Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States,
Volume I
United States Government Printing Office
Washington
U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page  to access updates.

TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:
No Congress of the United States ever assembled, on surveying the state of
the Union, has met with a more pleasing prospect than that which appears at
the present time. In the domestic field there is tranquillity and contentment,
harmonious relations between management and wage earner, freedom from
industrial strife, and the highest record of years of prosperity. In the foreign
field there is peace, the good will which comes from mutual understanding,
and the knowledge that the problems which a short time ago appeared so
ominous are yielding to the touch of manifest friendship. The great wealth
created by our enterprise and industry, and saved by our economy, has had
the widest distribution among our own people, and has gone out in a steady
stream to serve the charity and the business of the world. The requirements
of existence have passed beyond the standard of necessity into the region of
luxury. Enlarging production is consumed by an increasing demand at home
and an expanding commerce abroad. The country can regard the present
with satisfaction and anticipate the future with optimism.
The main source of these unexampled blessings lies in the integrity and
character of the American people. They have had great faith, which they
have supplemented with mighty works. They have been able to put trust in
each other and trust in their Government. Their candor in dealing with
foreign governments has commanded respect and confidence. Yet these
remarkable powers would have been exerted almost in vain without the
constant cooperation and careful administration of the Federal Government.
We have been coming into a period which may be fairly characterized as a
conservation of our national resources. Wastefulness in public business and
private enterprise has been displaced by constructive economy. This has
been accomplished by bringing our domestic and foreign relations more and
more under a reign of law. A rule of force has been giving way to a rule of
reason. We have substituted for the vicious circle of increasing
expenditures, increasing tax rates, and diminishing profits the charmed

circle of diminishing expenditures, diminishing tax rates, and increasing
profits.
Four times we have made, a drastic revision of our internal revenue system,
abolishing many taxes and substantially reducing almost all others. Each
time the resulting stimulation to business has so increased taxable incomes
and profits that a surplus has been produced. One-third of the national debt
has been paid, while much of the other two-thirds has been refunded at
lower rates, and these savings of interest and constant economies have
enabled us to repeat the satisfying process of more tax reductions. Under
this sound and healthful encouragement the national income has increased
nearly 50 per cent, until it is estimated to stand well over $90,000,000,000.
It has been a method which has performed the seeming miracle of leaving a
much greater percentage of earnings in the hands of the taxpayers with
scarcely any diminution of the Government revenue. That is constructive
economy in the highest degree. It is the corner stone of prosperity. It should
not fail to be continued.
This action began by the application of economy to public expenditure. If it
is to be permanent, it must be made so by the repeated application of
economy. There is no surplus on which to base further tax revision at this
time. Last June the estimates showed a threatened deficit for the current
fiscal year of $94,000,000. Under my direction the departments began
saving all they could out of their present appropriations. The last tax
reduction brought an encouraging improvement in business, beginning early
in October, which will also increase our revenue. The combination of
economy and good times now indicates a surplus of about $37,000,000.
This is a margin of less than 1 per cent on our expenditures and makes it
obvious that the Treasury is in no condition to undertake increases in
expenditures to be made before June 30. It is necessary therefore during the
present session to refrain from new appropriations for immediate outlay, or
if such are absolutely required to provide for them by new revenue;
otherwise, we shall reach the end of the year with the unthinkable result of
an unbalanced budget. For the first time during my term of office we face
that contingency. I am certain that the Congress would not pass and I should
not feel warranted in approving legislation which would involve us in that
financial disgrace.

On the whole the finances of the Government are most satisfactory. Last
year the national debt was reduced about $906,000,000. The refunding and
retirement of the second and third Liberty loans have just been brought to a
successful conclusion, which will save about $75,000,000 a year in interest.
The unpaid balance has been arranged in maturities convenient for carrying
out our permanent debt-paying program.
The enormous savings made have not been at the expense of any legitimate
public need. The Government plant has been kept up and many
improvements are under way, while its service is fully manned and the
general efficiency of operation has increased. We have been enabled to
undertake many new enterprises. Among these are the adjusted
compensation of the veterans of the World War, which is costing us
$112,000,000 a year; amortizing our liability to the civil-service retirement
funds, $20,000,000; increase of expenditures for rivers and harbors
including flood control, $43,000,000; public buildings, $47,000,000. In
1928 we spent $50,000,000 in the adjustment of war claims and alien
property. These are examples of a large list of items.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
When we turn from our domestic affairs to our foreign relations, we
likewise perceive peace and progress. The Sixth International Conference
of American States was held at Habana last winter. It contributed to a better
understanding and cooperation among the nations. Eleven important
conventions were signed and 71 resolutions passed. Pursuant to the plan
then adopted, this Government has invited the other 20 nations of this
hemisphere to a conference on conciliation and arbitration, which meets in
Washington on December 10. All the nations have accepted and the
expectation is justified that important progress will be made in methods for
resolving international differences by means of arbitration.
During the year we have signed 11 new arbitration treaties, and 22 more are
under negotiation.
NICARAGUA

When a destructive and bloody revolution lately broke out in Nicaragua, at
the earnest and repeated entreaties of its Government I dispatched our
Marine forces there to protect the lives and interests of our citizens. To
compose the contending parties, I sent there Col. Henry L. Stimson, former
Secretary of War and now Governor General of the Philippine Islands, who
secured an agreement that warfare should cease, a national election should
be held and peace should be restored. Both parties conscientiously carried
out this agreement, with the exception of a few bandits who later mostly
surrendered or left the country. President Diaz appointed Brig. Gen. Frank
R. McCoy, United States Army, president of the election board, which
included also one member of each political party.
A free and fair election has been held and has worked out so successfully
that both parties have joined in requesting like cooperation from this
country at the election four years hence, to which I have refrained from
making any commitments, although our country must be gratified at such
an exhibition of success and appreciation. Nicaragua is regaining its
prosperity and has taken a long step in the direction of peaceful self-
government.
TACNA-ARICA
The long-standing differences between Chile and Peru have been
sufficiently composed so that diplomatic relations have been resumed by
the exchange of ambassadors. Negotiations are hopefully proceeding as this
is written for the final adjustment of the differences over their disputed
territory.
MEXICO
Our relations with Mexico are on a more satisfactory basis than at any time
since their revolution. Many misunderstandings have been resolved and the
most frank and friendly negotiations promise a final adjustment of all
unsettled questions. It is exceedingly gratifying that Ambassador Morrow
has been able to bring our two neighboring countries, which have so many
interests in common, to a position of confidence in each other and of
respect for mutual sovereign rights.

CHINA
The situation in China which a few months ago was so threatening as to call
for the dispatch of a large additional force has been much composed. The
Nationalist Government has established itself over the country and
promulgated a new organic law announcing a program intended to promote
the political and economic welfare of the people. We have recognized this
Government, encouraged its progress, and have negotiated a treaty restoring
to China complete tariff autonomy and guaranteeing our citizens against
discriminations. Our trade in that quarter is increasing and our forces are
being reduced.
GREEK AND AUSTRIAN DEBTS
Pending before the Congress is a recommendation for the settlement of the
Greek debt and the Austrian debt. Both of these are comparatively small
and our country can afford to be generous. The rehabilitation of these
countries awaits their settlement. There would also be advantages to our
trade. We could scarcely afford to be the only nation that refuses the relief
which Austria seeks. The Congress has already granted Austria a long-time
moratorium, which it is understood will be waived and immediate payments
begun on her debt on the same basis which we have extended to other
countries.
PEACE TREATY
One of the most important treaties ever laid before the Senate of the United
States will be that which the 15 nations recently signed at Paris, and to
which 44 other nations have declared their intention to adhere, renouncing
war as a national policy and agreeing to resort only to peaceful means for
the adjustment of international differences. It is the most solemn declaration
against war, the most positive adherence to peace, that it is possible for
sovereign nations to make. It does not supersede our inalienable sovereign
right and duty of national defense or undertake to commit us before the
event to any mode of action which the Congress might decide to be wise if
ever the treaty should be broken. But it is a new standard in the world
around which can rally the informed and enlightened opinion of nations to
prevent their governments from being forced into hostile action by the

temporary outbreak of international animosities. The observance of this
covenant, so simple and so straightforward, promises more for the peace of
the world than any other agreement ever negotiated among the nations.
NATIONAL DEFENSE
The first duty of our Government to its own citizens and foreigners within
its borders is the preservation of order. Unless and until that duty is met a
government is not even eligible for recognition among the family of
nations. The advancement of world civilization likewise is dependent upon
that order among the people of different countries which we term peace. To
insure our citizens against the infringement of their legal rights at home and
abroad, to preserve order, liberty, and peace by making the law supreme, we
have an Army and a Navy.
Both of these are organized for defensive purposes. Our Army could not be
much reduced, but does not need to be increased. Such new housing and
repairs as are necessary are under way and the 5-year program in aviation is
being put into effect in both branches of our service.
Our Navy, according to generally accepted standards, is deficient in
built. It is evident that renewals and replacements must be provided. This
matter was thoroughly canvassed at the last session of the Congress and
does not need restatement. The bill before the Senate with the elimination
of the time clause should be passed. We have no intention of competing
with any other country. This building program is for necessary replacements
and to meet our needs for defense.
The cost of national defense is stupendous. It has increased $118,000,000 in
the past four years. The estimated expenditure for 1930 is $668,000,000.
While this is made up of many items it is, after all, mostly dependent upon
numbers. Our defensive needs do not call for any increase in the number of
men in the Army or the Navy. We have reached the limit of what we ought
to expend for that purpose.
I wish to repeat again for the benefit of the timid and the suspicious that this
country is neither militaristic nor imperialistic. Many people at home and

abroad, who constantly make this charge, are the same ones who are even
more solicitous to have us extend assistance to foreign countries. When
such assistance is granted, the inevitable result is that we have foreign
interests. For us to refuse the customary support and protection of such
interests would be in derogation of the sovereignty of this Nation. Our
largest foreign interests are in the British Empire, France, and Italy. Because
we are constantly solicitous for those interests, I doubt if anyone would
suppose that those countries feel we harbor toward them any militaristic or
imperialistic design. As for smaller countries, we certainly do not want any
of them. We are more anxious than they are to have their sovereignty
respected. Our entire influence is in behalf of their independence. Cuba
stands as a witness to our adherence to this principle.
The position of this Government relative to the limitation of armaments, the
results already secured, and the developments up to the present time are so
well known to the Congress that they do not require any restatement.
VETERANS
The magnitude of our present system of veterans’ relief is without
precedent, and the results have been far-reaching. For years a service
pension has been granted to the Grand Army and lately to the survivors of
the Spanish-American War. At the time we entered the World War,
however, Congress departed from the usual pension system followed by our
Government. Eleven years have elapsed since our laws were first enacted,
initiating a system of compensation, rehabilitation, hospitalization, and
insurance for the disabled of the World War and their dependents. The
administration of all the laws concerning relief has been a difficult task, but
it can safely be stated that these measures have omitted nothing in their
desire to deal generously and humanely. We should continue to foster this
system and provide all the facilities necessary for adequate care. It is the
conception of our Government that the pension roll is an honor roll. It
should include all those who are justly entitled to its benefits, but exclude
all others.
Annual expenditures for all forms of veterans’ relief now approximate
$765,000,000, and are increasing from year to year. It is doubtful if the peak
of expenditures will be reached even under present legislation for some

time yet to come. Further amendments to the existing law will be suggested
by the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States,
the Disabled American Veterans of the World War, and other like
organizations, and it may be necessary for administrative purposes, or in
order to remove some existing inequalities in the present law, to make
further changes. I am sure that such recommendations as may be submitted
to the Congress will receive your careful consideration. But because of the
vast expenditure now being made each year, with every assurance that it
will increase, and because of the great liberality of the existing law, the
proposal of any additional legislation dealing with this subject should
receive most searching scrutiny from the Congress.
You are familiar with the suggestion that the various public agencies now
dealing with matters of veterans’ relief be consolidated in one Government
department. Some advantages to this plan seem apparent, especially in the
simplification of administration and in the opportunity of bringing about a
greater uniformity in the application of veterans’ relief. I recommend that a
survey be made by the proper committees of Congress dealing with this
subject, in order to determine whether legislation to secure this
consolidation is desirable.
AGRICULTURE
The past year has been marked by notable though not uniform improvement
in agriculture. The general purchasing power of farm products and the
volume of production have advanced. This means not only further progress
in overcoming the price disparity into which agriculture was plunged in
1920–21, but also increased efficiency on the part of farmers and a well-
grounded confidence in the future of agriculture.
The livestock industry has attained the best balance for many years and is
prospering conspicuously. Dairymen, beef producers, and poultrymen are
receiving substantially larger returns than last year. Cotton, although lower
in price than at this time last year, was produced in greater volume, and the
prospect for cotton incomes is favorable. But progress is never uniform in a
vast and highly diversified agriculture or industry. Cash grains, hay,
tobacco, and potatoes will bring somewhat smaller returns this year than
last. Present indications are, however, that the gross farm income will be

somewhat larger than in the crop year 1927–28, when the total was
$12,253,000,000.
The
corresponding
figure
for
was
would have been secured this year had there not been an undue increase in
the production of certain crops. This is particularly true of potatoes, which
have sold at an unremunerative price, or at a loss, as a direct result of
overexpansion of acreage.
The present status of agriculture, although greatly improved over that of a
few years ago, bespeaks the need of further improvement, which calls for
determined effort of farmers themselves, encouraged and assisted by wise
public policy. The Government has been, and must continue to be, alive to
the needs of agriculture.
In the past eight years more constructive legislation of direct benefit to
agriculture has been adopted than during any other period. The Department
of Agriculture has been broadened and reorganized to insure greater
efficiency. The department is laying greater stress on the economic and
business phases of agriculture. It is lending every possible assistance to
cooperative marketing associations. Regulatory and research work have
been segregated in order that each field may be served more effectively.
I can not too strongly commend, in the field of fact finding, the research
work of the Department of Agriculture and the State experiment stations.
The department now receives annually $4,000,000 more for research than
in 1921. In addition, the funds paid to the States for experimentation
purposes under the Purnell Act constitute an annual increase in Federal
payments to State agricultural experiment stations of $2,400,000 over the
amount appropriated in 1921. The program of support for research may
wisely be continued and expanded. Since 1921 we have appropriated nearly
an additional $2,000,000 for extension work, and this sum is to be increased
next year under authorization by the Capper-Ketcham Act.
THE SURPLUS PROBLEM
While these developments in fundamental research, regulation, and
dissemination of agricultural information are of distinct help to agriculture,
additional effort is needed. The surplus problem demands attention. As

emphasized in my last message, the Government should assume no
responsibility in normal times for crop surplus clearly due to overextended
acreage. The Government should, however, provide reliable information as
a guide to private effort; and in this connection fundamental research on
prospective supply and demand, as a guide to production and marketing,
should be encouraged. Expenditure of public funds to bring in more new
land should have most searching scrutiny, so long as our farmers face
unsatisfactory prices for crops and livestock produced on land already
under cultivation.
Every proper effort should be made to put land to uses for which it is
adapted. The reforestation of land best suited for timber production is
progressing and should be encouraged, and to this end the forest taxation
inquiry was instituted to afford a practical guide for public policy.
Improvement has been made in grazing regulation in the forest reserves, not
only to protect the ranges, but to preserve the soil from erosion. Similar
action is urgently needed to protect other public lands which are now
overgrazed and rapidly eroding.
Temporary expedients, though sometimes capable of appeasing the
demands of the moment, can not permanently solve the surplus problem
and might seriously aggravate it. Hence putting the Government directly
into business, subsidies, and price fixing, and the alluring promises of
political action as a substitute for private initiative, should be avoided.
The Government should aid in promoting orderly marketing and in
handling surpluses clearly due to weather and seasonal conditions. As a
beginning there should be created a Federal farm board consisting of able
and experienced men empowered to advise producers’ associations in
establishing central agencies or stabilization corporations to handle
surpluses, to seek more economical means of merchandising, and to aid the
producer in securing returns according to the quality of his product. A
revolving loan fund should be provided for the necessary financing until
these agencies shall have developed means of financing their operations
through regularly constituted credit institutions. Such a bill should carry
authority for raising the money, by loans or otherwise, necessary to meet
the expense, as the Treasury has no surplus.

Agriculture has lagged behind industry in achieving that unity of effort
which modern economic life demands. The cooperative movement, which
is gradually building the needed organization, is in harmony with public
interest and therefore merits public encouragement.
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATES
Important phases of public policy related to agriculture lie within the sphere
of the States. While successive reductions in Federal taxes have relieved
most farmers of direct taxes to the National Government, State and local
levies have become a serious burden. This problem needs immediate and
thorough study with a view to correction at the earliest possible moment. It
will have to be made largely by the States themselves.
COMMERCE
It is desirable that the Government continue its helpful attitude toward
American business. The activities of the Department of Commerce have
contributed largely to the present satisfactory position in our international
trade, which has reached about $9,000,000,000 annually. There should be
no slackening of effort in that direction. It is also important that the
department’s assistance to domestic commerce be continued. There is
probably no way in which the Government can aid sound economic
progress more effectively than by cooperating with our business men to
reduce wastes in distribution.
COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICS
Continued progress in civil aviation is most gratifying. Demands for
airplanes and motors have taxed both the industry and the licensing and
inspection service of the Department of Commerce to their capacity. While
the compulsory licensing provisions of the air commerce act apply only to
equipment and personnel engaged in interstate and foreign commerce, a
Federal license may be procured by anyone possessing the necessary
qualifications. State legislation, local airport regulations, and insurance
requirements make such a license practically indispensable. This results in
uniformity of regulation and increased safety in operation, which are
essential to aeronautical development. Over 17,000 young men and women

have now applied for Federal air-pilot’s licenses or permits. More than 80
per cent of them applied during the past year.
Our national airway system exceeds 14,000 miles in length and has 7,500
miles lighted for night operations. Provision has been made for lighting
4,000 miles more during the current fiscal year and equipping an equal
mileage with radio facilities. Three-quarters of our people are now served
by these routes. With the rapid growth of air mail, express, and passenger
service, this new transportation medium is daily becoming a more important
factor in commerce. It is noteworthy that this development has taken place
without governmental subsidies. Commercial passenger flights operating on
schedule have reached 13,000 miles per day.
During the next fortnight this Nation will entertain the nations of the world
in a celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first successful
airplane flight. The credit for this epoch-making achievement belongs to a
citizen of our own country, Orville Wright.
CUBAN PARCEL POST
I desire to repeat my recommendation of an earlier message, that Congress
enact the legislation necessary to make permanent the Parcel Post
Convention with Cuba, both as a facility to American commerce and as a
measure of equity to Cuba in the one class of goods which that country can
send here by parcel post without detriment to our own trade.
“MAINE” BATTLESHIP MEMORIAL
When I attended the Pan American Conference at Habana, the President of
Cuba showed me a marble statue made from the original memorial that was
overturned by a storm after it was erected on the Cuban shore to the
memory of the men who perished in the destruction of the battleship Maine.
As a testimony of friendship and appreciation of the Cuban Government
and people he most generously offered to present this to the United States,
and I assured him of my pleasure in accepting it. There is no location in the
White House for placing so large and heavy a structure, and I therefore urge
the Congress to provide by law for some locality where it can be set up.

RAILROADS
In previous annual messages I have suggested the enactment of laws to
promote railroad consolidation with the view of increasing the efficiency of
transportation and lessening its cost to the public. While consolidations can
and should be made under the present law until it is changed, yet the
provisions of the act of 1920 have not been found fully adequate to meet the
needs of other methods of consolidation. Amendments designed to remedy
these defects have been considered at length by the respective committees
of Congress and a bill was reported out late in the last session which I
understand has the approval in principle of the Interstate Commerce
Commission. It is to be hoped that this legislation may be enacted at an
early date.
Experience has shown that the interstate commerce law requires definition
and clarification in several other respects, some of which have been pointed
out by the Interstate Commerce Commission in its annual reports to the
Congress. It will promote the public interest to have the Congress give early
consideration to the recommendations there made.
MERCHANT MARINE
The cost of maintaining the United States Government merchant fleet has
been steadily reduced. We have established American flag lines in foreign
trade where they had never before existed as a means of promoting
commerce and as a naval auxiliary. There have been sold to private
American capital for operation within the past few years 14 of these lines,
which, under the encouragement of the recent legislation passed by the
Congress, give promise of continued successful operation. Additional
legislation from time to time may be necessary to promote future
advancement under private control.
Through the cooperation of the Post Office Department and the Shipping
Board long-term contracts are being made with American steamship lines
for carrying mail, which already promise the construction of 15 to 20 new
vessels and the gradual reestablishment of the American merchant marine
as a private enterprise. No action of the National Government has been so
beneficial to our shipping. The cost is being absorbed to a considerable

extent by the disposal of unprofitable lines operated by the Shipping Board,
for which the new law has made a market. Meanwhile it should be our
policy to maintain necessary strategic lines under the Government operation
until they can be transferred to private capital.
INTER-AMERICAN HIGHWAY
In my message last year I expressed the view that we should lend our
encouragement for more good roads to all the principal points on this
hemisphere south of the Rio Grande. My view has not changed. The Pan
American Union has recently indorsed it. In some of the countries to the
south a great deal of progress is being made in road building. In others
engineering features are often exacting and financing difficult. As those
countries enter upon programs for road building we should be ready to
contribute from our abundant experience to make their task easier of
accomplishment. I prefer not to go into civil life to accomplish this end. We
already furnish military and naval advisors, and following this precedent we
could draw competent men from these same sources and from the
Department of Agriculture.
We should provide our southern neighbors, if they request it, with such
engineer advisors for the construction of roads and bridges. Private interests
should look with favor upon all reasonable loans sought by these countries
to open main lines of travel. Such assistance should be given especially to
any project for a highway designed to connect all the countries on this
hemisphere and thus facilitate intercourse and closer relations among them.
AIR MAIL SERVICE
The friendly relations and the extensive commercial intercourse with the
Western Hemisphere to the south of us are being further cemented by the
establishment and extension of air-mail routes. We shall soon have one
from Key West, Fla., over Cuba, Haiti, and Santo Domingo to San Juan, P.
R., where it will connect with another route to Trinidad. There will be
another route from Key West to the Canal Zone, where connection will be
made with a route across the northern coast of South America to
Paramaribo. This will give us a circle around the Caribbean under our own
control. Additional connections will be made at Colon with a route running

down the west coast of South America as far as Concepcion, Chile, and
with the French air mail at Paramaribo running down the eastern coast of
South America. The air service already spans our continent, with laterals
running to Mexico and Canada, and covering a daily flight of over 28,000
miles, with an average cargo of 15,000 pounds.
WATERWAYS
Our river and harbor improvements are proceeding with vigor. In the past
few years we have increased the appropriation for this regular work
$28,000,000, besides what is to be expended on flood control. The total
appropriation for this year was over $91,000,000. The Ohio River is almost
ready for opening; work on the Missouri and other rivers is under way. In
accordance with the Mississippi flood law Army engineers are making
investigations and surveys on other streams throughout the country with a
view to flood control, navigation, waterpower, and irrigation. Our barge
lines are being operated under generous appropriations, and negotiations are
developing relative to the St. Lawrence waterway. To secure the largest
benefits from all these waterways joint rates must be established with the
railroads, preferably by agreement, but otherwise as a result of
congressional action.
We have recently passed several river and harbor bills. The work ordered by
the Congress, not yet completed, will cost about $243,000,000, besides the
hundreds of millions to be spent on the Mississippi flood way. Until we can
see our way out of this expense no further river and harbor legislation
should be passed, as expenditures to put it into effect would be four or five
years away.
IRRIGATION OF ARID LANDS
For many years the Federal Government has been committed to the wise
policy of reclamation and irrigation. While it has met with some failures
due to unwise selection of projects and lack of thorough soil surveys, so
that they could not be placed on a sound business basis, on the whole the
service has been of such incalculable benefit in so many States that no one
would advocate its abandonment. The program to which we are already
committed, providing for the construction of new projects authorized by

Congress and the completion of old projects, will tax the resources of the
reclamation fund over a period of years. The high cost of improving and
equipping farms adds to the difficulty of securing settlers for vacant farms
on Federal projects.
Readjustments authorized by the reclamation relief act of May 25, 1926,
have given more favorable terms of repayment to settlers. These new
financial arrangements and the general prosperity on irrigation projects
have resulted in increased collections by the Department of the Interior of
charges due the reclamation fund. Nevertheless, the demand for still smaller
yearly payments on some projects continues. These conditions should have
consideration in connection with any proposed new projects.
COLORADO RIVER
For several years the Congress has considered the erection of a dam on the
Colorado River for flood-control, irrigation, and domestic water purposes,
all of which may properly be considered as Government functions. There
would be an incidental creation of water power which could be used for
generating electricity. As private enterprise can very well fill this field,
there is no need for the Government to go into it. It is unfortunate that the
States interested in this water have been unable to agree among themselves.
Nevertheless, any legislation should give every possible safeguard to the
present and prospective rights of each of them.
The Congress will have before it the detailed report of a special board
appointed to consider the engineering and economic feasibility of this
project. From the short summary which I have seen of it, I judge they
consider the engineering problems can be met at somewhat increased cost
over previous estimates. They prefer the Black Canyon site. On the
economic features they are not so clear and appear to base their conclusions
on many conditions which can not be established with certainty. So far as I
can judge, however, from the summary, their conclusions appear
sufficiently favorable, so that I feel warranted in recommending a measure
which will protect the rights of the States, discharge the necessary
Government functions, and leave the electrical field to private enterprise.
MUSCLE SHOALS

The development of other methods of producing nitrates will probably
render this plant less important for that purpose than formerly. But we have
it, and I am told it still provides a practical method of making nitrates for
national defense and farm fertilizers. By dividing the property into its two
component parts of power and nitrate plants it would be possible to dispose
of the power, reserving the right to any concern that wished to make nitrates
to use any power that might be needed for that purpose. Such a disposition
of the power plant can be made that will return in rental about $2,000,000
per year. If the Congress would grant the Secretary of War authority to lease
the nitrate plant on such terms as would insure the largest production of
nitrates, the entire property could begin to function. Such a division, I am
aware, has never seemed to appeal to the Congress. I should also gladly
approve a bill granting authority to lease the entire property for the
production of nitrates.
I wish to avoid building another dam at public expense. Future operators
should provide for that themselves. But if they were to be required to repay
the cost of such dam with the prevailing commercial rates for interest, this
difficulty will be considerably lessened. Nor do I think this property should
be made a vehicle for putting the United States Government
indiscriminately into the private and retail field of power distribution and
nitrate sales.
CONSERVATION
The practical application of economy to the resources of the country calls
for conservation. This does not mean that every resource should not be
developed to its full degree, but it means that none of them should be
wasted. We have a conservation board working on our oil problem. This is
of the utmost importance to the future well-being of our people in this age
of oil-burning engines and the general application of gasoline to
transportation. The Secretary of the Interior should not be compelled to
lease oil lands of the Osage Indians when the market is depressed and the
future supply is in jeopardy.
While the area of lands remaining in public ownership is small, compared
with the vast area in private ownership, the natural resources of those in
public ownership are of immense present and future value. This is

particularly true as to minerals and water power. The proper bureaus have
been classifying these resources to the end that they may be conserved.
Appropriate estimates are being submitted, in the Budget, for the further
prosecution of this important work.
IMMIGRATION
The policy of restrictive immigration should be maintained. Authority
should be granted the Secretary of Labor to give immediate preference to
learned professions and experts essential to new industries. The reuniting of
families should be expedited. Our immigration and naturalization laws
might well be codified.
WAGE EARNER
In its economic life our country has rejected the long accepted law of a
limitation of the wage fund, which led to pessimism and despair because it
was the doctrine of perpetual poverty, and has substituted for it the
American conception that the only limit to profits and wages is production,
which is the doctrine of optimism and hope because it leads to prosperity.
Here and there the councils of labor are still darkened by the theory that
only by limiting individual production can there be any assurance of
permanent employment for increasing numbers, but in general,
management and wage earner alike have become emancipated from this
doom and have entered a new era in industrial thought which has unleashed
the productive capacity of the individual worker with an increasing scale of
wages and profits, the end of which is not yet. The application of this theory
accounts for our widening distribution of wealth. No discovery ever did
more to increase the happiness and prosperity of the people.
cent, while in certain selected trades they have run as high as 34.9 per cent
and 38 per cent. Even in the boot and shoe shops the increase is over 5 per
cent and in woolen mills 8.4 per cent, although these industries have not
prospered like others. As the rise in living costs in this period is negligible,
these figures represent real wage increases.

The cause of constructive economy requires that the Government should
cooperate with private interests to eliminate the waste arising from
industrial accidents. This item, with all that has been done to reduce it, still
reaches enormous proportions with great suffering to the workman and
great loss to the country.
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
The Federal Government should continue its solicitous care for the
8,500,000 women wage earners and its efforts in behalf of public health,
which is reducing infant mortality and improving the bodily and mental
condition of our citizens.
CIVIL SERVICE
The most marked change made in the civil service of the Government in the
past eight years relates to the increase in salaries. The Board of Actuaries
on the retirement act shows by its report that July 1, 1921, the average
salary of the 330,047 employees subject to the act was $1,307, while on
This was an increase in six years of nearly 53 per cent. On top of this was
the generous increase made at the last session of the Congress generally
applicable to Federal employees and another bill increasing the pay in
certain branches of the Postal Service beyond the large increase which was
made three years ago. This raised the average level from $1,969 to $2,092,
making an increase in seven years of over 63 per cent. While it is well
known that in the upper brackets the pay in the Federal service is much
smaller than in private employment, in the lower brackets, ranging well up
over $3,000, it is much higher. It is higher not only in actual money paid,
but in privileges granted, a vacation of 30 actual working days, or 5 weeks
each year, with additional time running in some departments as high as 30
days for sick leave and the generous provisions of the retirement act. No
other body of public servants ever occupied such a fortunate position.
EDUCATION
Through the Bureau of Education of the Department of the Interior the
Federal Government, acting in an informative and advisory capacity, has

rendered valuable service. While this province belongs peculiarly to the
States, yet the promotion of education and efficiency in educational
methods is a general responsibility of the Federal Government. A survey of
negro colleges and universities in the United States has just been completed
by the Bureau of Education through funds provided by the institutions
themselves and through private sources. The present status of negro higher
education was determined and recommendations were made for its
advancement. This was one of the numerous cooperative undertakings of
the bureau. Following the invitation of the Association of Land Grant
Colleges and Universities, the Bureau of Education now has under way the
survey of agricultural colleges, authorized by Congress. The purpose of the
survey is to ascertain the accomplishments, the status, and the future
objectives of this type of educational training. It is now proposed to
undertake a survey of secondary schools, which educators insist is timely
and essential.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
We have laid out a public building program for the District of Columbia and
the country at large running into hundreds of millions of dollars. Three
important structures and one annex are already under way and one addition
has been completed in the City of Washington. In the country sites have
been acquired, many buildings are in course of construction, and some are
already completed. Plans for all this work are being prepared in order that it
may be carried forward as rapidly as possible. This is the greatest building
program ever assumed by this Nation. It contemplates structures of utility
and of beauty. When it reaches completion the people will be well served
and the Federal city will be supplied with the most beautiful and stately
public buildings which adorn any capital in the world.
THE AMERICAN INDIAN
The administration of Indian affairs has been receiving intensive study for
several years. The Department of the Interior has been able to provide better
supervision of health, education, and industrial advancement of this native
race through additional funds provided by the Congress. The present
cooperative arrangement existing between the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Public Health Service should be extended. The Government’s

responsibility to the American Indian has been acknowledged by annual
increases in appropriations to fulfill its obligations to them and to hasten the
time when Federal supervision of their affairs may be properly and safely
terminated. The movement in Congress and in some of the State legislatures
for extending responsibility in Indian affairs to States should be
encouraged. A complete participation by the Indian in our economic life is
the end to be desired.
THE NEGRO
For 65 years now our negro population has been under the peculiar care and
solicitude of the National Government. The progress which they have made
in education and the professions, in wealth and in the arts of civilization,
affords one of the most remarkable incidents in this period of world history.
They have demonstrated their ability to partake of the advantages of our
institutions and to benefit by a free and more and more independent
existence. Whatever doubt there may have been of their capacity to assume
the status granted to them by the Constitution of this Union is being rapidly
dissipated. Their cooperation in the life of the Nation is constantly
enlarging.
Exploiting the Negro problem for political ends is being abandoned and
their protection is being increased by those States in which their percentage
of population is largest. Every encouragement should be extended for the
development of the race. The colored people have been the victims of the
crime of lynching, which has in late years somewhat decreased. Some parts
of the South already have wholesome laws for its restraint and punishment.
Their example might well be followed by other States, and by such
immediate remedial legislation as the Federal Government can extend under
the Constitution.
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Under the guidance of Governor General Stimson the economic and
political conditions of the Philippine Islands have been raised to a standard
never before surpassed. The cooperation between his administration and the
people of the islands is complete and harmonious. It would be an advantage

if relief from double taxation could be granted by the Congress to our
citizens doing business in the islands.
PORTO RICO
Due to the terrific storm that swept Porto Rico last September, the people of
that island suffered large losses. The Red Cross and the War Department
went to their rescue. The property loss is being retrieved. Sugar, tobacco,
citrus fruit, and coffee, all suffered damage. The first three can largely look
after themselves. The coffee growers will need some assistance, which
should be extended strictly on a business basis, and only after most careful
investigation. The people of Porto Rico are not asking for charity.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
It is desirable that all the legal activities of the Government be consolidated
under the supervision of the Attorney General, in 1870 it was felt necessary
to create the Department of Justice for this purpose. During the intervening
period, either through legislation creating law officers or departmental
action, additional legal positions not under the supervision of the Attorney
General have been provided until there are now over 900. Such a condition
is as harmful to the interest of the Government now as it was in 1870, and
should be corrected by appropriate legislation.
SPECIAL GOVERNMENT COUNSEL
In order to prosecute the oil cases, I suggested and the Congress enacted a
law providing for the appointment of two special counsel. They have
pursued their work with signal ability, recovering all the leased lands
besides nearly $30,000,000 in money, and nearly $17,000,000 in other
property. They find themselves hampered by a statute, which the Attorney
General construes as applying to them, prohibiting their appearing for
private clients before any department. For this reason, one has been
compelled to resign. No good result is secured by the application of this
rule to these counsel, and as Mr. Roberts has consented to take
reappointment if the rule is abrogated I recommend the passage of an
amendment to the law creating their office exempting them from the
general rule against taking other cases involving the Government.

PROHIBITION
The country has duly adopted the eighteenth amendment. Those who object
to it have the right to advocate its modification or repeal. Meantime, it is
binding upon the National and State Governments and all our inhabitants.
The Federal enforcement bureau is making every effort to prevent
violations, especially through smuggling, manufacture, and transportation,
and to prosecute generally all violations for which it can secure evidence. It
is bound to continue this policy. Under the terms of the Constitution,
however, the obligation is equally on the States to exercise the power which
they have through the executive, legislative, judicial, and police branches of
their governments in behalf of enforcement. The Federal Government is
doing and will continue to do all it can in this direction and is entitled to the
active cooperation of the States.
CONCLUSION
The country is in the midst of an era of prosperity more extensive and of
peace more permanent than it has ever before experienced. But, having
reached this position, we should not fail to comprehend that it can easily be
lost. It needs more effort for its support than the less exalted places of the
world. We shall not be permitted to take our ease, but shall continue to be
required to spend our days in unremitting toil. The actions of the
Government must command the confidence of the country. Without this,
our prosperity would be lost. We must extend to other countries the largest
measure of generosity, moderation, and patience. In addition to dealing
justly, we can well afford to walk humbly.
The end of government is to keep open the opportunity for a more abundant
life. Peace and prosperity are not finalities; they are only methods. It is too
easy under their influence for a nation to become selfish and degenerate.
This test has come to the United States. Our country has been provided with
the resources with which it can enlarge its intellectual, moral, and spiritual
life. The issue is in the hands of the people. Our faith in man and God is the
justification for the belief in our continuing success.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

Tae Ware House, December 4, 1928.

List of Papers
Unless otherwise specified, the correspondence is from or to officials in the
Department of State.
GENERAL
TREATY FOR THE RENUNCIATION OF WAR AS AN INSTRUMENT OF NATIONAL POLICY, SIGNED AT PARIS, AUGUST 27, 1928
NEGOTIATION OF THE TREATY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Jan. 6
From the French Ambassador
Communication from Foreign Minister Briand, January 5
(text printed), stating that France is disposed to join the
United States in proposing, for agreement by all nations, a
treaty to be signed at the present time by France and the
United States providing for renunciation of all war of
aggression and employment of pacific means for
settlement of any differences that might arise between
them, the high contracting parties to engage to bring the
treaty to the attention of all States and invite them to
adhere.
1 [Pg.
1 is part
of Doc.
1]
Jan. 6
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (cir. tel.)
Instructions to deliver to the Foreign Office a
memorandum containing texts of the Briand proposal of
June 1927 for a pact of perpetual friendship and the
Secretary of State’s reply of December 28, 1927.
(Sent also to Embassies in Germany, Italy, and Japan.)
3 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
2 and
Doc. 3]
Jan. 11
To the French Ambassador
Objections to Briand’s proposal that treaty be signed by
France and United States and then submitted to other
Powers, and that its scope be limited to wars of aggression.
Suggestion that further discussions be based upon the
3 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
2 and
Doc. 3]

original proposal and that copy of Briand’s original
proposal and subsequent correspondence be submitted to
the British, German, Italian, and Japanese Governments.
Jan. 21 From the French Ambassador
Explanation of proposal of January 5; desire to receive
suggestions which would make it possible to reconcile an
absolute condemnation of war with international
obligations already entered into with the several States.
6 [Pg.
6 is part
of Doc.
4]
Feb. 14
(2632)
To the Ambassador in France
Information that on February 2 the French Ambassador
stated that Briand’s reply to the Secretary of State’s
proposition must not be construed as a definite refusal to
make the treaty but as a suggestion that other French
obligations be taken into consideration.
8 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
4 and
Doc. 5]
Feb. 27 To the French Ambassador
Inability to understand how unequivocal and unqualified
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy
could violate obligations imposed by the Covenant of the
League of Nations or conflict with idea and purpose of the
League; renewal of suggestion that Briand’s original
proposal and correspondence between the two
Governments be laid before British, German, Italian, and
Japanese Governments.
(Footnote: Communication of text of this note through
American Embassies to the French, British, German,
Italian, and Japanese Foreign Offices.)
9 [Pg.
9 is part
of Doc.
6]
Feb. 27 Memorandum by Mr. Spencer Phenix, Assistant to the
Under Secretary of State
Conversation in which the Secretary of State stated, in
response to a question by the French Ambassador, that he
could see no objection to including in a general multilateral
treaty renouncing war a provision that the breach of such
treaty by one party would release the other parties from
their obligations thereunder.
11 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
6 and
Doc. 7]
Mar. 1
To the Ambassador in France (cir. tel.)
Texts of two anti-war resolutions adopted at recent Habana
12 [Pg.
includes

Conference: (1) general resolution condemning all war, and
(2) resolution against aggression.
(Instructions to repeat to Embassies in Germany, Great
Britain, and Italy. Sent also to Embassy in Japan.)
portions
of Doc.
7 and
Doc. 8]
Mar. 3
(42)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Request for interpretation of term “aggression” in second
Habana resolution.
14 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
9 and
Doc.
10]
Mar. 3
(53)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Explanation that first Habana resolution would include not
only war but also acts of aggression which might result in
war.
14 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
9 and
Doc.
10]
Mar. 16
(52)
From the Ambassador in Germany (tel.)
Information from Foreign Minister that Briand had
inquired of colleagues at Geneva whether the U. S.
Government had communicated with them regarding treaty
and that the British, German, and Japanese representatives
replied in affirmative.
15 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
11 and
Doc.
12]
Mar. 30 From the French Ambassador
Further observations of Briand concerning proposed treaty;
readiness of French Government to join in submitting to
German, British, Italian, and Japanese Governments, the
correspondence between the two Governments and in
proposing a draft agreement essentially corresponding to
the original Briand proposal, in the multipartite form
desired by the United States and with changes of wording
made necessary by the new concept of the pact.
15 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
11 and
Doc.
12]
Apr. 3
(8494)
From the Ambassador in France
Favorable reaction in France to last Briand peace pact note.
19 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
12 and

Doc.
13]
Apr. 5
(79)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (cir. tel.)
Information that because it is believed important to submit
the treaty correspondence to British, German, Italian, and
Japanese Governments without delay, the Secretary has
inquired of the French Ambassador whether his
Government is now agreeable.
(Footnotes: Sent also to Embassies in France, Germany,
Italy, and Japan.
Information that on April 7 the French Ambassador made
affirmative answer to Secretary’s inquiry.)
21 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
14 and
Doc.
15]
Apr. 9
(101)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Note for transmission to British, German, Italian, and
Japanese Governments and accompanying draft treaty for
renunciation of war (texts printed).
(Instructions to repeat to Embassies in Great Britain,
Germany, and Italy. Sent also to Embassy in Japan.)
(Footnote: Delivery of notes and draft treaty to the
respective Foreign Offices on April 13.)
21 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
14 and
Doc.
15]
Apr. 10
(102)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to explain to Briand personally the Secretary’s
views and intention with regard to submission to the other
four powers of the draft treaty correspondence.
24 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
15 and
Doc.
16]
Apr. 11
(90)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Briand’s understanding of Secretary’s views and intention,
and his reservation of right to submit to the other four
powers a draft form of treaty embodying French point of
view.
26 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
17 and
Doc.
18]
Apr. 12
(91)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Request by Briand that Department also communicate to
the other four powers the substance of its telegram No. 102
26 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
17 and

of April 10, and inform him of date it proposes to send the
communications.
Doc.
18]
Apr. 12
(105)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information as to arrangements for submission of note,
draft treaty, and correspondence to the other four
Governments; instructions for advance notice and delivery
to French Government.
27 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
18 and
Doc.
19]
Apr. 16
(830)
From the Ambassador in Japan
Favorable attitude of Foreign Minister toward the idea
embodied in note and draft treaty, and his promise to give
matter careful consideration.
28 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
19 and
Doc.
20]
Apr. 17
(3411)
From the Ambassador in Germany
Note from Foreign Minister, April 13, acknowledging
receipt of U. S. note and enclosing a statement of views
expressed at time of delivery (texts printed).
29 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
20 and
Doc.
21]
Apr. 20 Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State
Delivery by Count de Sartiges of French draft anti-war
treaty.
31 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
21 and
Doc.
22]
Undated
[Rec’d
Apr. 20]
French Draft of Treaty
For the condemnation and renunciation of war as an
instrument of national policy.
32 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
22 and
Doc.
23]
Apr. 21
(117)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that the French draft seems entirely
unacceptable; instructions to avoid discussion of matter
34 [Pg.
includes
portions

until advised of Department’s position.
(Sent also to Embassies in Great Britain, Germany, Italy,
and Japan.)
of Doc.
23,
Doc.
24, and
Doc.
25]
Apr. 23
(118)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Unacceptability of French draft; exposition of Secretary’s
views on points emphasized in French correspondence and
draft treaty; authorization to use this material, at own
discretion, in discussions at Foreign Office. Willingness, if
necessary to prevent complete failure of negotiations, to
include provision that in event any party to treaty becomes
involved in war, the other parties shall be released from
obligations under the treaty so far as regards belligerent
party; instructions to feel out general situation.
(Instructions to repeat to Embassies in Great Britain,
Germany, and Italy. Similar telegram to Embassy in Japan.)
34 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
23,
Doc.
24, and
Doc.
25]
Apr. 27
(88)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Expression by Foreign Secretary of readiness to approach
anti-war treaty sympathetically, of probability that meeting
of Foreign Secretaries might be necessary later, and of
pleasure at intimation via British Ambassador that U. S.
Secretary might be willing to go to Europe to meet them.
Ambassador’s suggestion that Secretary give to press a
statement of position along lines of exposition set forth in
telegram of April 23.
39 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
25 and
Doc.
26]
Apr. 30
(104)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that in address before American Society of
International Law, April 28, Secretary gave statement of
position as set forth in telegram of April 23. Hope that
French proposal to Italian Government that question of
compatibility of anti-war treaty with League Covenant,
Locarno treaties, etc., be referred to a commission of jurists
representing principal Locarno powers and Japan, will not
meet with general acceptance.
41 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
26 and
Doc.
27]
May 1
(3473)
From the Ambassador in Germany
Foreign Minister’s note of April 27 (text printed) stating
42 [Pg.

Germany’s readiness to conclude anti-war pact and to enter
into the necessary negotiations.
includes
portions
of Doc.
27 and
Doc.
28]
May 2
(93)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Inclination of British Government to accept anti-war
proposal without serious discussion and to approach the
subject of reservations, interpretations, etc., after treaty
signature; probability that France will be urged to follow
same procedure.
44 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
28 and
Doc.
29]
May 2
(42)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Italian favorable attitude toward treaty, their belief that
preliminary meeting of jurists, including a U. S.
representative, should be held, and their opinion that
conference of Foreign Secretaries could be held later.
(Repeated to London.)
45 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
29,
Doc.
30, and
Doc.
31]
May 2
(43)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Information that the British suggested to the Italians that an
American juristic expert be invited to meet with juristic
experts of other powers.
45 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
29,
Doc.
30, and
Doc.
31]
May 2
(108)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Opinion that the question does not require submission to
conference of jurists; instructions to use efforts to
discourage idea of conference. Information that any
intimation that the Secretary would go to Europe to
negotiate anti-war treaty is erroneous, and that there is no
need for preliminary conference of Foreign Secretaries.
46 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
31 and
Doc.
32]
May 2
(56)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Statement of position regarding conference of jurists, and
preliminary conference of Foreign Secretaries.
47 [Pg.
includes
portions

of Doc.
32,
Doc.
33, and
Doc.
34]
May 2
(122)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Statement of position regarding conference of jurists and
preliminary conference of Foreign Secretaries.
(Instructions to repeat to Berlin. Sent also to Japan.)
47 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
32,
Doc.
33, and
Doc.
34]
May 2
(47)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Opinion of Secretary General of League that there is no
inconsistency between American proposal for anti-war pact
and League Covenant.
48 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
34 and
Doc.
35]
May 3
(112)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Advice that Ambassador has heard nothing about either
commission of technical experts or conference of Foreign
Secretaries.
49 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
36 and
Doc.
37]
May 3
(95)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Discussion with Chamberlain regarding misunderstanding
concerning Secretary’s attitude toward conference of
Foreign Secretaries, and Chamberlain’s willingness to
discourage proposed meeting of jurists. Desire of French
Ambassador at London to talk with American Ambassador.
49 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
36 and
Doc.
37]
May 4
(111)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
No objection to a talk with French Ambassador.
51 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
37 and

Doc.
38]
May 4
(55)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Unwillingness of Japan to participate in any conference of
jurists or Foreign Secretaries not attended by United States.
52 [Pg.
52 is
part of
Doc.
39]
May 4
(112)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that the Secretary’s attitude toward conference
of jurists and Foreign Secretaries has been conveyed to
French, British, and German Ambassadors. Information as
to Japanese attitude.
53 [Pg.
53 is
part of
Doc.
40]
May 7
(99)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
French Ambassador’s opinion that some sort of meeting
will be necessary before treaty can be put in final form; his
statement that French acceptance of treaty would be made
easier if Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia were
favorable toward signing; his suggestion that American
Ambassador talk over situation with Beneš, Czechoslovak
Foreign Minister; his favorable attitude toward treaty,
provided Secretary’s interpretation, as given in Washington
speech, can be put into more precise and authoritative
form.
54 [Pg.
54 is
part of
Doc.
41]
May 7
(114)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Authorization of general and informal talk with Beneš.
55 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
42 and
Doc.
43]
May 8
(1682)
From the Ambassador in Italy
Foreign Minister’s note of May 4 (text printed) expressing
willingness to reach agreement proposed by U. S.
Government, but stating desire that United States
participate in a preliminary meeting of jurists.
55 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
42 and
Doc.
43]
May 8
(127)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Transmittal of Italian note of May 4; likelihood that Italy
56 [Pg.
includes

will not prove insistent in conference matter.
(Instructions to repeat to Berlin.)
portions
of Doc.
43,
Doc.
44, and
Doc.
45]
May 8
(87)
From the Minister in Canada (tel.)
Canadian uncertainty as to what arrangements will be
made for Dominion participation in anti-war pact.
56 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
43,
Doc.
44, and
Doc.
45]
May 9
(101)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that Chamberlain is preparing a reply based
substantially on German formula, and that he expressed
gratification that Secretary does not wholly exclude
conference of jurists; Ambassador’s assumption that
Secretary felt to the contrary.
57 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
45,
Doc.
46, and
Doc.
47]
May 9
(116)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Advice that Secretary has been careful to refrain from
stating flatly that U. S. Government would decline to be
represented at a conference of jurists.
57 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
45,
Doc.
46, and
Doc.
47]
May 9
(52)
To the Minister in Canada (tel.)
Belief that question of Canadian participation in treaty is
primarily one of Empire policy.
58 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
47 and
Doc.
48]
May 9
(102)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Report of discussions with Beneš concerning anti-war pact;
59 [Pg.
59 is

opinion that Beneš is in favor of treaty and will exert his
influence with the French Foreign Office.
part of
Doc.
49]
May 10
(89)
From the Minister in Canada (tel.)
Canadian desire for initial inclusion in treaty, provided
Government at London agrees.
60 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
49 and
Doc.
50]
May 11
(103)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Arguments against Secretary’s participation in any sort of
conference; opinion that consultations on phraseology can
be carried on under Secretary’s guidance with
Ambassadors at Washington.
61 [Pg.
61 is
part of
Doc.
51]
May 12
(119)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Aide-mémoire from British Embassy, May 11 (text
printed), stating that because Secretary of State was not
favorably disposed toward conference of jurists or Foreign
Ministers, British Foreign Secretary withdrew his
suggestion.
62 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
51 and
Doc.
52]
May 14
(29)
From the Minister in Poland (tel.)
Polish Government’s regret that it was not equally
associated with the five powers in anti-war pact plan, and
its belief that both Czechoslovakia and Poland, as
signatories of Locarno pact, should be included in
invitation.
63 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
52 and
Doc.
53]
May 15
(32)
To the Minister in Poland (tel.)
Instructions to explain that invitations were limited to the
five great powers because real difficulties might emerge if
field of formal negotiations were enlarged, and to inform
Foreign Minister that Secretary will cooperate in any way
to the end that Poland may become one of the original
signatories.
(Instructions to repeat telegram No. 29 of May 14 and this
telegram to Embassy in London.)
64 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
53 and
Doc.
54]
May 17 From the Minister in Poland (tel.)
65 [Pg.

(31)
Favorable attitude of Foreign Minister, and his promise to
give a definite reply within a week.
includes
portions
of Doc.
54 and
Doc.
55]
May 19
(114)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
British reply (text printed) to U. S. proposal of April 13,
stating readiness to enter into negotiations looking to
conclusion of treaty and agreement of the Dominions and
India in the general principle of proposed treaty.
66 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
55 and
Doc.
56]
May 21
(130)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Arrangements for extending through U. S. Legations
invitations to Canadian and Irish Free State Governments
to participate in treaty; note for Foreign Secretary (text
printed) extending through him invitation to Governments
of Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and India.
69 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
56 and
Doc.
57]
May 21
(127)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Gratification of French public at British note of May 19
which is taken as recognizing validity of France’s position
and as taking her reservations into consideration.
71 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
57,
Doc.
58, and
Doc.
59]
May 25
(2774)
To the Ambassador in France
Explanation of the reason for the existence of confusion
with respect to the two Habana resolutions.
71 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
57,
Doc.
58, and
Doc.
59]
May 25
(122)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Report of informal conversation in which Chamberlain
explained his policy toward France and British desires with
regard to the treaty in general.
72 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

59 and
Doc.
60]
May 26
(66)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Japanese reply (text printed) stating desire to render
cooperation toward conclusion of a treaty.
75 [Pg.
75 is
part of
Doc.
61]
May 30
(11)
From the Minister in the Irish Free State (tel.)
Irish Free State reply (text printed) accepting U. S.
invitation unreservedly.
76 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
61 and
Doc.
62]
May 30
(437)
From the Minister in Canada
Canadian note (text printed) accepting U. S. invitation.
77 [Pg.
77 is
part of
Doc.
63]
June 3
From the British Ambassador
Objections to incorporation in treaty of a provision by
which contracting parties would be liberated from their
obligations toward one of their number who might become
involved in war.
79 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
63,
Doc.
64, and
Doc.
65]
June 6
(147)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Briand’s remarks that negotiations have reached point
where they can hardly fail, and his belief that reservations
of views of various powers can be put in concrete form by
protocol, expanded preamble, or other means.
79 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
63,
Doc.
64, and
Doc.
65]
June 9
(1452)
To the Chargé in Great Britain
Conversation with the British Ambassador in which the
Secretary expressed his inability to agree to suggested
80 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
65 and

inclusion by each country of reservations, provisos, or
understandings.
Doc.
66]
June 11
(1776)
From the Minister in Poland
Polish note (text printed) accepting U. S. invitation.
83 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
66 and
Doc.
67]
June 12 Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State
Conversation in which the Japanese Chargé offered certain
technical suggestions as to phraseology of treaty, and
reserved right to make further suggestions.
84 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
67 and
Doc.
68]
June 18 From the British Embassy
Understanding that French reservations and the views
expressed by the different powers are to be included in
redraft of preamble.
86 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
68 and
Doc.
69]
June 19
(2853)
From the Chargé in Great Britain
15 (texts printed), stating acceptance of U. S. invitation by
the Governments of New Zealand, Australia, India, and
South Africa, respectively.
87 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
69 and
Doc.
70]
June 20
(179)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Note for Foreign Office containing statement of U. S.
position and transmitting a revised draft treaty containing
redrafted preamble (texts printed).
(Footnotes: Instructions to repeat to missions in Great
Britain, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Irish Free
State, Italy, and Poland. Sent also to Japan.
Information that, in accordance with telegraphic
instructions of June 22, the note was dated June 23 and
90 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
70 and
Doc.
71]

together with draft treaty was delivered to the respective
Foreign Offices on that day.)
June 20
(157)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions for preparing the notes to the British
Government and the Dominion Governments and India.
95 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
71 and
Doc.
72]
June 23 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western
European Affairs
Conversation in which the Secretary handed to the
Japanese Chargé a copy of identic note and revised treaty
draft and explained certain changes in phraseology.
96 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
72 and
Doc.
73]
June 23 Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State
Conversation in which the Secretary explained to the
French Ambassador certain clauses in the preamble, and
stated that he believed he had met all of France’s views.
97 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
73 and
Doc.
74]
June 28
(27)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Press query as to reason why Brazil has not been included
in invitation to participate as original signatory;
Ambassador’s desire for statement thereon, for use with
Foreign Minister if deemed desirable.
98 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
74,
Doc.
75, and
Doc.
76]
June 29
(24)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Explanation that original restriction to a few powers was to
narrow the field of negotiations and to expedite conclusion
of a treaty; reasons for inclusion of British Dominions and
India and the Locarno powers.
98 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
74,
Doc.
75, and
Doc.
76]

June 29
(49)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Transmittal of text of telegram No. 24 of June 29 sent to
Brazil, with explanation that same considerations apply to
country to which Ambassador is accredited.
(Instructions to repeat to Embassies in Chile and
Argentina.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
77 and
Doc.
78]
June 29
(193)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Secretary explained to French
Ambassador that he could not put the interpretations as
expressed in his note either into a preamble or exchange of
notes as part of the treaty; similar statement to British
Chargé. Instructions to telegraph if Ambassador knows
what action French Cabinet has taken.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
77 and
Doc.
78]
July 3
(155)
From the Chargé in Great Britian (tel.)
Understanding that British are preparing reply to latest
American proposal, that British and French juridical
experts are studying legal aspect at Geneva, and that
British Foreign Secretary regrets that American proposal
has been presented in final form, for either acceptance or
refusal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
79 and
Doc.
80]
July 5
(183)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information from Briand that on his suggestion Cabinet
gave its approval in principle to draft treaty, and that he
stated he would continue study of situation with France’s
cosignatories to Locarno treaties, after which he would
bring up question before Cabinet again.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
79 and
Doc.
80]
July 6
(200)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Expression of opinion, in response to question raised by
British Chargé, that there can be no inconsistency between
the proposed treaty and the League Covenant.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
80 and
Doc.
81]
July 6
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
[Pg.

(82)
Foreign Office instructions to Japanese Chargé in
Washington to take up question of alteration of
phraseology to avoid possible objections of Privy Council
when it studies matter of ratification.
includes
portions
of Doc.
81 and
Doc.
82]
July 6
(73)
To the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Memorandum handed to Japanese Chargé (text printed),
explaining that text would justify translation into
phraseology acceptable to Japanese, and stating that the
phraseology in question has no such significance as was
attributed to it.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
82 and
Doc.
83]
July 6
(423)
To the Ambassador in Spain
Information that Spanish Ambassador has expressed desire
that Spain come into treaty as an original signatory.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
83 and
Doc.
84]
July 11
(3706)
From the Ambassador in Germany
Foreign Office note (text printed), stating agreement to
interpretation in Secretary of State’s note of June 23 and
declaring readiness to sign revised draft treaty.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
84 and
Doc.
85]
July 14
(193)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed), giving résumé of
understandings as expressed in new preamble and
Secretary’s note, and stating disposition to sign revised
draft treaty.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
85 and
Doc.
86]
July 15
(72)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed), stating agreement with
[Pg.
includes

interpretation set forth in U. S. note of June 23 and
disposition to proceed to signature of treaty.
portions
of Doc.
86 and
Doc.
87]
July 16
(14)
From the Minister in the Irish Free State
Foreign Office note, July 14 (text printed), stating
acceptability of revised treaty and readiness to sign.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
88 and
Doc.
89]
July 16
(218)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that press reports that U. S. Government has
invited Spain to become original signatory are incorrect.
(Instructions to repeat to Ambassador in Spain.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
88 and
Doc.
89]
July 17
(221)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Discussion with French Ambassador as to arrangements
for signature of treaty, possibly at Paris about August 25.
[Pg. 110
includes
portions
of Doc.
89,
Doc.
90, and
Doc.
91]
July 17
(529)
From the Chargé in Canada
Canadian note of July 16 (text printed), stating acceptance
of revised treaty and readiness to participate in signature.
[Pg. 110
includes
portions
of Doc.
89,
Doc.
90, and
Doc.
91]
July 18
(168)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Receipt of British reply, together with replies of
[Pg. 111
includes
portions

Governments of Australia, India, New Zealand, and Union
of South Africa.
of Doc.
91 and
Doc.
92]
July 18
(2900)
From the Chargé in Great Britain
Foreign Office notes of July 18 (texts printed), stating, with
understandings, acceptance of revised treaty and readiness
to proceed to signature, of Governments in Great Britain,
Australia, New Zealand, Union of South Africa, and India.
[Pg. 112
includes
portions
of Doc.
92 and
Doc.
93]
July 18
(86)
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Information that question of wording is still causing some
difficulty, and is the only reason for Parliament’s delay in
answering.
[Pg. 117
includes
portions
of Doc.
93,
Doc.
94, and
Doc.
95]
July 18
(288)
From the Ambassador in Belgium
Foreign Office note of July 17 (text printed), stating
acceptance of explanations in Secretary of State’s letter of
June 23 and indicating readiness to proceed to signature.
[Pg. 117
includes
portions
of Doc.
93,
Doc.
94, and
Doc.
95]
July 18
(1843)
From the Minister in Poland
Foreign Office note of July 8 [17?] (text printed),
accepting, on basis of Secretary of State’s explanations in
note of June 23, proposed treaty and stating readiness to
proceed to signature.
[Pg. 118
includes
portions
of Doc.
95 and
Doc.
96]
July 19 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western
European Affairs
Conversation in which the Secretary of State advised the
Spanish Ambassador that as soon as all the invited
Governments had replied, he would raise the question of
inclusion of Spain as an original signatory.
[Pg.
120 is
part of
Doc.
97]

July 20
(62)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s note (text printed) stating acceptance of
explanations in Secretary of State’s note of June 23 and
declaring readiness to sign treaty.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
97 and
Doc.
98]
July 20
(88)
From the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s note (text printed) accepting proposed
treaty and stating readiness to proceed to signature.
[Pg.
123 is
part of
Doc.
99]
July 23
(226)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain privately the Foreign Minister’s
opinion on inclusion of Spain or any other powers as
original signatories.
(Sent also to Great Britain, Germany, and Italy.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
99 and
Doc.
100]
July 25
(158)
From the Ambassador in Germany (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s opinion concerning inclusion of any
other powers as original signatories.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
100 and
Doc.
101]
July 26 From the French Chargé
Invitation extended to the Secretary of State to go to Paris
on August 27 to sign the treaty.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
101 and
Doc.
102]
July 26
(205)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Briand’s disposition to include Spain as original signatory
but his realization that Secretary of State, having issued the
invitations, should be the one to decide.
[Pg.
127 is
part of

Doc.
103]
July 26
(172)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Chamberlain’s disposition to include Spain, but feeling that
question is for decision between Briand and the Secretary
of State.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
103,
Doc.
104,
and
Doc.
105]
July 27
(78)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Information that Italian Government would favor inclusion
of Spain as original signatory, but doubts expediency of
opening treaty to inclusion of a number of other nations.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
103,
Doc.
104,
and
Doc.
105]
July 30
(233)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Note sent to the French Chargé (text printed), stating that
Secretary of State will be pleased to meet the Foreign
Ministers in Paris to sign the treaty on August 27.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
105 and
Doc.
106]
July 31
(237)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to inform Foreign Office orally that Secretary
of State is advising Spanish Ambassador that it is not
feasible to arrange to have Spain included among the
original signatories.
(Instructions to repeat to Great Britain, Italy, and
Germany.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
106 and
Doc.
107]
Aug. 1
(51)
To the Ambassador in Spain (tel.)
Transmittal, for information and discreet use if necessary,
[Pg.

the Ambassador in France; memorandum of conversation,
July 31 (text printed), in which the Spanish Ambassador
was advised of the reasons why it was not feasible to
arrange for Spain to be included as an original signatory,
and in which he was insistent that Spain had been invited
to sign.
includes
portions
of Doc.
107 and
Doc.
108]
Aug. 3
(241)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Withdrawal by French of their suggestion that protocol of
adhesion be ready for signature by other nations at the time
of signature of the treaty by the 15 nations.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
108,
Doc.
109,
and
Doc.
110]
Aug. 3
(31)
From the Minister in Portugal (tel.)
Desire of Portugal to be invited to sign the peace pact as an
original signatory, particularly in view of understanding
that Primo de Rivera will go to Paris to sign for Spain; U.
S. Minister’s recommendation to that effect, and request
for instructions.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
108,
Doc.
109,
and
Doc.
110]
Aug. 4
(179)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Inquiry from Foreign Office official whether door is
definitely closed to inclusion of Spain as original signatory.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
111 and
Doc.
112]
Aug. 8
(247)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Intention to send to all missions except those in countries
signing as original signatories, telegraphic instructions
(text printed) to deliver to respective Foreign Offices notes
contained therein inviting adherence to the treaty;
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
111 and

instructions to consult French Government confidentially
on this procedure, at same time inquiring if it will invite
Russia to adhere.
Doc.
112]
Aug. 9
(21)
To the Minister in Portugal (tel.)
Reasons why Secretary is unable to accede to suggestion
for Portugal’s inclusion as original signatory; instructions
to explain the circumstances to Foreign Minister.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
112 and
Doc.
113]
Aug. 10
(225)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Briand’s disposition in principle to invite Russia’s
adherence, but necessity for careful examination of
problem to eliminate possibility of a refusal or
objectionable answer. Expectation of an early answer to
rest of program; consideration of whether countries could
adhere before deposit of ratifications by original
signatories.
[Pg.
140 is
part of
Doc.
114]
Aug. 13
(76)
From the Ambassador in Spain (tel.)
Information that on August 9 Ambassador explained
discreetly to Primo de Rivera point of view outlined in
telegram No. 51 of August 1, and that at conclusion of
interview Primo was resigned but not convinced;
memorandum by Primo dated August 10 (text printed),
placing on record Spain’s position in the matter of her
noninclusion as an original signatory.
[Pg.
141 is
part of
Doc.
115]
Aug. 13
(230)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that France is disposed to extend adherence
invitation to Russia but that U. S. Ambassador has asked
for exact terms of formula proposed to be adopted in
approaching Soviet Government; expectation that answer
upon whole question of adherence procedure will be given
following day.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
115 and
Doc.
116]
Aug. 14
(258)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to inform the Foreign Office that the Secretary
entrusts matter of the form and substance of the Russian
[Pg.
includes

invitation to France; desire for explicit assurance by France
as to agreeability of proposed procedure for inviting
adherence of other countries.
portions
of Doc.
116,
Doc.
117,
and
Doc.
118]
Aug. 14
(261)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Revision of paragraph (text printed) of draft note to clear
up any question regarding procedure for governments to
adhere to treaty before it comes into force through
ratification by signatories.
(Footnote: Advice from the U. S. Ambassador, August 16,
that the alteration in draft note was acceptable to the
French Government.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
116,
Doc.
117,
and
Doc.
118]
Aug. 14
(233)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information from Foreign Office as to exact procedure for
inviting Russia’s adherence. Likelihood that France would
be willing to perform similar service with regard to
inviting adherence of Afghanistan, where the United States
is without diplomatic representation. Communication of
textual addition in proposed instructions to missions,
desired by France.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
118 and
Doc.
119]
Aug. 15
(236)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that France’s agreeability to procedure for
adherence was assured in telegram No. 233 of August 14,
except for the French addition mentioned; observation,
however, that Foreign Office has now raised question as to
whether adherence by other countries can be other than
conditional until ratifications have been deposited by
original signatories.
[Pg.
146 is
part of
Doc.
120]
Aug. 15
(266)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Belief that any country may adhere at any time and that
adherence would come into effect with the treaty; opinion
that present procedure would expedite adherences by other
powers.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
121,

Doc.
122,
and
Doc.
123]
Aug. 16
(82)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Information that as Under Secretary Grandi finds it
impossible to go to Paris August 27, the Italian
Ambassador at Paris will sign.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
121,
Doc.
122,
and
Doc.
123]
Aug. 16
(94)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Opinion that Italian attitude will make unfortunate
impression; instructions to make this point clear to Foreign
Office. Hope that Grandi’s presence may still be possible.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
121,
Doc.
122,
and
Doc.
123]
Aug. 16
(53)
To the Ambassador in Spain (tel.)
Instructions to communicate to Prime Minister the
Secretary of State’s sincere regret that any
misunderstanding has occurred with regard to limitation of
treaty signatories to the original powers; to explain U. S.
Government’s regard for Spain’s world position and her
people; and to express hope that Spain will be one of the
first countries to adhere.
[Pg.
148 is
part of
Doc.
124]
Aug. 16 To American Diplomatic Representatives (cir. tel.)
Transmittal of note for Foreign Office (excerpt printed)
inviting adherence to multilateral treaty, with instructions
to missions to make arrangements for its presentation upon
receipt of telegram from Paris stating that treaty has been
signed.
[Pg.
149 is
part of
Doc.
125]

Aug. 16
(272)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to arrange with Minister of Afghanistan at
Paris to deliver to him for transmission to his government
the note of invitation to adhere, and to intimate to the
French that while this procedure is being followed in view
of U. S. recognition of Afghanistan, that French Minister at
Kabul might be instructed to inform the Government of
Afghanistan of the action being taken at Paris in this
matter.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
125,
Doc.
126,
and
Doc.
127]
Aug. 17
(277)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Instructions to advise French Foreign Office informally,
prior to transmitting note and instructions to diplomatic
agent at Tangier with respect to Morocco and as a matter of
courtesy, of U. S. Government’s intention to invite
Morocco to adhere.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
125,
Doc.
126,
and
Doc.
127]
Aug. 17
(77)
From the Ambassador in Spain (tel.)
Information that Primo de Rivera’s communication to the
press (text printed) indicates his acceptance of situation in
regard to nonparticipation of Spain as an original
signatory; intention to await Primo’s arrival in San
Sebastian before urging Spain’s prompt adherence.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
127 and
Doc.
128]
Aug. 18
(248)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Report that Foreign Office is gravely concerned over U. S.
intention with regard to Morocco expressed in telegram
No. 277 of August 17; probability that Briand could never
give his consent to this step.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
129,
Doc.
130,
and
Doc.
131]
Aug. 18
(283)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Department thought that France would not
[Pg.

have any objection to Morocco’s adherence; instructions,
however, that as objection does exist, to inform Foreign
Office that Department does not desire to press the matter
further at this time.
includes
portions
of Doc.
129,
Doc.
130,
and
Doc.
131]
Aug. 20
(85)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Personal communication from Prime Minister Mussolini
(excerpt printed), stating that because of numerous
engagements it will be impossible for Grandi to absent
himself from the Ministry, and that the Italian Ambassador
at Paris has been given full royal powers to sign for Italy.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
129,
Doc.
130,
and
Doc.
131]
Aug. 26 From President Coolidge to President Doumergue (tel.)
Congratulations on successful outcome of negotiations
inaugurated by France and the United States for treaty
renouncing war as an instrument of national policy.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
131,
Doc.
132,
and
Doc.
133]
Aug. 27 Treaty Between the United States and Other Powers
For the renunciation of war as an instrument of national
policy.
(Bracketed note: List of adhering and non-adhering States,
with the respective dates.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
131,
Doc.
132,
and
Doc.
133]
Aug. 27 From President Doumergue to President Coolidge (tel.)
Appreciation for congratulatory telegram; conveyance of
[Pg.

thanks of the civilized world.
includes
portions
of Doc.
133 and
Doc.
134]
Aug. 27
(265)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Telegraphic instructions from Secretary of State (text
printed) for transmittal to missions which received circular
telegram of August 16, advising that anti-war treaty has
been signed, and directing delivery of note.
(Footnote: Repeated by the Department to the missions
concerned, August 27, 1 p.m.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
134,
Doc.
135,
and
Doc.
136]
NOTIFICATIONS OF ADHERENCE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Aug.
From the Peruvian Ambassador
Notification that Peru adheres to anti-war pact, and that
upon receipt of certified copy of treaty, it will be submitted
to Congress for ratification.
[Pg. 158
includes
portions
of Doc.
134,
Doc.
135,
and
Doc.
136]
Aug.
Dip.)
From the Minister in Liberia
Foreign Office note (text printed) giving formal notification
of adherence.
[Pg. 159
includes
portions
of Doc.
136 and
Doc.
137]
Aug.
From the Norwegian Legation
Intention of Norwegian Government to submit to the
Storting a royal proposal in regard to adherence.
[Pg. 161
includes
portions

of Doc.
137,
Doc.
138,
and
Doc.
139]
Aug.
(3052)
From the Ambassador in Brazil
Foreign Office note of August 28 (text printed)
acknowledging invitation to adhere to anti-war pact and
stating agreement with the principles on which treaty is
based.
[Pg. 161
includes
portions
of Doc.
137,
Doc.
138,
and
Doc.
139]
Aug.
(100)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Information that Panaman Government accepts in principle
and will recommend formal adherence to Congress on
receipt of certified copy of treaty text.
[Pg. 163
includes
portions
of Doc.
139,
Doc.
140,
and
Doc.
141]
Aug.
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Note from Political Department (text printed) stating
agreement in principle and probability that Federal Council
will recommend to Federal Chambers that it be authorized
to accede to the new treaty.
[Pg. 163
includes
portions
of Doc.
139,
Doc.
140,
and
Doc.
141]
Aug.
From the Costa Rican Chargé
Declaration of adherence to Kellogg Pact, which will be
referred to Congress for ratification.
[Pg. 164
includes
portions
of Doc.
141,
Doc.
142,

and
Doc.
143]
Aug.
(414)
From the Ambassador in Cuba
Foreign Office note of August 29 and statement by
President Machado (texts printed) concerning Cabinet
resolution to adhere to treaty as soon as possible.
[Pg. 164
includes
portions
of Doc.
141,
Doc.
142,
and
Doc.
143]
Aug.
(2844)
From the Netherlands Chargé
Information that necessary constitutional measures have
been taken to adhere to treaty.
[Pg. 166
includes
portions
of Doc.
143 and
Doc.
144]
Aug.
From the Minister in Ethiopia (tel.)
Telegram from Prince Regent of Ethiopia (text printed),
notifying adherence and stating that information is awaited
as to steps necessary to complete the act of adherence.
[Pg. 167
includes
portions
of Doc.
145 and
Doc.
146]
Aug.
(1000)
From the Minister in Finland
Foreign Office note of August 30 (text printed), stating
favorable attitude of Finland toward adherence and
intention to submit matter to the Diet for approval.
[Pg. 167
includes
portions
of Doc.
145 and
Doc.
146]
Aug.
(1942)
From the Chargé in Austria
Foreign Office note, August 30 (text printed), setting forth
resolution of adherence which will be submitted as soon as
possible to National Council and Bundesrat for approval.
[Pg. 168
includes
portions
of Doc.
146 and
Doc.
147]
Aug.
From the Acting Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the French
Ambassador in Russia
Request that Ambassador communicate to his Government,
for transmittal to U. S. Government, Soviet Government’s
views concerning its foreign policy, matter of disarmament,
noninclusion of Soviet Government in negotiations
preceding the treaty, comments on certain provisions of the
pact, and expression of consent to adherence, instrument of
adherence to be forwarded as soon as necessary formalities
have been accomplished.
[Pg. 170
includes
portions
of Doc.
147 and
Doc.
148]
Sept. 1
(17)
From the Minister in Sweden (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed), advising that Riksdag
will be asked as soon as possible to give consent to
Sweden’s adherence.
[Pg. 175
includes
portions
of Doc.
148 and
Doc.
149]
Sept. 1
(122)
From the Danish Minister
Declaration of formal adherence of Danish Government,
which will be submitted to Parliament for ratification.
[Pg. 176
includes
portions
of Doc.
150 and
Doc.
151]
Sept. 4 From the Rumanian Chargé
Note of adherence of Rumanian Government (text printed).
[Pg. 176
includes
portions
of Doc.
150 and
Doc.
151]
Sept. 4
(109)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed), stating Honduran
Government’s decision to adhere as soon as respective
ratifications of the original signatory powers have been
received.
[Pg. 178
includes
portions
of Doc.
151,
Doc.
152,
and

Doc.
153]
Sept. 4
(72)
From the Minister in Latvia (tel.)
Information that Estonian Minister at Riga stated on
September 3 that Estonia would adhere to pact.
(Footnote: Passage of law of adherence by Parliament on
[Pg. 178
includes
portions
of Doc.
151,
Doc.
152,
and
Doc.
153]
Sept. 4
(11)
From the Ambassador in Belgium
Note from Luxemburg Minister of State, August 29 (text
printed), declaring that Luxemburg adheres and that
instrument of adhesion will be transmitted to Washington
after approval by legislative power.
[Pg. 179
is part
of Doc.
154]
Sept. 4
(1018)
From the Ambassador in Spain
Foreign Office note, August 30 (text printed), expressing
sympathy with aims of anti-war pact, but containing no
commitment as to when Spain will adhere.
[Pg. 180
is part
of Doc.
155]
Sept. 4
(789)
From the Minister in Nicaragua
Foreign Office note, August 30 (text printed), stating
adherence subject to constitutional approval of Congress.
Minister’s understanding, however, that formal Presidential
decree providing for adherence will be issued in near
future.
(Footnote: Issuance of decree, September 5, 1928.)
[Pg. 181
includes
portions
of Doc.
155 and
Doc.
156]
Sept. 4
(30)
From the Chargé in Egypt
Foreign Office note of September 3 (text printed), stating
adherence to treaty as signed in Paris without admission of
any reservation whatever.
[Pg. 183
is part
of Doc.
157]
Sept. 4
(378)
From the Ambassador in Argentina
Foreign Office note of August 31 (text printed),
acknowledging invitation to adhere to anti-war pact, stating
favorable attitude toward principles consecrated therein,
and advising that Ambassador will be informed of any
resolution which may be adopted regarding the treaty.
[Pg. 184
includes
portions
of Doc.
157 and
Doc.
158]

Sept. 5
(2377)
From the Chargé in Portugal
Foreign Office note of August 31 (text printed), giving
definite adherence.
[Pg. 186
is part
of Doc.
159]
Sept. 5
(1320)
From the Minister in Bulgaria
Foreign Office note (text printed) stating that Council of
Ministers has unanimously approved Bulgaria’s adherence,
and that all necessary formalities will be carried out with
least possible delay.
[Pg. 187
is part
of Doc.
160]
Sept. 6
(88)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Presentation by Lithuanian Minister of note of September 5
from Lithuanian Premier, then at Geneva, to the Secretary
of State (text printed), stating adherence to pact.
(Footnote: Information that subsequently Lithuanian
Minister in United States stated that note was merely
notification of intention to adhere and that a formal
declaration of adherence would be transmitted as soon as
treaty had come into force through ratification by signatory
powers.)
[Pg. 188
is part
of Doc.
161]
Sept. 6
(398)
From the Venezuelan Minister
Notification of Venezuela’s adherence.
[Pg. 189
includes
portions
of Doc.
161,
Doc.
162,
and
Doc.
163]
Sept. 6
(663)
From the Chargé in Greece
Foreign Office note, August 31 (text printed), advising that
when Chamber of Deputies convenes, Greek President will
ask for necessary authorization to adhere.
[Pg. 189
includes
portions
of Doc.
161,
Doc.
162,
and
Doc.
163]

Sept. 6
(1149)
From the Minister in Ecuador
Transmittal of Ecuadoran reply to invitation to adhere,
which merely acknowledges U. S. note without
commitment as to attitude Government will assume.
Ambassador’s assumption that Ecuador will eventually
adhere and is awaiting the action which other Latin
American countries may take.
[Pg. 191
includes
portions
of Doc.
163 and
Doc.
164]
Sept. 7
(109)
From the Chargé in Guatemala (tel.)
Receipt of note from Foreign Office stating acceptance in
principle of anti-war treaty, to which Guatemala will adhere
in conformity with the conditions of the pact itself.
[Pg. 192
includes
portions
of Doc.
164 and
Doc.
165]
Sept. 7
(485)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes
Foreign Office note of August 30 (text printed), stating that
adherence will be given as soon as the necessary formalities
can be completed.
[Pg. 193
is part
of Doc.
166]
Sept. 7
(474)
From the Ambassador in Turkey
Foreign Office note of September 6 (text printed),
announcing Turkey’s adherence.
[Pg. 195
includes
portions
of Doc.
166 and
Doc.
167]
Sept. 8
(14)
From the Ambassador in Chile
Foreign Office note of September 5 (text printed), stating
agreement with policy of peace contained in treaty.
Ambassador’s opinion that Chile will adhere after treaty has
been ratified by the original signatories.
[Pg. 196
includes
portions
of Doc.
167 and
Doc.
168]
Sept.
(1004)
From the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
Foreign Office note of September 7 (text printed), stating
that Dominican Government’s decision to adhere will be
submitted for legislative approval.
[Pg. 198
is part
of Doc.
169]
Sept.
From the Ambassador in Argentina
Report that a resolution favoring Argentine adherence
[Pg. 199

(382)
introduced into Senate on September 6, was vigorously
opposed by Senator Molinari, and after considerable debate
was referred to committee before which Foreign Minister
will be invited to appear to express opinion of the
Executive.
includes
portions
of Doc.
169 and
Doc.
170]
Sept.
(520)
From the Minister in Albania
Foreign Office note of September 8 (text printed), declaring
that Albania is ready to adhere and is instructing its
Minister in Washington to that effect.
[Pg. 201
includes
portions
of Doc.
170 and
Doc.
171]
Sept.
(970)
From the Ambassador in Mexico
Foreign Office note (text printed) accepting invitation to
adhere and stating that as soon as treaty has come into
effect by ratification by signatories, the necessary steps to
accomplish formal adherence will be taken.
[Pg. 202
includes
portions
of Doc.
171 and
Doc.
172]
Sept.
To the Danish Minister
Information that note No. 122 of September 1 has been
deposited with the treaty and that notification of Danish
Parliament’s ratification of adherence will be annexed
thereto when received; intention to transmit two certified
copies of treaty for purpose of formal adherence.
[Pg. 206
includes
portions
of Doc.
172 and
Doc.
173]
Sept.
To the Diplomatic Representatives in All Countries Except
Those Which Were Original Signatories of the Treaty for the
Renunciation of War
Instructions to present to government to which accredited
the two certified copies of treaty transmitted with this
instruction, one for purpose of formal adherence and the
other for archives; further instructions to point out that
instrument of adherence may be executed immediately in
accordance with the constitutional or legal procedure of the
government adhering.
[Pg. 207
is part
of Doc.
174]
Sept.
(5564)
From the Chargé in Latvia
Foreign Office note of August 30 (text printed), announcing
[Pg. 208
includes

Latvian decision to adhere and intention to submit this
decision to the Saeima for ratification.
portions
of Doc.
175 and
Doc.
176]
Sept.
(688)
From the Minister in Uruguay
Foreign Office note of September 7 (text printed), advising
that Uruguayan Government is disposed to favor adhesion
and will initiate the appropriate constitutional steps to that
end.
[Pg. 208
includes
portions
of Doc.
175 and
Doc.
176]
Sept.
(100)
From the Chargé in Siam
Foreign Office note of September 18 (text printed),
communicating decision to adhere and intention to transmit
formal instrument of adherence through Siamese Minister
at Washington.
[Pg. 210
is part
of Doc.
177]
Sept.
(2908)
To the Chargé in France
Instructions to send to Minister of Afghanistan at Paris a
note (text printed) transmitting two certified copies of
antiwar treaty for archives and purpose of formal adherence
and, for information, a copy of the circular instruction of
September 17 to certain diplomatic representatives of the
United States.
[Pg. 211
includes
portions
of Doc.
178 and
Doc.
179]
Sept.
From the Haitian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
American Chargé
Adherence to anti-war treaty.
[Pg. 211
includes
portions
of Doc.
178 and
Doc.
179]
Sept.
(1676)
From the Minister in China
Note from Nationalist Foreign Minister of September 13
(text printed), stating decision to adhere without delay and
expressing hope that signatory powers will carry out spirit
of treaty by removing China’s unequal treaties and
encroachments upon her sovereignty.
[Pg. 212
includes
portions
of Doc.
179 and
Doc.
180]
Sept.
To the Ambassador in Mexico (tel.)
Note for Foreign Ministry (text printed), stating that there is
[Pg. 214

(263)
no need to await ratification of treaty by signatory powers
before completing adherence and expressing hope that
Mexican Government will be among the first to complete
process of adherence.
includes
portions
of Doc.
180,
Doc.
181,
and
Doc.
182]
Oct. 4
(81)
From the Chargé in Persia (tel.)
Foreign Office note of October 3 (text printed),
communicating adhesion to anti-war pact.
[Pg. 214
includes
portions
of Doc.
180,
Doc.
181,
and
Doc.
182]
Oct. 8
(977)
From the Chargé in Japan
Press reports of objections of Privy Councillors to treaty on
basis of interpretation of phraseology and present state of
Sino-Japanese relations; concern of opposition as to
whether Japan should ratify a treaty to which China has
adhered or whether it would be possible to ratify treaty with
reservations that obligations created by treaty shall not exist
in respect of China so long as Japan withholds recognition
from Nationalist Government.
[Pg. 215
includes
portions
of Doc.
182 and
Doc.
183]
Oct. 9
(276)
From the Minister in Hungary
Foreign Office note of October 6 (text printed), notifying of
Hungarian Government’s adherence and intention to take
constitutional measures to give it full validity.
[Pg. 217
includes
portions
of Doc.
183 and
Doc.
184]
Oct. 12
(58)
From the Chargé in Bolivia
Declaration of adherence by Cabinet Council of Bolivia,
October 11 (text printed). Information that Department will
be advised as soon as Bolivian Congress has taken action
upon ratification thereof.
[Pg. 220
is part
of Doc.
185]

(Footnote: Nonratification by the Bolivian Congress of
adherence.)
Oct. 23
(286)
From the Ambassador in Mexico (tel.)
Belief of Acting Foreign Minister that inconsistency exists
between treaty provision and U. S. notes of September 24
and 26 concerning procedure for adherence; submission of
matter to Department for instructions.
[Pg. 221
includes
portions
of Doc.
185 and
Doc.
186]
Oct. 25
(46)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Observations on Senator Molinari’s remarks concerning
negotiations and effect of the anti-war treaty; permission to
convey these views to Molinari if the Ambassador deems it
wise.
[Pg. 222
includes
portions
of Doc.
186 and
Doc.
187]
Oct. 29
(86)
From the Minister in Ethiopia
Information that on October 28 the King of Ethiopia sealed,
signed, and ratified the treaty, this act constituting complete
and final ratification under Ethiopian law.
[Pg. 225
includes
portions
of Doc.
187 and
Doc.
188]
Oct. 30
(14)
To the Minister in Egypt
Instructions to present note to Egyptian Government (text
printed) expressing pleasure at Egyptian decision to adhere
and appreciation for friendly sentiments expressed in its
note; information, for use if occasion requires, that
complete adherence may be evidenced by deposit with U.
S. Government of Egyptian adherence, and that there is no
need to await ratification by the signatory powers.
[Pg. 226
includes
portions
of Doc.
188 and
Doc.
189]
Oct. 30
(647)
From the Minister in Denmark
Foreign Office note of October 29 (text printed), stating that
formal declaration of adhesion of Iceland, while reserving
its ratification, has been endorsed on one of the certified
copies which was forwarded to Danish Minister in
Washington with instructions to transmit it to the
Department for deposit.
[Pg. 227
includes
portions
of Doc.
189 and
Doc.
190]

(Footnote: Transmitted by the Danish Minister on
November 13.)
Nov. 2
(1450)
From the Chargé in Colombia
Foreign Office note of October 25 (text printed), stating that
a bill has been presented to Congress to authorize
Government to adhere to anti-war pact.
[Pg. 228
includes
portions
of Doc.
190 and
Doc.
191]
Nov. 3
(288)
To the Ambassador in Mexico (tel.)
Explanation of Department’s instructions with regard to
adherence procedure; information that Department regarded
Mexican Government’s note of September 14 as notice of
adherence, but that if Mexican Government wishes to
deposit its perfected instrument of adherence at
Washington, the U. S. Government will be pleased to
receive it.
[Pg. 229
includes
portions
of Doc.
191 and
Doc.
192]
Nov. 9
(79)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Argentine President’s decision that anti-war treaty does not
offer possibilities for realizing universal peace which has
always been ideal and policy of Argentina; information that
Ambassador talked unsuccessfully with Senator Molinari
on the basis of points contained in Department’s telegram
No. 46 of October 25; doubt that any further representations
in immediate future would cause Argentine President to
change his mind.
[Pg. 230
includes
portions
of Doc.
192 and
Doc.
193]
Nov.
(666)
From the Minister in Paraguay
Foreign Office note of November 17 (text printed),
declaring adherence and stating that matter will be
submitted to National Congress for approval.
[Pg. 231
includes
portions
of Doc.
193 and
Doc.
194]
Nov.
(123)
To the Chargé in Japan (tel.)
Information that U. S. Government does not consider
adherence by an unrecognized government to a multilateral
treaty to which it is a party, entails recognition by U. S.
Government; opinion that it is for Japanese Government to
[Pg. 232
includes
portions
of Doc.
194 and

decide what the action would be on its part which would
constitute recognition of the Chinese Nationalist
Government; instructions to telegraph promptly if there is
any likelihood that suggested reservation with regard to
China will be seriously considered.
Doc.
195]
Nov.
(1402)
From the Chargé in Salvador
Receipt of note from Salvadoran Government stating that it
will at an opportune time issue resolution regarding its
adherence.
[Pg. 233
includes
portions
of Doc.
195 and
Doc.
196]
Nov.
From the French Ambassador
Note from Afghan Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs to
the French Minister in Afghanistan of October 3 (text
printed), asking that decision of Afghan Government to
adhere to antiwar treaty be communicated to U. S.
Government.
[Pg. 234
is part
of Doc.
197]
PARTICIPATION OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORK OF THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE
DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Dec.
(209)
1023)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Suggestions as to course to be followed by American
delegation at fifth session of Preparatory Commission, to
convene on March 15, 1928.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
197 and
Doc.
198]
Feb. 16
(12)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Announcement by Secretariat that provisional agenda will
cover (1) progress of work of Security Committee, (2)
Russian resolution regarding convention for total
disarmament, and (3) progress of work of Preparatory
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
199 and

Commission, including a full discussion of whether or not a
second reading of draft convention is to take place in the
session.
(Footnote: Instructions by Acting Secretary of State,
February 6, 1928, that Mr. Hugh Gibson, Ambassador in
Belgium, proceed to Geneva to head American
representation.)
Doc.
200]
Feb. 25 From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Summary of Russian draft convention for immediate and
complete disarmament.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
199 and
Doc.
200]
Feb. 27
(14)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Desire of Gibson and Minister for instructions regarding
forthcoming meeting, particularly as regards second reading
of draft and U. S. attitude on Russian resolution.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
201 and
Doc.
202]
Feb. 28
(23)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions not to assume offensive at opening of meeting;
opinion that Russian idea is so impractical that no detailed
discussion is required; willingness to agree to second
reading of draft if other powers so desire; information as to
developments in naval limitation discussions; advice that
there have been no new developments which would
necessitate departure from stand previously taken on land
and air armaments.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
201 and
Doc.
202]
Mar. 9 From the British Embassy
Information that British Government attaches great
importance to its proposals at Geneva Naval Conference
regarding capital ships and plans to allude thereto in broad
terms at session of Preparatory Commission.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
203 and
Doc.
204]

Mar.
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
For Gibson and Wilson: Information concerning
conversation with British Ambassador on March 9, during
which the Secretary advised the Ambassador that U. S.
attitude remained the same and that he saw no reason to
take up capital ship question at Preparatory Commission
meeting.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
203 and
Doc.
204]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Probability that point (1) of agenda will result in formal
adoption of Security Committee report. Information that
feeling in regard to Russian proposals is divided; also that
there is nearly unanimous feeling that more harm than good
would result from a second reading of convention before a
larger measure of agreement is reached by direct relations
between various governments.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
204 and
Doc.
205]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Request for instructions as to questions regarding
renunciation of war and obligations under multilateral treaty
which may be evoked by remarks Chairman proposes to
make in opening session.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
205 and
Doc.
206]
Mar.
To the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Instructions not to make proposed speech, or any speech, on
subject of pending negotiations regarding arbitration,
conciliation, and Briand proposal for renunciation of war.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
207 and
Doc.
208]
Mar.
To the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Instructions to state, if asked any questions regarding
proposed anti-war treaty, that party in question should take
up negotiations on matter at Washington.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
207 and
Doc.
208]

Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Information that Commission reached discussion of Russian
proposals, and that while all delegations appear to be
anxious to dispose of the proposals promptly, none
apparently has courage to stand up against attacks of
Russians; intention to keep free of debates as far as
possible.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
208 and
Doc.
209]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Failure of interested delegations to decide how to deal with
Soviet proposals; feeling that one course under
consideration—discussion of Russian proposals clause by
clause with first reading of draft convention—would be
futile and intolerable; suggestion that, if this course appears
about to be adopted, the Chairman be authorized to point
out that limitation of armament and complete disarmament
are irreconcilable, and that the U. S. Government would
have to consider whether it could continue with any profit
to participate in work of Preparatory Commission.
[Pg.
250 is
part of
Doc.
210]
Mar.
To the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Endorsement of decision to abstain as far as possible from
debate on Russian proposals.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
211 and
Doc.
212]
Mar.
To the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Doubt that suggestion in telegram No. 11 of March 19
would be advisable if it means a complete withdrawal from
Preparatory Commission, which would give the other
powers a chance to shift blame for failure of Conference
onto U. S. Government; suggestion that a League member
of Commission might ask League Council for instructions
as to competence of Commission to consider plan for total
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
211 and
Doc.
212]

disarmament when it was called to consider reduction and
limitation of armament.
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Information that because American representative’s
continued silence on Soviet proposals was becoming
conspicuous, in view of speeches by the other powers, he
had deemed it wise to speak briefly on U. S. belief in
multilateral pact as method of approach, disbelief in
Russian proposals as impracticable, and other points in
sense of Secretary’s telegram No. 23 of February 28 to the
Minister in Switzerland.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
212 and
Doc.
213]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Speech of March 21 (text printed).
[Pg.
253 is
part of
Doc.
214]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Advice that when question of fixing date for next meeting
arose, American representative made clear U. S. attitude
toward second reading of draft and suggested that
Commission Chairman be asked to follow progress of direct
negotiations for purpose of harmonizing divergent views
and to convoke Commission as soon as he believed second
reading might have reasonable prospect of success.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
214,
Doc.
215,
and
Doc.
216]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Introduction and discussion of various resolutions regarding
Russian proposals and second reading, without any definite
action; decision of Russians, in view of rejection of
proposals, to cooperate in partial disarmament, and their
introduction of new draft, on which ruling as to discussion
was reserved. Observation that there has not yet been such
an entirely futile session.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
214,
Doc.
215,
and
Doc.
216]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
[Pg.

24 (20) Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Letter from British representative (text printed) setting forth
proposals regarding limitation of size and armament and
extension of life of capital ships.
includes
portions
of Doc.
216 and
Doc.
217]
Mar.
From the Chief of the American Representation on the
Preparatory Commission (tel.)
Advice that British letter came as complete surprise, and
that because British representatives left immediately for
London, there has been no opportunity to discuss proposals
or to learn reason for their presentation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
217,
Doc.
218,
and
Doc.
219]
Sept.
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Inquiry from Chairman of Preparatory Commission as to
opinion concerning date to be fixed for next meeting;
request for Department’s instructions.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
217,
Doc.
218,
and
Doc.
219]
Sept.
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Instructions to advise Chairman that his inquiry has been
referred to Secretary of State. Information that the Secretary
must confer with the President.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
219,
Doc.
220,
and
Doc.
221]
Oct. 30
(104)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Report that League Secretariat considers that it is time to
break the deadlock on question of naval disarmament and
intends to suggest that experts of the naval powers be called
[Pg.
includes
portions

together for informal discussions in hope that a solution
may be found.
of Doc.
219,
Doc.
220,
and
Doc.
221]
Nov. 6 From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Information that Chairman of Preparatory Commission does
not intend to approach the naval powers in regard to
preliminary conversation, but prefers to wait until British
Government replies to American note concerning Franco-
British naval agreement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
221 and
Doc.
222]
Dec. 1
(79)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Opinion of Commission Chairman that to hold another
meeting before some kind of agreement is reached between
Great Britain and United States would be disastrous.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
223 and
Doc.
224]
Dec. 6
(118)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Opinion of Secretary General of League that it would be
wise from a strategic point of view to call a short session in
February with a limited agenda from which an attempt
should be made to exclude naval questions.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
223 and
Doc.
224]
Dec.
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Opinion that a meeting at the present time would be
harmful; feeling that suggestion of a limited agenda from
which naval matters are to be excluded is of questionable
value; belief that a meeting should be avoided as it will
probably only embitter relations between United States and
Great Britain; opinion that decision practically rests with
Germany, the only League member now urging a meeting,
and Italy.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
224 and
Doc.
225]
Dec.
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
[Pg.

(107)
Preference for postponement of meeting, but belief that
attitude expressed by President Coolidge to the press—that
disarmament question is under League and would have to
be carried on irrespective of U. S. views, that United States
has never indicated desire for postponement, and is always
ready to cooperate with Commission—should prevail.
(Instructions to repeat to Ambassador Gibson.)
includes
portions
of Doc.
225 and
Doc.
226]
Dec.
(123)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Information from Secretary General of League that Great
Britain, France, and Germany agreed to advise Commission
Chairman to call meeting between the 8th and 15th of
April; his desire for unofficial expression by Secretary of
opinion as to convenience of these dates.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
226 and
Doc.
227]
Dec.
(109)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to advise Secretary General that U. S.
Government is prepared to send delegates at any time.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
227,
Doc.
228,
Doc.
229,
and
Doc.
230]
Dec.
(693)
1253)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Receipt of notification from League that next session of
Preparatory Commission has been convened for April 15.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
227,
Doc.
228,
Doc.
229,
and
Doc.
230]

REJECTION BY THE UNITED STATES OF THE FRANCO-BRITISH COMPROMISE PLAN FOR NAVAL LIMITATION
Date
and
number
Subject
page
July 31
(358)
From the British Chargé
Terms of Franco-British compromise plan for naval
limitation (text printed), which it is hoped will promote
general agreement and thus render fruitful the resumption
of discussions in the Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.
264 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 227,
Doc. 228,
Doc. 229,
and Doc.
230]
Aug. 2 To the British Chargé
Request for explanation of certain provisions in the note
of July 31.
266 [Pg.
266 is part
of Doc.
231]
Aug. 2 From President Coolidge (tel.)
Instructions to make no commitments concerning
limitation of armaments.
267 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 231,
Doc. 232,
Doc. 233,
and Doc.
234]
Aug. 2
(180)
To the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Transmittal of text of note sent to the British Chargé on
August 2, with instructions to discuss with Foreign
Secretary the various points covered therein.
267 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 231,
Doc. 232,
Doc. 233,
and Doc.
234]
Aug. 3 To President Coolidge (tel.)
Assurance that Secretary will make no commitments
concerning limitation of armaments; explanation that he
is simply asking British Government to explain certain
provisions in order that proposal may be discussed
intelligently with the Navy.
267 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 231,
Doc. 232,
Doc. 233,
and Doc.
234]

Aug. 3 To President Coolidge
Report on extent of action which has been taken thus far
in matter; intention to make no reply to the British note
until British answer is received and the whole subject has
been studied and submitted to the President.
268 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 234
and Doc.
235]
Aug. 3 To President Coolidge (tel.)
Information that no commitments have been made, that
Department has simply asked for meaning of certain
clauses, and that full report has been sent by mail.
Intention to make no reply until subject is studied and
submitted to the President.
270 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 236
and Doc.
237]
Aug. 3 From President Coolidge
Desire that nothing at all be done in relation to British
proposals at present, not even inquiry for any explanation
of proposals; information that matter can stand in
abeyance until the President’s return to Washington.
270 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 236
and Doc.
237]
Aug. 3 From the French Chargé
Terms of the Franco-British compromise plan for naval
limitation (text printed); hope that U. S. Government may
be able to give its approval.
271 [Pg.
271 is part
of Doc.
238]
Aug. 4
(178)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Conversation with the Under Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs concerning Franco-British compromise
plan, in which oral answers were given to the points
mentioned in Secretary’s telegram No. 180 of August 2.
272 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 238
and Doc.
239]
Aug.
(184)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that Acting Foreign Secretary gave assurance
that press had misinterpreted Franco-British compromise
plan as a definite, fixed agreement upon which the two
Governments would stand even in opposition to the other
members of the Preparatory Commission; his explanation
that British Government has only been interested in
making progress toward the solution of Preparatory
Commission problems.
273 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 239
and Doc.
240]
Aug.
From the British Acting Secretary of State for Foreign
275 [Pg.

Affairs to the British Chargé in Washington (tel).
Explanation of the aims of the British and French
Governments in reaching their naval limitation proposal;
instructions to read this telegram to the Secretary of State
at earliest opportunity.
includes
portions of
Doc. 240
and Doc.
241]
Aug.
(380)
From the British Chargé
Presumption that, as the American Chargé made the same
inquiries in London as contained in the Secretary’s note
of August 2, the Secretary is already in possession of the
requested information.
278 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 242,
Doc. 243,
and Doc.
244]
Aug.
(255)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Marriner, Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs: Information that President Coolidge desires that
neither Secretary of State nor Embassies discuss further
the Franco-British naval plan, and that nothing will be
done in Washington until the President’s return.
Instructions to send copy to Embassies in Great Britain
and Belgium.
(Footnote: Sent also to Embassies in Germany, Italy, and
Japan on August 22.)
278 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 242,
Doc. 243,
and Doc.
244]
Sept.
(201)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Report that atmosphere is clearing in regard to Franco-
British naval proposal; summary of present situation,
including understanding that Italy has notified the Foreign
Office of inacceptability of agreement as it stands;
suggestions as to U. S. answer.
278 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 242,
Doc. 243,
and Doc.
244]
Sept.
(104)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Opinion that the United States would never agree to
provision for limiting only cruisers carrying 8-inch guns
and leaving unlimited all cruisers carrying less than 8-
inch guns; instructions to discuss matter informally with
Foreign Office and ascertain Italy’s attitude if possible.
280 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 245
and Doc.
246]
Sept.
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Information from Under Secretary that Italy has not
replied to either France or Great Britain regarding naval
280 [Pg.
includes
portions of

proposal; his desire to facilitate an exchange of views
between the Italian and U. S. Governments.
Doc. 245
and Doc.
246]
Sept.
(105)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Telegram from Premier Mussolini to the Italian
Ambassador (text printed), stating intention to wait before
answering Franco-British proposition, and instructing that
the matter be discussed with the Secretary of State.
Informal statement to the Italian Ambassador of the
Secretary’s objections, which will be submitted to the
President.
281 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 246
and Doc.
247]
Sept.
(329)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Note for Foreign Office (text printed) submitting
suggestions concerning provisions of Franco-British
naval limitation agreement as summarized in Embassy’s
communication of August 3, and advising that
unfortunately the agreement appears to fulfill none of the
conditions which, to the U. S. Government, seem vital.
(Footnote: Instructions to repeat to London for delivery,
mutatis mutandis, to British Foreign Office. Information
that the two notes were delivered on September 28.)
282 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 247
and Doc.
248]
Sept.
(439)
From the British Chargé
Notes exchanged between British and French
Governments (texts printed) which led up to the Franco-
British compromise.
286 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 248
and Doc.
249]
Sept.
(330)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Textual changes in U. S. note for French Government,
occasioned by receipt from both Governments of texts of
the notes exchanged.
(Footnote: Sent also, mutatis mutandis, to the
Ambassador in Great Britain.)
291 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 250
and Doc.
251]
APPROVAL BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF HOUSE JOINT RESOLUTION FAVORING THE ABOLITION OF SUBMARINES BY ALL
NATIONS
Date
Subject
Page

and
number
Jan. 28
To the Honorable Stephen G. Porter
Suggestion that House resolution concerning
submarines (text printed), be amended to express
opinion of Congress that submarines be abolished and
their construction prohibited by all the nations of the
world.
includes
portions of
Doc. 250 and
Doc. 251]
SPECIAL COMMISSION FOR THE PREPARATION OF A DRAFT CONVENTION ON THE PRIVATE MANUFACTURE OF ARMS AND AMMUNITION
AND OF IMPLEMENTS OF WAR, SECOND AND THIRD SESSIONS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1928 July
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
League circular of July 15 (text printed) announcing that
second session of Special Commission will open at
Geneva on August 27 with provisional agenda covering
drafting of a single text for draft convention.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
251,
Doc.
252,
and
Doc.
253]
Aug. 9
(276)
To the Minister in Switzerland
Instructions for participation as American representative;
draft convention (text printed) intended to serve as a
possible basis for agreement acceptable to U. S.
Government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
251,
Doc.
252,
and
Doc.
253]
Aug. 27
(1)
From the American Representative on the Special
Commission (tel.)
Inquiry whether the Department draft limits “civil
aircraft” to those “manufactured under military
[Pg.
includes
portions

specifications suggestion that if full publicity concerning
aircraft is made by U. S. Government Departments,
United States might safely promise full publicity on
“civil aviation” without limitation.
of Doc.
253,
Doc.
254,
and
Doc.
255]
Aug. 28
(1)
To the American Representative on the Special
Commission (tel.)
Instructions to maintain position that only aircraft and
engines manufactured under military specifications
should be listed in convention—or if necessary to meet
views of other Governments, that only aircraft and
engines manufactured for the armed forces of the
respective countries should be included.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
253,
Doc.
254,
and
Doc.
255]
Aug. 29
Statement by the American Representative in the Fourth
Meeting of the Second Session of the Special Commission
Reservation that U. S. Government has not changed its
attitude against incorporation of all aircraft and engines
as implements of war, as described under article 1 of the
preliminary draft convention.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
256 and
Doc.
257]
[Undated] Preliminary Draft Convention
With regard to the supervision of the private manufacture
and publicity of the manufacture of arms and ammunition
and of implements of war, submitted to the League
Council by the Special Commission.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
256 and
Doc.
257]
Sept. 10
N. 1201)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Report on second session of Special Commission held
August 27 to 30.
[Pg. 311
is part
of Doc.
258]
Oct. 2
(92)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Information that next session of Special Commission will
be held on December 5; desire for detailed comment
from the Department on stand taken by delegation during
[Pg.
includes
portions

last session as reported in despatch No. 584 of September
10.
of Doc.
258,
Doc.
259,
and
Doc.
260]
Oct. 4
(90)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to report any developments which may have
taken place in direction of ending deadlock and whether
there is greater prospect of an agreement at forthcoming
session.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
258,
Doc.
259,
and
Doc.
260]
Oct. 12
(97)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Lack of evidence that situation has altered. Suggestion
that, as it is unlikely any tangible results will come from
forthcoming meeting, the Department may wish to
consider advisability of informing Secretary General that
the U. S. Government feels its presence might impede
achievement of some form of agreement among other
delegations; observation that this course would entail
some risk that attempt will be made to blame a failure on
part of Commission to U. S. nonparticipation.
[Pg.
315 is
part of
Doc.
261]
Oct. 16
(71)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Request for views concerning next session of Special
Commission.
[Pg.
316 is
part of
Doc.
262]
Oct. 18
(68)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Opinion that if United States nonparticipation in meeting
might be taken as a refusal to cooperate in arms
limitation, then the United States should be represented,
but that representation should be reduced to a minimum.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
263 and
Doc.
264]

Nov. 21
(260)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
For Wilson, Minister in Switzerland: Information that
two instructions have been sent to Berne, one approving
his position at last session, and the other designating the
Minister as U. S. delegate to attend third session.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
263 and
Doc.
264]
Nov. 22
(354)
To the Minister in Switzerland
Approval of position at last session; observations and
instructions concerning third session.
[Pg.
318 is
part of
Doc.
265]
Dec. 7
Declaration by the American Representative in the
Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Special
Commission
Appeal that in interval until Commission meets again the
delegates examine the question of achieving full publicity
for both public and private manufacture, on which the
Commission has not been able to agree.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
265 and
Doc.
266]
Dec. 13
(673)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Report on third session of Commission held December 5
to 7; revised preliminary draft convention (text printed).
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
266 and
Doc.
267]
Dec. 28
N. 1249)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Transmittal of League communication of December 22,
requesting the appointment of an expert to discuss the
proposal submitted by Belgian delegate with regard to
drafting of article 1 of the preliminary draft convention;
information that the meeting of experts will be held on
March 11, 1929, at Geneva.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
267 and
Doc.
268]
POLICY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE REGARDING THE EXPORTATION OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO CERTAIN COUNTRIES
Date
Subject
Page

and
number
Oct. 15
From the Acting Secretary of War
Request that a list be furnished of those countries to
which there is objection to the export of Liberty
aviation engines.
334 [Pg.
334 includes
portions of
Doc. 269 and
Doc. 270]
Jan. 11
To the Secretary of War
Observations relative to certain countries in Latin
America, Europe, and the Far East; desire to be advised
of any requests for sale of aviation material or war
supplies to any foreign government, because the
situation changes from time to time.
334 [Pg.
334 includes
portions of
Doc. 269 and
Doc. 270]
CONVENTION AND PROTOCOL FOR THE ABOLITION OF IMPORT AND EXPORT PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS, WITH SUPPLEMENTARY
AGREEMENT AND PROTOCOL, SIGNED AT GENEVA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
July 11
International Convention and Protocol, Together with a
Supplementary Agreement and Protocol
For the abolition of import and export prohibitions and
restrictions.
(Footnote: Convention and protocol signed at Geneva,
November 8, 1927; signed on part of the United States,
January 30, 1928. Supplementary agreement and
protocol signed July 11, 1928; signed on the part of the
United States, July 31, 1928.)
336 [Pg.
336 includes
portions of
Doc. 270 and
Doc. 271]
SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE FOR THE ABOLITION OF IMPORT AND EXPORT PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS, GENEVA, JULY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
From the Minister in Switzerland

Feb. 16
(294)
Transmittal of League document containing exceptions
claimed by various governments under article 6 of the
convention for abolition of import prohibitions and
restrictions, including letter of French Government of
January 27, 1928 (text printed), stating intention to adopt
certain restrictive measures regarding French and foreign
films. Minister’s opinion that the number of exceptions
should be limited as far as possible.
[Pg. 366
is part
of Doc.
272]
Feb. 29
(317)
1079)
From the Minister in Switzerland
Opinion that French law of February 18 appears to set up a
censorship under which foreign films might be refused
visas arbitrarily, for sake of protecting French film industry;
suggestion that at July meeting of conference, American
representative might state that while this and similar laws
do not technically violate the convention, they might open
the door to a violation of the spirit of the convention,
should the administering authorities so desire.
[Pg. 368
includes
portions
of Doc.
272 and
Doc.
273]
Apr. 13
(393)
1117)
From the Chargé in Switzerland
League communication of April 11 (text printed),
announcing that the Conference will reconvene on July 3
for the purpose of deciding with regard to (1) requests for
exceptions under article 6 of the convention, and (2)
necessary conditions for putting convention into force.
[Pg. 369
includes
portions
of Doc.
273 and
Doc.
274]
Apr. 27
(47)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Letter for Secretary General of League (text printed),
stating U. S. disappointment at the extensive exceptions
requested, and reserving right to offer objections.
Instructions to report concerning observations submitted by
the various countries.
[Pg. 371
is part
of Doc.
275]
May 25
(57)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Letter for Secretary General of League (text printed) stating
that Mr. Hugh Wilson, Minister in Switzerland, will
represent the United States at forthcoming Conference.
[Pg. 372
includes
portions
of Doc.
276 and
Doc.
277]
June 5 From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)

(57)
Tendency of other states to await results of July conference
as applied to French letter of January 27 concerning films;
desire for instructions as to a statement of U. S. attitude at
July conference.
[Pg. 372
includes
portions
of Doc.
276 and
Doc.
277]
June 15
(237)
To the Minister in Switzerland
Instructions with regard to action to be taken at Conference.
[Pg. 373
includes
portions
of Doc.
277 and
Doc.
278]
June 21
(63)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Insistent requests from film interests urging a strong stand.
[Pg. 381
includes
portions
of Doc.
278,
Doc.
279, and
Doc.
280]
June 27
(64)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Request for explanation of portion of instruction No. 237 of
June 15. Information that attitude on film question will
provoke liveliest public interest; and communication of
certain observations thereon.
[Pg. 381
includes
portions
of Doc.
278,
Doc.
279, and
Doc.
280]
June 28
(65)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Information that Department favors Minister’s suggestion
that he present a speech which would amount to a brief on
legality of French action with respect to films under terms
of treaty, but will leave question of procedure to his
discretion.
[Pg. 382
includes
portions
of Doc.
280,
Doc.
281, and
Doc.
282]
June 29
(67)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Opinion that if particular exceptions are recognized by
[Pg. 382

Conference in order to bridge over present difficulties, it is
important that clause be inserted in procès-verbal to
prevent extension of such interpretation of the convention
to cases which may arise in the future.
includes
portions
of Doc.
280,
Doc.
281, and
Doc.
282]
July 2
(2)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Summary of speech which American representative
suggests he make regarding restrictive measures on films.
[Pg. 383
includes
portions
of Doc.
282 and
Doc.
283]
July 3
(1)
To the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of suggested speech; desire that if American
representative should make this speech, he follow it up with
utmost vigor and consider the proposing of a protocol or
declaration for signature by parties to the convention to the
effect that the restrictions such as those of France on
subject of exhibiting foreign films are considered to be
contrary to the intent of the convention, and in fact, in
contravention of it.
[Pg. 387
includes
portions
of Doc.
283 and
Doc.
284]
July 3
(3)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Decision of Conference that claims for exception which
seem to be covered by other sections of the convention
must be thrown out as not admissible to discussion under
article 6.
[Pg. 388
includes
portions
of Doc.
285 and
Doc.
286]
July 3
(4)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Report on action of Conference in rejecting or admitting for
discussion various exceptions brought forth; information
that the U. S. exception on helium gas was admitted for
discussion.
[Pg. 388
includes
portions
of Doc.
285 and
Doc.
286]
July 4
(5)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Advice that Conference has taken definite position that its
only task is to discuss matters for which convoked;
[Pg. 390
includes
portions

impossibility, therefore, of bringing film matter to decision;
intention, however, to insist upon right to make statement
of U. S. viewpoint.
of Doc.
287 and
Doc.
288]
July 4
(6)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
List of exceptions now admitted for discussion under article
6; inclusion of U. S. exception regarding helium gas.
[Pg. 390
includes
portions
of Doc.
287 and
Doc.
288]
July 4
(7)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Report of disposition of various exceptions; admission of
U. S. reservation on helium under paragraph 2 of article 6.
[Pg. 391
includes
portions
of Doc.
288 and
Doc.
289]
July 5
(8)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that matter of ratification will soon be brought
up for discussion; inquiry as to authorization to state that
convention and protocol with new annex, if American
representative is authorized to sign, will be submitted to
Senate at next session.
[Pg. 392
includes
portions
of Doc.
290,
Doc.
291, and
Doc.
292]
July 5
(9)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Further action on various reservations.
[Pg. 392
includes
portions
of Doc.
290,
Doc.
291, and
Doc.
292]
July 5
(10)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Further action on various reservations; report that a
preliminary discussion of conditions required for entry into
force of convention brought up a greater divergence of
opinion than hitherto manifested in Conference.
[Pg. 392
includes
portions
of Doc.
290,
Doc.

291, and
Doc.
292]
July 5
(2)
To the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Inability to authorize statement which would bind President
to submit a treaty to Senate or in advance to recommend a
treaty to him. Instructions, however, to state there is every
reason to suppose that convention and protocol signed by
American representative and such instruments of present
Conference as he may be authorized to sign will be
submitted to next session of Senate.
[Pg. 393
includes
portions
of Doc.
292,
Doc.
293, and
Doc.
294]
July 6
(11)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Drafting committee proposal that ratification must be made
by at least 20 states, and that each state notifying
ratification before September 30, 1929, may name states
from list of 14, including United States, on whose
ratification it makes its own ratification dependent;
insistence of certain states, notably Germany, that U. S.
ratification might be essential prerequisite to their
ratification.
[Pg. 393
includes
portions
of Doc.
292,
Doc.
293, and
Doc.
294]
July 6
(12)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that Conference agreed in principle that
convention must be ratified by at least 18 states, including
that if ratifications have been notified before September 30,
special clause (text printed) to cover contingency that
because of short session of Congress 1928–1929, U. S.
ratification may not be obtained before September 30,
1929. Disposition of various reservations. Promise of
opportunity to make statement on films.
[Pg. 394
includes
portions
of Doc.
294 and
Doc.
295]
July 7
(3)
To the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Instructions to use full influence against proposal outlined
for bringing convention into effect. Gratification that a
number of exceptions reserved by other countries have been
withdrawn.
[Pg. 395
includes
portions
of Doc.
295 and
Doc.
296]

July 7
(13)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Agreement upon special provision permitting United States
and Bulgaria to maintain their reservations by signing
annex and protocol to general convention on or before
September 1. Information that text for first reading will be
circulated the following day for probable signature July 11.
[Pg. 396
includes
portions
of Doc.
296,
Doc.
297, and
Doc.
298]
July 7
(14)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Delivery of film speech and general reservation of rights;
agreement of several delegations with French justification
of film restrictions on basis of maintaining national culture
and traditions.
[Pg. 396
includes
portions
of Doc.
296,
Doc.
297, and
Doc.
298]
July 8
(15)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Unsuccessful efforts to persuade colleagues that the United
States should not be included in the list; doubt that any
useful purpose would be served by further insistence.
[Pg. 397
includes
portions
of Doc.
298 and
Doc.
299]
July 8
(4)
To the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Advice that the Department is satisfied that the American
representative has done all that could be expected and
leaves his future course entirely to his judgment.
[Pg. 398
includes
portions
of Doc.
299,
Doc.
300,
Doc.
301, and
Doc.
302]
July 11
(19)
From the Chief of the American Delegation (tel.)
Signature of the supplementary agreement by all states
represented at Conference except United States and
Bulgaria.
(Footnote: Signature on behalf of the United States by the
American representative, July 31.)
[Pg. 398
includes
portions
of Doc.
299,
Doc.
300,

Doc.
301, and
Doc.
302]
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE COPYRIGHT UNION, AS REVISED AND SIGNED AT ROME, JUNE 2, 1928
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Aug. 2
From the Italian Ambassador
Invitation to participate in International Conference on
Copyright at Rome in October 1927.
includes
portions of
Doc. 299, Doc.
and Doc. 302]
Apr. 28
To the Italian Ambassador
Acceptance of invitation to attend the Copyright
Conference on May 8, 1928; designation of Mr. Henry
P. Fletcher, Ambassador in Italy, Mr. Thorvald
Solberg, Register of Copyrights, Library of Congress,
and the Honorable Sol Bloom, Member of Congress,
as U. S. delegates.
(Footnote: Postponement of the Conference from
October 1927.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 302 and
Doc. 303]
July 25
(1797)
From the Ambassador in Italy
Report of the U. S. delegation to the Copyright
Conference, and convention for the protection of
literary and artistic works signed at Berne, September
9, 1886, as revised and signed at Berlin, November
(Footnote: Submission of convention to the Senate,
February 19, 1934.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 303 and
Doc. 304]
ADHERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES TO THE SLAVERY CONVENTION, SIGNED AT GENEVA, SEPTEMBER 25, 1926
Date and
number
Subject
Page

1927 May
1927, VI)
From the Secretary General of the League of
Nations
Invitation to adhere to the slavery convention
signed at Geneva, September 25, 1926.
includes portions
of Doc. 305 and
Doc. 306]
May 22
To President Coolidge
Recommendation that slavery convention be
submitted to Senate for advice and consent to
U. S. adherence.
(Footnote: Information that on May 22, 1928,
the President submitted to the Senate the
slavery convention and Secretary of State’s
recommendation.)
includes portions
of Doc. 305 and
Doc. 306]
Slavery Convention Signed at Geneva,
September 25, 1926
(Bracketed note: Adherence advised by the
Senate, February 25, 1929, with reservation.)
includes portions
of Doc. 306 and
Doc. 307]
RATIFICATION BY THE UNITED STATES OF THE CONVENTION RELATING TO THE LIQUOR TRAFFIC IN AFRICA, SIGNED AT SAINT
GERMAIN-EN-LAYE, SEPTEMBER 10, 1919
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
May 22
To President Coolidge
Recommendation that convention relating to the liquor
traffic in Africa, signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye,
September 10, 1919, be submitted to the Senate for advice
and consent to U. S. ratification, subject to a reservation in
regard to arbitral procedure; draft of a letter from
President Coolidge to the Senate for that purpose (text
printed).
(Footnote: Sent to the Senate, May 22, 1928.)
426 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
307 and
Doc. 308]
Convention Signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye, September
For the restriction of the liquor traffic in the African
territories under the administration of the contracting
429 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

parties.
(Bracketed note: Adherence advised by the Senate on
reservation.)
308 and
Doc. 309]
CONVENTION SIGNED AT SAINT GERMAIN-EN-LAYE, SEPTEMBER 10, 1919, RE-VISING THE GENERAL ACT OF BERLIN OF
1885 AND THE GENERAL ACT AND DECLARATION OF BRUSSELS OF 1890
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
May 22
To President Coolidge
Recommendation that convention signed at Saint Germain-
en-Laye, September 10, 1919, revising the General Act of
Berlin of 1885 and the General Act and Declaration of
Brussels of 1890, which convention provides for equality of
commercial treatment, assures religious freedom, and
protection of religious, charitable, and scientific institutions
in Africa, be submitted to the Senate for advice and consent
to U. S. ratification, subject to a reservation in regard to
arbitral procedure; draft of a letter from President Coolidge
to the Senate for that purpose (text printed).
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
309 and
Doc.
310]
Convention Signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye, September
Revising the general act of Berlin of 1885 and the general
act and declaration of Brussels of 1890.
(Bracketed note: Adherence advised by the Senate on April
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
310 and
Doc.
311]
INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES IN EFFORTS OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS TO CONTROL THE TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
To Senator Reed Smoot
444 [Pg.
444 is

Mar.
Exposition of policy of the U. S. Government with regard
to the control of the traffic in narcotic drugs.
part of
Doc. 312]
Mar.
To Four American Insurance Companies
Hope that companies will join the other 72 members of
the American Institute of Marine Underwriters in
voluntarily including in their policies the so-called
“dangerous drug clause” which provides that no losses
will be paid on narcotic shipments not covered by import
permits from countries to which consigned or by export
permits from countries from which exported.
(Footnote: Information that the four replies received
indicated no agreement as to a new clause in policies.)
446 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
312 and
Doc. 313]
Sept. 7
(89)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
League communication of September 5 (text printed)
inviting the United States to nominate a person to
participate in appointment of the Permanent Central Board
provided under the Geneva opium convention and also to
take full part in settlement of the procedure for
appointment of that board.
448 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
314 and
Doc. 315]
Sept.
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Note for League (text printed) advising of the U. S.
Government’s regret that it does not find it possible to
participate in the selection of the Permanent Central
Board, and setting forth certain criticisms of the Geneva
convention.
448 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
314 and
Doc. 315]
Oct. 18
(627)
1223)
From the Minister in Switzerland
League communication of October 16 (text printed),
inquiring whether the U. S. Government would permit a
commission of inquiry into use of opium prepared for
smoking to visit Philippine Islands to study system of
prohibition in operation there, and stating understanding
that commission members will be chosen from nations not
directly concerned in problem to be investigated.
449 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
315 and
Doc. 316]
Dec. 8
(106)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to inform League that commission will be
made welcome in the Philippines. Information that the U.
452 [Pg.
includes
portions

S. Government, in view of inability to take part in electing
the Permanent Central Board, could not recommend or
endorse any American for a board position; instructions to
inform League that matter is one in regard to which
Department would prefer to express no opinion.
of Doc.
317, Doc.
318, and
Doc. 319]
Dec.
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Appointment by League Council of Mr. Herbert L. May of
Pittsburgh as a member of the Central Board.
452 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
317, Doc.
318, and
Doc. 319]
Dec.
(121)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Memorandum adopted by League Council, December 14
(text printed), stating regret that U. S. Government does
not find it possible to accept its invitation to participate in
selection of the board, setting forth observations on U. S.
criticisms of Geneva opium convention, and expressing
hope that U. S. Government will continue to extend the
practical collaboration which now exists.
(Footnote: Announcement by Secretary in telegram No.
111 of December 29, to the Minister in Switzerland, that
Mr. John K. Caldwell, Consul General assigned to the
Department, would “attend unofficially” the 12th session
of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other
Dangerous Drugs at Geneva, beginning January 17, 1929.)
452 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
317, Doc.
318, and
Doc. 319]
PARTICIPATION OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH CONFERENCE AT BRUSSELS, SEPTEMBER 10–22,
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
July 31
(74)
To the Minister in Sweden
Instructions to proceed to Brussels to act as chairman of
the American delegation at the International Telegraph
Conference to open September 10, 1928, for the
455 [Pg.
455 includes
portions of
Doc. 319
and Doc.
320]

purpose of considering question of code language and
rates charged in connection therewith.
Aug. 23 To American Diplomatic Officers in Mexico and
Central and South America (cir. tel.)
Information that the American delegation is being
instructed to endeavor to maintain status quo as regards
method of counting words and rates; instructions to
ascertain if government to which accredited will have
representatives at Conference and if so, to endeavor to
have similar instructions issued to them.
457 [Pg.
457 includes
portions of
Doc. 320
and Doc.
321]
Sept. 10
(61)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
For Harrison: Summary of information as to intentions
of Latin American countries with regard to the Brussels
Conference.
458 [Pg.
458 includes
portions of
Doc. 321,
Doc. 322,
and Doc.
323]
Undated
[Rec’d
Sept.
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Signature of protocol containing amendments to
international telegraph convention regulations, effective
October 1929; information that amended regulations
will not increase cost of telegraphic communication.
458 [Pg.
458 includes
portions of
Doc. 321,
Doc. 322,
and Doc.
323]
PROPOSED DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE ALIEN PROPERTY CUSTODIAN
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1928 Jan.
From the Austrian Minister
Request that bill dealing with return of sequestrated
Austrian property include a clause reserving to Austrian
owners of patents, copyrights, etc., the same rights which
Congress is willing to grant to German citizens; opinion
that question of determining claims of Austrian citizens
should not interfere with passage of a bill for return of
property; desire that Austrian views be brought to
attention of Congress.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
323 and
Doc.
324]

(Footnote: Transmitted, January 9, 1928, to the House
Committee on Ways and Means.)
Jan. 17
From the Swiss Minister
Information that pending bill provides in effect that
neutral corporations, in order to recover property still held
by Alien Property Custodian, shall be obliged to file a
consent that 20 percent of their property may be retained
by the United States; request that appropriate steps be
taken to assure complete release of Swiss properties.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
324 and
Doc.
325]
Jan. 23
To the Swiss Minister
Information of the transmittal to Senate Finance
Committee of Minister’s note of January 17 concerning
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
325,
Doc.
326,
and
Doc.
327]
Jan. 23
(5)
From the Danish Minister
Request that full and unqualified compensation be
provided for seized German merchant vessels belonging
to residents of North Slesvig, now Danish citizens; desire
that request be communicated to Senate Committee.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
325,
Doc.
326,
and
Doc.
327]
Jan. 24
To Senator Reed Smoot
Transmittal, for information of Senate Finance
Committee, of Secretary’s statement of December 10,
1927, to the House Committee on Ways and Means with
relation to return of Austrian and Hungarian property.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
327 and
Doc.
328]
Jan. 28
To the French Ambassador
Information from Alien Property Custodian that claims of
[Pg.

Alsace-Lorrainese for release of sequestrated property
will not be affected by pending legislation, except that
proof of pre-war ownership will not be required;
observation that unless reciprocity is accorded by France
to American citizens, the property cannot be returned
under proposed act. Suggestion that data regarding
Alsace-Lorrainese claims be supplied.
includes
portions
of Doc.
328 and
Doc.
329]
Feb. 13
(14)
From the Danish Minister
Opinion that amendment recently adopted by Senate
Committee granting limited and conditional
compensation to owners of two specified vessels does not
seem to accord the full and unqualified compensation to
which the Danish owners seem entitled; suggestion that
Committee be so advised in order that amendment may be
worded to cover all Danish claims of this order and to
provide full and unconditional compensation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
329 and
Doc.
330]
Apr. 19
From the Austrian Minister
Observation that section 10 (d) of War Claims Settlement
Act of 1928, providing that all property will be held to be
owned by German Government if no claim has been filed
with Alien Property Custodian within a year, is likely to
deprive rightful Austrian owners of their property; desire
for interpretation of other doubtful points; request that
Alien Property Custodian be asked to furnish list of all
unclaimed property recorded as Austrian-owned.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
330 and
Doc.
331]
Apr. 24
From the Hungarian Minister
Belief that section 10 (d) discriminates in favor of
German Government as against Hungary; observation
that procedure relating to deposit of unclaimed property
in German account would appear to be injurious to
Hungary; request for correct interpretation of section 10
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
331 and
Doc.
332]
May 9
To the Austrian Minister
Opinion of Alien Property Custodian that section 25 of
the Trading With the Enemy Act as amended by section
10 (d) refers to German-owned property and does not
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

relate to Austrian property, and that Austrian-owned
property may be credited when the citizenship of the
person is not stated or known; answers to other questions;
inability of Alien Property Custodian to furnish list of
Austrian owners at present but his willingness to
cooperate in due course.
332 and
Doc.
333]
May 11
From the Austrian Minister
Understanding that statement regarding crediting of
Austrian-owned property means that unclaimed Austrian-
owned property may be credited to the Austrian special
deposit account; desire to be advised as to the correctness
of this interpretation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
333 and
Doc.
334]
May 12
From the Austrian Minister
Request for a statement by the competent authorities as to
what conditions they would consider appropriate to issue
the certificate provided for by War Claims Settlement Act
in matter of release of Austrian property; opinion that
sequestrated Austrian Government funds are sufficient to
cover maximum possible awards against Austria.
[Pg.
473 is
part of
Doc.
335]
May 23
From the Alien Property Custodian
Advice that there is no law authorizing transfer of
unclaimed property of Austrian citizens to Austrian
Government account, and that only Austrian property or
that of a corporation wholly owned by Austrian
Government may be transferred to that account.
(Footnote: Transmittal to the Austrian Minister on June
15.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
336 and
Doc.
337]
June 1
To the Hungarian Chargé
Information that where Alien Property Custodian holds
property to the credit of a citizen of Hungary, and the
records of that office so disclose his citizenship, such
property would not be credited to the German
Government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
336 and
Doc.
337]
June 16
To the British Embassy
[Pg.

Suggestion that the British Government may desire to
instruct the Public Trustee to discontinue actions in
Supreme Court of the District of Columbia to recover
certain ex-enemy securities turned over by him pursuant
to an agreement reached in October 1921 after
conferences between representative of the Public Trustee
and the Alien Property Custodian. Observation that the
action of Public Trustee is in repudiation of an
arrangement entered into in good faith and scrupulously
observed by Alien Property Custodian.
475 is
part of
Doc.
338]
June 22
To the Austrian Minister
Statement by Commissioner of the Tripartite Claims
Commission of June 5 (text printed) explaining
impossibility of granting certification without accurate
knowledge of maximum of judgments which can be
rendered against Austria, advising that plans have been
made to facilitate matters by affording opportunity for
agents of the respective governments to explain to
Commission progress in each case; information that
Hungarian cases will be dealt with separately.
[Pg.
483 is
part of
Doc.
339]
June 26
From the Hungarian Chargé
Inquiry as to time limit for filing claims for return of
property of Hungarian nationals, disposition of unclaimed
property of Hungarian nationals, and amounts of
Hungarian property held by Alien Property Custodian.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
339 and
Doc.
340]
Aug. 3
To the Hungarian Chargé
Information from Alien Property Custodian that property
held to credit of Hungarian citizens will not be credited to
German Government, that there is no time limit for filing
a claim, and that he will be glad to furnish list of persons
for whom his office holds assets when release of
Hungarian property is begun, but that at present he does
not have a sufficient force to do so.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
340,
Doc.
341,
and
Doc.
342]

Aug. 21
To the First Secretary of Embassy in France
Transmittal to First Secretary, as acting American
observer on the Reparation Commission, of queries from
War Claims Arbiter for information to assist in
determining the value of seized German shipping.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
340,
Doc.
341,
and
Doc.
342]
Sept. 7
From the Chargé in France
Replies to queries of War Claims Arbiter as secured from
Reparation Commission’s records and after consultation
with the competent officials.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
342 and
Doc.
343]
Oct. 6
From the Austrian Minister
Request that all sequestrated property of the Austrian
Government, including trust held by the Austrian
Tobacco Monopoly, be transferred to the Austrian special
deposit account.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
343 and
Doc.
344]
Oct. 6
(643)
From the Chargé in Rumania
Desire of Ministry of Finance that steps be taken to
hasten release of assets of the Austro-Hungarian Bank
seized by Alien Property Custodian, in order that the
portion of these assets assigned to Rumania might be
available to it as soon as possible.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
344 and
Doc.
345]
Oct. 15
From the Alien Property Custodian
Information that the necessary procedure has been
ordered to comply with Austrian Minister’s request for
transfer of funds belonging to the Austrian Government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
345,
Doc.
346,

and
Doc.
347]
Oct. 30
From the British Embassy
Inability to concur in U. S. construction that the 1921
negotiations resulted in an agreement between the two
Governments or in U. S. suggestion that the Public
Trustee is endeavoring to repudiate an arrangement
entered into in good faith and scrupulously observed by
the Alien Property Custodian. Assurance that the suit is
merely an attempt to obtain a definite interpretation of the
legal position in regard to court decisions subsequent to
the negotiations mentioned. Regret that the British
Government do not see their way clear to instruct Public
Trustee to discontinue the court actions.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
345,
Doc.
346,
and
Doc.
347]
PROPOSALS TO EUROPEAN COUNTRIES FOR AGREEMENTS AND TREATIES REGARDING NATURALIZATION, DUAL NATIONALITY, AND
MILITARY SERVICE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Mar. 1
To the Honorable Stephen G. Porter
Comments, as requested by the House Committee on
Immigration and Naturalization, regarding H. J. Res. 195,
introduced February 7 (text printed), which requests the
negotiation of agreements and treaties with other nations to
protect persons born in the United States of foreign
parentage and naturalized citizens from liability for military
service and other acts of allegiance upon temporary sojourn
in such nations.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
347 and
Doc.
348]
Dec. 1
(167)
To the Ambassador in Belgium
Joint resolution as approved by the President on May 28,
1928 (text printed); instructions to propose the conclusion
of a convention regarding military service to protect
persons having dual nationality, the case of naturalized
citizens already having been covered in the existing
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
348 and

naturalization treaty; instructions to ascertain willingness to
consider adoption of agreement for termination of dual
nationality arising at birth, upon attainment by the persons
concerned of a prescribed age.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to missions
in Bulgaria, Denmark, Great Britain, Norway, Portugal, and
Sweden.)
Doc.
349]
Dec. 1
(2993)
To the Ambassador in France
Desirability of including in draft treaty of naturalization,
now under consideration between the two Governments, a
provision concerning military service with regard to persons
having dual nationality; instructions to inquire whether
whole question of termination of dual nationality by
adoption of an agreement might not be considered.
(Similar instructions on the same day to missions in Greece,
Italy, Poland, Spain, and Yugoslavia.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
349 and
Doc.
350]
Dec. 1
(583)
To the Chargé in Estonia
Instructions to submit to government to which accredited
draft treaty concerning naturalization and military service
(text printed); instructions to inquire whether whole
question of termination of dual nationality by adoption of
an agreement might not be considered.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, to missions in Finland, Latvia,
Lithuania, the Netherlands, and Rumania.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
350 and
Doc.
351]
SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON EMIGRATION AND IMMIGRATION, HELD AT HABANA, MARCH 31–APRIL 17,
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Mar.
To the American Delegation
Instructions to make clear the U. S. Government’s
position that control of immigration is a matter of
purely domestic concern, and to take no action
505 [Pg.
505 includes
portions of
Doc. 351 and
Doc. 352]

inconsistent with this attitude or in any way committing
the U. S. Government.
Aug.
From the Cuban Chargé
Transmittal of certified copy of Final Act of the
Conference with request that the U. S. Government
adhere to resolution to hold next conference at Madrid.
507 [Pg.
507 includes
portions of
Doc. 352 and
Doc. 353]
Aug.
From the American Delegation
Report of the Habana Conference.
508 [Pg.
508 includes
portions of
Doc. 353 and
Doc. 354]
Sept.
To the Cuban Chargé
Opinion that no useful purpose is served by such
conferences other than exchange of technical
information which can be achieved by direct
correspondence; U. S. inability to adhere to resolution
or to participate in a third conference.
526 [Pg.
526 includes
portions of
Doc. 354 and
Doc. 355]
PRELIMINARIES
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Dec.
From the Cuban Chargé
Invitation to be represented at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, to open at Habana on
January 16, 1928.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
355 and
Doc.
356]
Jan. 6
To the Cuban Chargé
Acceptance of invitation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
356 and

Doc.
357]
Nov. 8
(85)
To the Chargé in Cuba (tel.)
Instructions to inquire of Foreign Minister as to correctness
of press report (text printed) that League of Nations has
been invited to send a member of Secretariat to follow
proceedings of the Conference, and if answer is in the
affirmative, to state the U. S. view that no non-American
nation or entity should attend Pan American conferences
and the U. S. hope that Cuban Government will concur.
[Pg.
529 is
part of
Doc.
358]
Nov. 9
(108)
From the Chargé in Cuba (tel.)
Information that Foreign Minister sent for Chargé and,
referring to telegram from Cuban Ambassador in
Washington, advised that the Cuban Government not only
did not invite a League of Nations representative, but
refused Secretary General’s request for invitation, as well as
a request from Spanish Government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
358 and
Doc.
359]
Nov. 9
(2352)
From the Chargé in Cuba
Report of the conversation with the Foreign Minister;
information that in view of the voluntary information on
Foreign Minister’s part, the Chargé made no mention of
Department’s telegram No. 85 of November 8.
[Pg.
531 is
part of
Doc.
360]
Nov.
To the Chargé in Cuba (tel.)
Geneva press report (text printed) stating that the League
Secretariat probably will participate in work of preliminary
organization for the Conference, that Señor Cristobal
Rodriguez, member of the Secretariat, is being sent to
Habana, and that probably one or more League interpreters
may go. Instructions to inquire immediately and report
definitely regarding measures taken by Cuba with the
League.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
360 and
Doc.
361]
Nov.
(109)
From the Chargé in Cuba (tel.)
Information from Foreign Minister that the League was
consulted concerning strictly mechanical preparations for
the Conference; that Rodriguez was anxious to come to
Cuba to assist, Cuba has refused to allow him to come in
any but a purely personal capacity; that owing to lack of
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
361 and

competent interpreters in Cuba the League was asked
whether some of its interpreters could be obtained as
individuals to serve; and that no League official had been
invited to come to Cuba in any capacity whatsoever.
Doc.
362]
Jan. 5
To the American Delegation
Instructions as to conduct at Habana Conference.
[Pg.
534 is
part of
Doc.
363]
CONVENTIONS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 20
Convention Regarding Commercial
Aviation
585 [Pg. 585 includes
portions of Doc. 363 and Doc.
364]
Feb. 20 Convention Regarding the Status of
Aliens
596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc.
365]
Feb. 20 Convention Regarding Consular Agents
598 [Pg. 598 includes
portions of Doc. 365 and Doc.
366]
Feb. 20 Convention Regarding Maritime
Neutrality
604 [Pg. 604 includes
portions of Doc. 366 and Doc.
367]
Feb. 20 Convention Regarding the Duties and
Rights of States in the Event of Civil
Strife
612 [Pg. 612 includes
portions of Doc. 367 and Doc.
368]
Feb. 20 Convention Regarding the Pan American
Union
615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc.
369]
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF AMERICAN STATES ON CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION, HELD AT WASHINGTON, DECEMBER
Date
and
Subject
Page

number
Apr. 14
(1364)
To the Ambassador in Brazil
Instructions to inform Brazilian Government that, in
accordance with resolution of February 18, 1928, by the
Pan American Conference at Habana, the U. S. Government
suggests that a conference be held in Washington,
December 10, 1928, for the purpose of drawing up a
convention of arbitration and conciliation, and that each
country send two delegates; also to inquire if these
suggestions are acceptable. Desire for information with
regard to attitude of Brazilian Government on question of
arbitration and conciliation; information that as Brazil has
ratified the Gondra Treaty regarding conciliation it would
appear that that subject has been properly taken care of.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to missions
in Chile, Cuba, Haiti, Mexico, Paraguay, Uruguay, and
Venezuela.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
369 and
Doc.
370]
Apr. 14
(71)
To the Ambassador in Argentina
Instructions similar to those to Ambassador in Brazil,
except for instructions to state informally the U. S. hope
that the Argentine Government will ratify the Gondra
Treaty and deposit ratifications at Santiago, Chile, before
the Conference.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to missions
in Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, and
Salvador. A similar instruction was sent to the mission in
Ecuador on May 9, 1928.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
371 and
Doc.
372]
Apr. 30
(219)
From the Chargé in Cuba
Acceptability to Cuba of the Department’s suggestions.
Information that Secretary of State is favorable in principle
to arbitration provided local laws are adequately
safeguarded.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
371 and
Doc.
372]
May 5 From the Minister in Honduras
[Pg.

(594)
Acceptability to Honduras of Department’s suggestions.
Information that Honduras will be unable to ratify Gondra
Treaty before Conference because National Congress will
not convene again before January 1, 1929.
includes
portions
of Doc.
373 and
Doc.
374]
May 8
(1700)
From the Minister in Panama
Information that Panaman ratification of Gondra Treaty has
already been sent to Santiago. Opinion that there is no
doubt of Panama’s readiness to adhere to proposed
convention.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
373 and
Doc.
374]
May 10
(620)
From the Chargé in Uruguay
Favorable attitude of Uruguay toward principle of
arbitration; expectation of an early answer to note presented
in accordance with Department’s instruction of April 14.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
374,
Doc.
375,
and
Doc.
376]
May 11
(885)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Informal opinion of Foreign Minister that suggestions for
Conference will be acceptable; his endorsement of
arbitration and conciliation; his observation that ratification
of Gondra Treaty might opportunely precede the
conference. Expectation of early advice as to Government’s
attitude.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
374,
Doc.
375,
and
Doc.
376]
May 14
(955)
From the Chargé in Peru
Information that Department’s suggestions are now being
considered and that Gondra Treaty will probably be
submitted to Congress when it assembles in July. Inability
to obtain more than an impression of Peruvian attitude on
question of arbitration and conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
376 and

Doc.
377]
May 16
(1013)
From the Chargé in Haiti
Haitian President’s acceptance of suggestions for
Conference and his favorable attitude toward arbitration of
juridical questions and questions involving national honor.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
378 and
Doc.
379]
May 17
(550)
From the Minister in Paraguay
Agreement of Paraguayan Government with suggestions for
Conference; its belief that all potential causes of war should
be obligatory of arbitration.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
378 and
Doc.
379]
May 24
(679)
From the Minister in Nicaragua
Acceptability to Nicaraguan Government of suggestions for
Conference; probability that no action can be taken in
matter of ratification of Gondra Treaty until Congress
convenes December 15. Inability to learn Nicaraguan
Government’s attitude on question of arbitration and
conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
379 and
Doc.
380]
May 24
(616)
From the Minister in Honduras
Information from Foreign Minister that Honduran
Government is in favor of arbitration of international
differences.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
380,
Doc.
381,
and
Doc.
382]
May 24
(1946)
From the Minister in Guatemala
Acceptance by Guatemala of suggestions for Conference.
Probability that ratification of Gondra Treaty will be sent to
Chilean Government by the end of the month. Advice that
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

Foreign Minister expressed no specific ideas regarding
proposed convention of arbitration.
380,
Doc.
381,
and
Doc.
382]
May 29
(1399)
From the Ambassador in Chile
Information that in discussion with Foreign Minister
regarding probable action of Chilean delegates at December
conference, the Minister said that in determining
reservations that it would have to make as to arbitration,
Chilean Government was influenced by the Tacna-Arica
question.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
382 and
Doc.
383]
June 4
(915)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Intention of Foreign Minister to press for ratification of
Gondra Treaty as soon as the boundary negotiations with
Haiti reach a successful conclusion; his verbal assurance
that Department’s suggestions for Conference are
acceptable and that formal notification will be sent.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
383 and
Doc.
384]
June 8
(1190)
From the Minister in Salvador
Informal information from Salvadoran President that he will
submit Gondra Treaty to National Assembly for ratification,
that he approves Habana resolution in favor of obligatory
arbitration for juridical differences, and that he sympathizes
with Department’s efforts toward international conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
384,
Doc.
385,
and
Doc.
386]
June 8
(153)
From the Chargé in Mexico (tel.)
Nonobjection of Mexican Government to December
conference; acceptability of suggestion as to two delegates;
information that matter of obligatory arbitration of juridical
questions is being studied, but that Acting Foreign Minister
indicated little confidence in its efficacy in disputes
between Mexico and a more powerful country.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
384,
Doc.
385,
and
Doc.
386]

June 14
(26)
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Information that Gondra Treaty will be ratified by the
Congress convening August 6; acceptability to Bolivia of
suggestions for Conference, and reiteration of its adherence
to principles of arbitration and conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
386 and
Doc.
387]
June 14
(920)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Receipt of formal notification that Dominican Government
agrees completely with suggestions for Conference.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
387,
Doc.
388,
and
Doc.
389]
June 19 To the Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions in Latin America (cir.
tel.)
Instructions to deliver formal invitation to attend
Conference at Washington on December 10, 1928 (text
printed).
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
387,
Doc.
388,
and
Doc.
389]
June 27
(325)
From the Ambassador in Argentina
Advice that while Foreign Minister stated he would renew
attempts to obtain ratification of Gondra Treaty, and that
Argentine Government has always approved arbitration, he
is not sanguine of obtaining ratification; receipt of
information as to acceptability of date of Conference and
names of Argentine delegates.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
389 and
Doc.
390]
July 3
From the Minister in Costa Rica, Temporarily in
Washington
Readiness of Costa Rican Government to cooperate in
Conference; and probability that it will give favorable
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

consideration to conciliation and arbitration proposals,
provided that questions previously submitted to arbitration
cannot be made subject of arbitration under any general
treaty of arbitration. Observation that reservation was made
because boundary controversy with Panama, decided in
favor of Costa Rica, has not been accepted as settled by
Panama.
390 and
Doc.
391]
July 7
(3029)
From the Ambassador in Brazil
Acceptance by Brazil of invitation to attend December
conference; personal note from Foreign Minister, July 2
(excerpt printed), stating that Brazil is bound by its
constitution to resort to arbitration and is therefore able to
adopt the most complete proposals for arbitration which
may be brought up.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
391 and
Doc.
392]
July 9
(1640)
From the Chargé in Venezuela
Transmittal of official acceptance by Venezuela of
invitation to attend December conference; information that
Foreign Minister stated his firm belief in arbitration and
conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
392 and
Doc.
393]
July 12
(593)
To the Minister in Ecuador
Instructions that, in view of Department’s circular telegram
of June 19 directing the extension of invitation to
Ecuadoran Government, all invitations received by
Legation under circular instructions subsequent to that date
may be delivered.
(Footnote: Extension of de jure recognition to the regime of
Dr. Ayora on August 14, 1928.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
394 and
Doc.
395]
Sept.
(1415)
From the Chargé in Colombia
Impression that, although Colombian Government will be
officially represented at Conference and Foreign Minister
feels chances of obtaining ratification of Gondra Treaty are
good, there is at present little interest in forthcoming
Conference and little faith in conventions of arbitration and
conciliation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
394 and
Doc.
395]

Oct. 13
(114)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Note from Chilean Government (excerpt printed), accepting
invitation to Conference, notifying names of delegates, and
declaring that Chile has always vigorously supported
progress of arbitration in America.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
395,
Doc.
396,
and
Doc.
397]
Oct. 19
(32)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Information from Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs that
attitude of Uruguayan Government relative to arbitration of
juridical questions will be the same as at the Rio de Janeiro
Conference.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
395,
Doc.
396,
and
Doc.
397]
ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT COMMISSIONS UNDER TREATY TO AVOID OR PREVENT CONFLICTS BETWEEN THE AMERICAN
STATES, SIGNED MAY 3, 1923 (GONDRA TREATY)
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Mar. 2
To the Colombian Minister
Invitation to meet with the two other senior American
diplomatic agents in Washington to organize the
Permanent Commission having its seat at Washington as
provided for in the Gondra Treaty; understanding that
Uruguayan Foreign Minister is similarly inviting the
three senior American diplomatic agents in Montevideo
to organize the other Commission.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Panaman and Uruguayan Ministers.)
644 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 397
and Doc.
398]
Mar. 26 To the Colombian Minister
645 [Pg.

Invitation, in view of affirmative replies to invitations of
March 2, to meet in the Acting Secretary of State’s office
on March 29, for the purpose of organizing the
Permanent Commission at Washington; information that
like notes are being addressed to the Uruguayan Minister
and the Panaman Chargé.
includes
portions of
Doc. 399
and Doc.
400]
Undated Report of a Meeting Between the Minister of Uruguay,
the Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad
Interim of Panama on March 29, 1928
Appointment by Commission of the Uruguayan Minister
as Chairman; decision that Chairman shall notify State
Department of any changes in personnel caused by
termination of the mission of one of the members.
645 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 399
and Doc.
400]
Dec. 7
(824)
From the Uruguayan Minister
Establishment at Montevideo of the Permanent
Commission, composed of the Mexican, Peruvian, and
Chilean Ministers, and headed by the Mexican Minister
as Chairman.
646 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 400,
Doc. 401,
and Doc.
402]
Dec. 22 To the Uruguayan Minister
Acknowledgment of note of December 7.
646 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 400,
Doc. 401,
and Doc.
402]
GOOD OFFICES OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE REESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN CHILE AND PERU
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
July 9
To President Coolidge
Receipt of assurances from Chilean and Peruvian
Governments, in response to inquiry, that they will renew
diplomatic relations and exchange Ministers; information
that if the U. S. Government can induce them to exchange
647 [Pg.
647 is part
of Doc.
403]

Ministers, the Secretary will take up again the question of
settlement of Tacna-Arica dispute.
July 9
(44)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Note for Foreign Minister (text printed) suggesting that
Chile signify its readiness to reestablish diplomatic
relations with Peru and stating that a similar inquiry is
being made of Peruvian Foreign Minister. Instructions to
stress importance of an unconditional and friendly
acceptance which will avoid any references to Tacna-
Arica question or other controversial matters.
648 [Pg.
648 is part
of Doc.
404]
July 9
(52)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Transmittal of note for Foreign Minister and instructions
similar in context to those in telegram to the Ambassador
in Chile.
649 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 404
and Doc.
405]
July 11 From the Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs
Full acceptance of U. S. suggestion.
650 [Pg.
650 is part
of Doc.
406]
July 12
(73)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Note from Foreign Minister, July 11 (text printed), stating
Peru’s disposition to reestablish diplomatic relations with
Chile.
651 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 406
and Doc.
407]
July 13
(47)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to present the Secretary’s compliments to the
President and Foreign Minister and to express his
gratification.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the
Ambassador in Peru.)
652 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 407,
Doc. 408,
and Doc.
409]
July 13
(58)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that the Secretary advised the Chilean and
Peruvian Ambassadors that while he would be glad to
assist in making arrangements regarding requests for
agreements, he believed they would probably be able to
arrange this matter themselves; intention of Ambassadors
652 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 407,
Doc. 408,
and Doc.
409]

to suggest that representatives be given rank of
Ambassador.
(Repeated to Chile.)
July 16
(59)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Desire of Chilean Government to learn whether Peruvian
Government will agree to appointment of Ambassadors
or only Ministers; instructions to use informal good
offices to expedite reply.
653 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 409,
Doc. 410,
Doc. 411,
and Doc.
412]
July 17
(77)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Nonobjection of Peruvian President to appointment of
Ambassadors.
653 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 409,
Doc. 410,
Doc. 411,
and Doc.
412]
July 21
(62)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Readiness of Chilean Government to send message to
Congress on July 28 regarding reestablishment of
diplomatic relations with Peru and to sign a decree the
same day naming its Ambassador; instructions to bring
this matter to attention of the proper authorities.
653 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 409,
Doc. 410,
Doc. 411,
and Doc.
412]
July 23
(82)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that President Leguia said he saw no reason
why Chile should not go ahead with procedure mentioned
in Department’s telegram No. 62 of July 21.
654 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 412,
Doc. 413,
and Doc.
414]
July 24
(64)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to confirm as soon as possible whether
President Leguia agrees to take the same action as
Chilean Government on July 28, so that Chilean
Government can take the proposed action the same day.
654 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 412,
Doc. 413,
and Doc.
414]

July 24
(83)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information from President Leguia that under the
Constitution his message to Congress at inaugural session
is limited to report on past activities and cannot initiate
legislation, that Congress is also unable to enact
legislation at that session, that he cannot name an
Ambassador without approval of Senate, and that he will
communicate to Congress immediately after close of the
national holidays on July 31.
655 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 415
and Doc.
416]
July 25
(65)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Receipt by Peruvian Ambassador of telegram stating that
President Leguia will send message to Congress on July
28 for establishment of an Embassy in Santiago;
agreement of Peruvian and Chilean Ambassadors that
simultaneous action will be taken by their Congresses on
July 28.
655 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 415
and Doc.
416]
July 26
(84)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that project for establishing an Embassy in
Santiago will be submitted to Congress on July 28, that
Congress will act upon it after July 31, and that the
President cannot name an Ambassador until the position
has been legally created.
656 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 416,
Doc. 417,
Doc. 418,
and Doc.
419]
Aug. 1
(84)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Appointment of Emiliano Figueroa Larrain as
Ambassador to Peru.
656 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 416,
Doc. 417,
Doc. 418,
and Doc.
419]
Aug. 7 From the Peruvian Ambassador
Approval by Peruvian Congress of bill to create an
Embassy in Chile.
656 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 416,
Doc. 417,
Doc. 418,
and Doc.
419]

Aug.
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s request for U. S. good offices for the
formal agrément from Chilean Government for Cesar A.
Elguera as Ambassador to Chile.
657 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 420,
Doc. 421,
and Doc.
422]
Aug.
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information from Chilean Ambassador that his
Government is happy to accord agrément for Señor
Elguera.
657 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 420,
Doc. 421,
and Doc.
422]
Oct. 8
(108)
From the Chargé in Peru
Remarks of Chilean Ambassador on occasion of the
presentation of his letters of credence on October 3, and
reply of President Leguia (texts printed).
657 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 420,
Doc. 421,
and Doc.
422]
Oct. 8
(26)
From the Ambassador in Chile
Remarks of Peruvian Ambassador on occasion of the
presentation of his letters of credence on October 5, and
reply of President Ibanez (texts printed).
659 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 422
and Doc.
423]
TACNA-ARICA DISPUTE: BEGINNING OF DIRECT NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN CHILE AND PERU AT THE SUGGESTION OF THE UNITED
STATES
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
June 18
(60)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Opinion that time is now propitious for negotiations looking
to settlement of Tacna-Arica boundary dispute between
Chile and Peru.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
423 and

Doc.
424]
Sept.
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Belief that time is now propitious to inaugurate
conversations looking to settlement of the Tacna-Arica
question; instructions to try to ascertain from President
Leguia how far he would be willing to go in the settlement
of the matter.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
424 and
Doc.
425]
Oct. 2
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Conversation, October 1, between the Secretary and the
Chilean Ambassador, in which the latter agreed with
suggestion that work of Tacna-Arica Boundary Commission
be suspended while the Peruvian and Chilean Governments
attempt by direct negotiations to reach a settlement.
[Pg.
662 is
part of
Doc.
426]
Oct. 2
(77)
To the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to suggest to President Leguia that Boundary
Commission suspend operations for a period of 4 months.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
426 and
Doc.
427]
Oct. 3
(115)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Acceptance by President Leguia of suggestion for
suspension of Commission; his comment that the
suspension will be regarded as a diplomatic victory by
Chile.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
428 and
Doc.
429]
Oct. 5
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Conversation, October 4, in which the Chilean Ambassador
advised of his Government’s agreement to suspension of
Commission, and agreed to procedure suggested for such
suspension.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
428 and
Doc.
429]
Oct. 5
To the Chargé in Peru (tel.)

(79)
Instructions to express to President Leguia the Secretary’s
appreciation for his action regarding suspension, and to
inform him of the Secretary’s inability to see why the
postponement can be considered a diplomatic victory for
either side, when it is merely a common-sense arrangement
for promoting a settlement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
430 and
Doc.
431]
Oct. 8
(117)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
President Leguia’s surprise that Chilean Ambassador has
not yet requested an audience to discuss Tacna-Arica
question, and his intention, if Ambassador does not do so
soon, to take the initiative.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
430 and
Doc.
431]
Oct. 8
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Conversation in which the Bolivian Minister expressed to
the Secretary the concern of his Government that Chile and
Peru might reach a settlement without participation of the
United States and might at the same time conclude
economic arrangements which would be very unfavorable,
[Pg.
666 is
part of
Doc.
432]
Oct. 27
(121)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Information from President Leguia concerning progress of
his negotiations with Chilean Ambassador, in which the
former stated that justice demanded return of the entire
disputed territory to Peru, the Chilean Ambassador
proposed a division, and President Leguia offered the
further suggestion that the entire territory be placed under
U. S. administration, but stated he would not accept
Bolivian administration. Pessimistic attitude of Chilean
Ambassador.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
432 and
Doc.
433]
Oct. 29
(80)
To the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to advise President Leguia that the United
States cannot assume any obligation to govern the territory
either alone or jointly with another neutral country.
Confidential opinion that division of the territory, with city
of Arica being made a free port, would be a reasonable
adjustment.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
433 and
Doc.
434]

(Instructions to repeat telegram No. 121 of October 27 and
this telegram to the American Embassy in Chile.)
Nov. 1
(123)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Information that on October 28 the Chilean Ambassador
advised President Leguia of inacceptability of proposal for
U. S. administration of the territory; the Chilean
Ambassador’s proposal for division of territory, with port of
Arica to be administered by Chile; inability of President
Leguia to accept this proposal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
434 and
Doc.
435]
Nov.
(126)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Declaration by Foreign Minister that nobody in Chile would
accept agreement to give up city of Arica; willingness to
give full commercial privileges to Peru in city of Arica;
comment of Foreign Minister that he fears war if the Tacna-
Arica question is not settled.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
435 and
Doc.
436]
BOUNDARY DISPUTES
BOLIVIA AND PARAGUAY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 4
(333)
To the Chargé in Bolivia
Information that U. S. Government does not wish at the
present time, while the Tacna-Arica controversy is still
pending, to be placed in the position of undertaking to
settle boundary dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay,
either by arbitration or other procedure; instructions to
keep this attitude in mind and be guided accordingly, since
it is possible that the President or Foreign Minister may
mention the matter.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Minister in Paraguay.)
672 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
437 and
Doc. 438]
Feb. 6
(412)
To the Ambassador in Peru
Instructions in the sense of despatch No. 333 of February
672 [Pg.
includes

4 to the Chargé in Bolivia, in view of President Leguia’s
suggestion to Bolivia and Paraguay that they seek U. S.
assistance.
portions
of Doc.
437 and
Doc. 438]
May 28
(285)
From the Ambassador in Argentina
Resumption by Paraguayan and Bolivian Boundary
Commissions of negotiations in Buenos Aires which were
suspended in December 1927; information that
divergences of opinion have arisen but that active
negotiations are still in progress.
673 [Pg.
673 is
part of
Doc. 439]
July 19
(339)
From the Ambassador in Argentina
Suspension of Bolivian-Paraguayan negotiations in
Buenos Aires on July 12, in view of inability to reach any
definite agreement; statement issued on July 12 by the
Bolivian and Paraguayan plenipotentiaries (text printed);
Argentine proposals of December 1927 for settlement of
the boundary question (text printed).
674 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
439 and
Doc. 440]
Sept.
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Bolivian request that Department endeavor to obtain
adhesion of Paraguay to the multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war, as such action would facilitate
settlement of boundary question.
678 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
440, Doc.
441, and
Doc. 442]
Oct.
(46)
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Signature by Bolivia of the multilateral treaty. Information
from the President and Acting Foreign Minister that
Paraguay has violated the mutual understanding by
constructing three forts in the disputed territory; and their
request that the Department be notified in order that it may
use its good influence with Paraguayan Minister in the
hope of stopping construction; Minister’s reply that he
would convey message to the Department.
678 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
440, Doc.
441, and
Doc. 442]
Oct. 12
(24)
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Approval of reply to Bolivian officials; instructions to take
no further action without definite authorization.
679 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
442, Doc.
443, Doc.

444, and
Doc. 445]
Oct. 12
(9)
To the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Information from Bolivian Legation that Paraguayan
troops are building fortresses near Bolivian fortresses;
instructions to report any information without discussing
matter with officials.
679 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
442, Doc.
443, Doc.
444, and
Doc. 445]
Oct. 16
(15)
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Advice that information in Department’s telegram No. 9 of
October 12 is exaggerated, that so-called fortresses are
only small observation outposts, and that all Paraguayan
fortifications are in indisputable territory of Paraguay.
679 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
442, Doc.
443, Doc.
444, and
Doc. 445]
Dec. 6
(25)
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Commencement of hostilities between Bolivian and
Paraguayan soldiers near Paraguayan Fort Galpón, near
which Bolivia has been constructing a fort. Desire of
Paraguay that Washington invoke convocation of the
Commission of Inquiry provided for in Gondra Treaty, and
that Commission at Montevideo assume charge.
680 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
446 and
Doc. 447]
Dec. 7
(13)
To the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Inability to invoke convocation of Commission of Inquiry
because United States is not a party in the dispute;
necessity for Paraguay, if it cares to do so, to take such
action.
680 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
446 and
Doc. 447]
Dec. 7
(26)
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Information that Paraguayan official is en route to
Montevideo to request officially that Uruguayan
Government convoke Commission of Inquiry under
Gondra Treaty; official Paraguayan note to Bolivia
notifying of such action (excerpt printed); report of
casualties resulting from conflict.
681 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
447, Doc.
448, and
Doc. 449]
Dec. 8 From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
681 [Pg.

(27)
Advice that Bolivia answered Paraguayan request for
convocation of Gondra Commission by giving Paraguayan
Minister at La Paz his passport, and that Paraguay will
give Bolivian Minister his passport the next day.
includes
portions
of Doc.
447, Doc.
448, and
Doc. 449]
Dec. 9 From President Guggiari to President Coolidge (tel.)
Notification that in reply to his Government’s request for
convocation of Gondra Commission, the Bolivian
Government delivered passport to the Paraguayan Chargé
at La Paz.
682 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
450, Doc.
451, and
Doc. 452]
Dec. 9
(31)
To the Chargé in Bolivia (tel.)
Concern over Bolivian-Paraguayan situation;
Department’s hesitation to make suggestion, since
Argentine Government has been mediating question for
many months. Instructions to advise of Bolivia’s attitude
in regard to Paraguayan request for convocation of Gondra
Commission.
682 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
450, Doc.
451, and
Doc. 452]
Dec. 9
(62)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Transmittal of copy of telegram No. 31 of December 9 to
Bolivia; instructions to telegraph views as to whether any
suggestion from U. S. Government to Bolivian
Government that it accept constitution of Gondra
Commission would be misunderstood in Argentina, and to
advise what action, if any, Argentine Government
contemplates.
682 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
450, Doc.
451, and
Doc. 452]
Dec. 9
(28)
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Belief that U. S. Government should counsel Bolivia to
accept provisions of the Gondra Treaty.
683 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
452, Doc.
453, and
Doc. 454]
Dec.
From the Chargé in Bolivia (tel.)
Bolivian attitude that investigation by Gondra
Commission would be incompatible with the dignity of
Bolivia in view of the unprovoked aggression by
683 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
452, Doc.

Paraguay; that question is under the Gutierrez-Diaz Leon
protocol; and that conciliation will be refused which does
not include prior and full reparation to Bolivian
sovereignty and dignity.
453, and
Doc. 454]
Dec.
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Impression that the Argentine President would not desire
the U. S. Government to advise either party to accept his
offer to act as friendly adviser in solution of problem;
suggestion that any U. S. action be along lines of urging
both Governments to find a way of settling their
differences amicably.
684 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
455 and
Doc. 456]
Dec.
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Passage by Conference of Conciliation and Arbitration at
inaugural session in Washington of a resolution regarding
Bolivian-Paraguayan difficulty; importance of being
advised what action, if any, is being taken by Argentina.
684 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
455 and
Doc. 456]
Dec.
From the Chairman of the International Conference of
American States on Conciliation and Arbitration to the
Bolivian Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (tel.)
Resolution expressing hope that Bolivia and Paraguay will
settle their present differences pacifically, and providing
for committee to report to Conference with respect to
conciliatory action to cooperate with the instrumentalities
now employed in the friendly solution of the problem (text
printed).
(Sent also, on the same date, to the Paraguayan Minister
for Foreign Affairs.)
685 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
456, Doc.
457, and
Doc. 458]
Dec. 11
(65)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Nonintention of U. S. Government to take any
independent action; advice that the only action taken has
been the forwarding by Conference of the resolution of
December 10, which the Secretary of State signed as
Chairman of the Conference.
685 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
456, Doc.
457, and
Doc. 458]
Dec. 11
(119)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Adoption by League of Nations Council of resolution
directing dispatch to Paraguayan and Bolivian
686 [Pg.
includes

Governments of identical notes recalling their obligations
under the Covenant to settle their differences by pacific
means; observation that the Council endeavored to frame
the message to avoid any contravention of the Monroe
Doctrine or conflict with possible action on the part of the
United States.
portions
of Doc.
458, Doc.
459, and
Doc. 460]
Dec. 11 From the Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (tel.)
Acknowledgment of message of December 10, stating that
Paraguay is and has always been disposed to submit the
settlement of her difficulties to legal means.
686 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
458, Doc.
459, and
Doc. 460]
Dec. 11 From the Bolivian President and the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the Chairman of the International
Conference of American States on Conciliation and
Arbitration (tel.)
Acknowledgment of message of December 10, stating that
Bolivia requires satisfaction for Paraguayan aggression,
and that there exist commitments between Bolivia and
Paraguay to accept an arbitration at law from which
Bolivia will not deviate.
687 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
460 and
Doc. 461]
Dec. 11
(29)
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Opinion of the diplomatic corps that only the U. S.
Government could cause Bolivia to recognize its treaty
obligations.
688 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
461, Doc.
462, and
Doc. 463]
Dec.
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Feeling of Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs that
war is imminent unless the United States acts to prevent it.
688 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
461, Doc.
462, and
Doc. 463]
Dec.
To President Guggiari (tel.)
Expression of hope that difficulty between Paraguay and
689 [Pg.
includes

Bolivia will soon be settled to the satisfaction of both
parties.
portions
of Doc.
463, Doc.
464, Doc.
465, and
Doc. 466]
Dec.
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Instructions to advise immediately what measures are
being taken to bring about a settlement, and whether the
Argentine Government has taken any action to compose
the present difficulty.
689 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
463, Doc.
464, Doc.
465, and
Doc. 466]
Dec.
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Inquiry whether Argentina is exerting her good offices or
is mediating in this question.
689 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
463, Doc.
464, Doc.
465, and
Doc. 466]
Dec.
To the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Information that because Gondra Treaty has not been
ratified by Bolivia and hence is not in effect between that
country and Paraguay, nor is the Kellogg Pact in force,
neither treaty can be invoked. Instructions to advise
immediately what measures are being taken to bring about
a settlement, and whether the Argentine Government has
taken any action to compose the present difficulty.
690 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
466, Doc.
467, Doc.
468, and
Doc. 469]
Dec.
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Declaration by the Foreign Minister that Argentina is
doing nothing in the way of mediation and has no
objection to any action which Conference may take.
690 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
466, Doc.
467, Doc.
468, and
Doc. 469]
Dec.
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Understanding that the special committee will recommend
to the Conference on December 14 that the Conference
690 [Pg.
includes
portions

tender its good offices to the Bolivian and Paraguayan
Governments for the purpose of aiding them in providing
conciliatory measures looking to the avoidance of conflict
and maintenance of peace; instructions to so inform the
President, expressing the Secretary’s hope that nothing
will be done to make abortive the tender of good offices.
(Dispatch of similar message to the Minister in Paraguay.)
of Doc.
466, Doc.
467, Doc.
468, and
Doc. 469]
Dec.
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
President’s intention upon receipt of tender of good
offices, to call Cabinet meeting and use all influence for
peaceful solution; Bolivian Government’s request for
Department’s attitude toward League offer of mediation.
691 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
469, Doc.
470, and
Doc. 471]
Dec.
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Foreign Office note (text printed) stating accord with
Secretary’s hope that anticipated tender of good offices by
Conference will be accepted; information that European
intervention is not desired.
691 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
469, Doc.
470, and
Doc. 471]
Dec.
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Information that, since the Conference has voted to offer
its good offices and Secretary of State is the Chairman, he
does not desire to suggest anything which might interfere
with action of the Conference or acceptance of its good
offices by Bolivia.
692 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
471 and
Doc. 472]
Dec.
From the Chairman of the International Conference of
American States on Conciliation and Arbitration to the
Bolivian Minister for Foreign Affairs (tel.)
Report of the special commission and resolution regarding
tender of good offices to Bolivia and Paraguay (text
printed).
693 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
472 and
Doc. 473]
Dec.
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Report of attacks by Bolivian troops and airplane;
information that Paraguayan troops withdrew in obligation
not to provoke hostilities, and that, in view of attacks,
694 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
473, Doc.

Paraguayan President has ordered all citizens 18 to 28
years of age to report for duty.
474, and
Doc. 475]
Dec.
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Information that Cabinet is now considering good offices
of the Conference. Opinion that certain strong measures
must be taken immediately toward Bolivia, because
Paraguay cannot stand idle in face of an invasion;
observation that present situation is very grave.
694 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
473, Doc.
474, and
Doc. 475]
Dec.
From the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Acceptance by Paraguay of offer of good offices of
Conference. U. S. Minister’s belief that forceful measures
must be employed against aggression or Paraguay will be
invaded; report of another Bolivian attack in locality near
American properties.
695 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
476 and
Doc. 477]
Dec.
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Report that Bolivia will accept good offices of the
Conference within 48 hours; plan on which Bolivia would
be willing to submit present differences (summary
printed).
695 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
476 and
Doc. 477]
Dec.
From the Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (tel.)
Acceptance of tender of good offices.
696 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
477 and
Doc. 478]
Dec.
From the Bolivian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (tel.)
Acceptance of tender of good offices.
697 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
478 and
Doc. 479]
Dec.
(419)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Receipt from Foreign Minister Briand, in his capacity as
President of the League Council, of information
concerning efforts of the League to settle Bolivian-
Paraguayan differences and copy of League memorandum
(text printed), which expresses the hope that the Chairman
698 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
479 and
Doc. 480]

of Conference on Conciliation and Arbitration will advise
views as to the best measures to be taken by all those who
are endeavoring to insure a pacific settlement.
Dec.
(427)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Receipt from M. Briand of congratulations on successful
outcome of the Bolivian-Paraguayan situation; Chargé’s
interpretation that his message indicates that with the
cessation of hostilities and acceptances of good offices of
Conference, League’s part in matter has come to an end;
indication by Briand that no reply to his message would
appear necessary, but Chargé’s presumption that some
acknowledgment is desired.
700 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
480, Doc.
481, and
Doc. 482]
Dec.
(430)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Advice that since good offices of Conference have been
accepted, no further observations would appear to be
required.
700 [Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
480, Doc.
481, and
Doc. 482]
COLOMBIA AND NICARAGUA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 4
(67)
From the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Telegram to Assistant Secretary of State at Habana (text
printed), stating that, at the request of Colombian
Minister, the U. S. Minister repeated to Nicaraguan
President his previous statement that the Department
viewed with favor a settlement of Colombian-Nicaraguan
boundary matter along the lines proposed by Colombia,
and that the President acceded to settlement as proposed.
701 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 483
and Doc.
484]
Mar.
(333)
To the Minister in Nicaragua
Transmittal of draft treaty which will be proposed by
Colombian Minister in Nicaragua; authorization to state,
if consulted by Nicaraguan Government, that the U. S.
701 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 483

Government favors proposed treaty and hopes that it will
receive approval of the Nicaraguan Government.
and Doc.
484]
Mar.
(634)
From the Minister in Nicaragua
Treaty between Colombia and Nicaragua, signed March
24 (text printed), recognizing Nicaraguan sovereignty
over the Mosquito Coast and Great and Little Corn
Islands and Colombian sovereignty over San Andrés
Archipelago; desire of Nicaraguan Government that
signature of treaty be kept secret because Liberals would
probably use treaty as political weapon if its contents
were known before Presidential elections.
(Footnote: Exchange of ratifications at Managua, May 5,
1930.)
702 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 484
and Doc.
485]
Sept.
(342)
From the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Information that Liberals have learned of signature of
treaty and are attacking administration; desire of the
President that the Department inform press that boundary
dispute was settled through U. S. good offices and as a
result of suggestions made by the Department to the
Nicaraguan Government; probability that treaty will never
be ratified by Nicaragua if permitted to become party
issue now.
704 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 486,
Doc. 487,
and Doc.
488]
Sept.
(180)
To the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Inquiry whether treaty text has been published in
Managua.
704 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 486,
Doc. 487,
and Doc.
488]
Sept.
To the Minister in Colombia (tel.)
Inquiry whether treaty text has been made public in
Colombia.
704 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 486,
Doc. 487,
and Doc.
488]
Sept.
From the Minister in Colombia (tel.)
Report that text has not been made public but that
705 [Pg.

President publicly stated the general provisions of treaty
in recent annual message to Congress.
includes
portions of
Doc. 489,
Doc. 490,
Doc. 491,
and Doc.
492]
Sept.
(347)
From the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Intention of President to publish treaty on September 22;
his desire for announcement by Department at the same
time regarding negotiations which led up to signature.
705 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 489,
Doc. 490,
Doc. 491,
and Doc.
492]
Sept.
(349)
From the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Desire for authorization not only to furnish press with
copy of Department’s statement concerning the
negotiations but also to state orally that the United States
has no intention of acquiring the San Andrés Islands for
itself.
705 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 489,
Doc. 490,
Doc. 491,
and Doc.
492]
Sept.
(187)
To the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Statement to press conference regarding the Nicaraguan-
Colombian treaty negotiations (text printed);
authorization to give out same statement as well as to say
orally that United States has no intention of acquiring the
islands for itself.
705 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 489,
Doc. 490,
Doc. 491,
and Doc.
492]
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND HAITI
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Jan. 14
(8)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Likelihood that informal conversations now in
progress will result in exchange of notes agreeing to
settle Dominican-Haitian boundary question on the
basis of the status quo line, with minor adjustments
includes
portions of
Doc. 492, Doc.
493, and Doc.
494]

involving mutual territorial cessions to be made after
the exchange of notes.
Feb. 20
(790)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
between the Dominican Foreign Minister and Haitian
Minister expressing desire to undertake settlement of
the boundary question (texts printed).
includes
portions of
Doc. 492, Doc.
493, and Doc.
494]
Mar. 9
(811)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Report that informal agreement has been reached as to
the boundary line.
is part of Doc.
495]
May 26
(908)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Report that with the settlement of one remaining point
of difficulty, informal agreement will again have been
reached with regard to the entire boundary.
is part of Doc.
496]
July 30
(45)
From the Chargé in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Signature of informal agreement on boundary
question.
includes
portions of
Doc. 496, Doc.
and Doc. 499]
July 31
(16)
To the Chargé in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Instructions to express to President and Foreign
Minister, when boundary agreement is made public,
congratulations of the Secretary of State on the
peaceful settlement of the longstanding dispute.
(Identical instructions to the Legation in Haiti on the
same date.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 496, Doc.
and Doc. 499]
Nov.
(1091)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Transmittal of copy of the projected Dominican-
Haitian boundary treaty.
(Footnote: Signature of treaty at Santo Domingo,
January 21, 1929.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 496, Doc.
and Doc. 499]
GUATEMALA AND HONDURAS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page

Feb. 10
From the Guatemalan Legation
Information that the Guatemalan Government is again
protesting to the Honduran Government against violations
of the status quo in disputed territory, and particularly
against railway construction between Cacao and
Chachagualillo.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
499 and
Doc.
500]
Feb. 11
(13)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions to investigate Guatemalan claims, especially
as to alleged railway construction in disputed territory.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
500,
Doc.
501,
and
Doc.
502]
Feb. 13
(26)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Report that Cuyamel Fruit Company has constructed
beyond Cacao and without authority 400 meters of tram
line, and that despite fact that Honduran Government
considers this as Honduran territory and not in dispute,
President Paz has ordered company to suspend all
construction work in that region.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
500,
Doc.
501,
and
Doc.
502]
Feb. 13
(27)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Invasion by Guatemalan force of territory near
Chachagualillo and capture of guard there; Honduran
protest to Guatemala, with request for immediate
restoration of Honduran force and withdrawal of
Guatemalan force.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
503 and
Doc.
504]
Feb. 14 From the Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
Desire for influence and mediation of the Department
toward restoration of the status quo ante between
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

Honduras and Guatemala by withdrawal of the invasion
forces; willingness to accept later a well-defined neutral
line to be surveyed and fixed by U. S. Government pending
settlement of the boundary dispute.
503 and
Doc.
504]
Feb. 14
(28)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Receipt by Foreign Minister of telegram dated February 13
from the Guatemalan Foreign Minister stating disposition
to order evacuation of Chachahualia provided Honduran
Government will agree not to reoccupy it and will respect
status quo in disputed zone until agreement on boundary
line shall have been reached; Minister’s understanding that
proposal regarding non-reoccupation is not acceptable.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
504,
Doc.
505,
and
Doc.
506]
Feb. 15
(29)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Intention of President to send Acting Foreign Minister to
investigate alleged railway construction work after
withdrawal of Guatemalan forces from Chachahualia; his
inquiry whether U. S. military attache might accompany
Coello; his invitation to Guatemalan Minister to
participate.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
504,
Doc.
505,
and
Doc.
506]
Feb. 16 To the Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (tel.)
Hope that difficulties are now in a way to be satisfactorily
adjusted; belief that chief difficulty is lack of a definite
understanding as to the exact nature of the status quo and
the extent of the territory in dispute; assurance that the
Department will be glad to lend its good offices in any way
acceptable to both parties in an effort to bring about a
satisfactory arrangement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
507 and
Doc.
508]
Feb. 21
(15)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Information that the Honduran Legation has requested
opinion concerning arrangement it contemplates proposing
to Guatemala: (1) inspection of disputed territory to
determine for time being a better-defined line, (2)
agreement to proceed without delay to a final settlement of
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
507 and

boundary dispute, and (3) obligation to submit matter to
United States for arbitration if no agreement is reached
(Repeated to the Minister in Guatemala.)
Doc.
508]
Undated
[Rec’d
Feb. 28]
From the Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
Allegation that Guatemala appears on new pretexts to defer
indefinitely the question of settlement of the boundary
dispute; request for U. S. good offices so that the dispute
may finally be settled.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
508 and
Doc.
509]
Feb. 29
(14)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain why no reply has been made to the
Honduran proposal, and to mention that the Department
desires sincerely that Guatemala accept proposal for
inspection of disputed territory and agreement to proceed
to a final settlement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
509 and
Doc.
510]
Mar. 9
(19)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Concern of Honduras that Guatemala has not yet replied to
proposal. Secretary’s inability to reply to telegram from
Acting Foreign Minister of Honduras until he has further
information regarding Guatemalan attitude and willingness
to settle boundary dispute through negotiation; instructions
to report present situation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
510 and
Doc.
511]
Mar. 10
(19)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Telegram from Acting Foreign Minister to Guatemalan
Minister in Washington (text printed) instructing him to
inform Secretary of State that Guatemala desires
mediation, is agreeable to sending commission to inspect
territory and fix provisional line, and is disposed to discuss
final settlement as soon as provisional line is established.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
512 and
Doc.
513]
Mar. 15 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
Conversation with the Guatemalan Minister in which the
Chief of the Latin American Division made personal
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

suggestion that procedure for commission would be greatly
simplified if Guatemala and Honduras would act in
accordance with the Central American convention of 1923
establishing commissions of inquiry.
512 and
Doc.
513]
Mar. 15
(40)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Request by President Paz that U. S. Minister confirm
Honduran willingness that commission of inspection be
sent to the border, composed of Sub-secretaries of Foreign
Affairs and an engineer from each of the countries, and a
representative of the mediator government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
513,
Doc.
514,
and
Doc.
515]
Mar. 17
(23)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Information that the U. S. Government will appoint a
representative to accompany Honduran and Guatemalan
commissioners; instructions to take up question of prompt
appointment of commissioners and question as to where
commission should meet to undertake the work.
(Similar telegram to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
513,
Doc.
514,
and
Doc.
515]
Mar. 19
(41)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Communication of names of Honduran commissioners;
Guatemalan suggestion that Commission meet first at
Cuyamel.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
516,
Doc.
517,
and
Doc.
518]
Mar. 19
(23)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Information as to personnel of Guatemalan representation;
lack of decision as to time and place for meeting.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
516,

Doc.
517,
and
Doc.
518]
Mar. 20
(1)
To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Notification of appointment as American member of
Commission; instructions as to conduct.
(Footnote: The American representative was Mr. Roy T.
Davis, U. S. Minister in Costa Rica.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
516,
Doc.
517,
and
Doc.
518]
Mar. 20
(25)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions to advise Honduran Government of the
appointment of American representative.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
518,
Doc.
519,
and
Doc.
520]
Mar. 20
(25)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to inform the Guatemalan Foreign Office that
Honduras has appointed representatives and to inquire
whether place and date of proposed meeting are
satisfactory; also to announce the appointment of the
American representative.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
518,
Doc.
519,
and
Doc.
520]
Mar. 20
(7)
To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Advice that time and place of meeting will be
communicated later; instructions to be prepared to leave on
short notice.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
521,

Doc.
522,
and
Doc.
523]
Mar. 20
(24)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Communication of names of Guatemalan commissioners;
Guatemalan suggestion that first meeting place be Puerto
Barrios or Puerto Cortes.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
521,
Doc.
522,
and
Doc.
523]
Mar. 20 From the Honduran Minister for Foreign Affairs (tel.)
Appreciation for U. S. good offices; Honduran intention
that Commission shall agree upon a provisional line, and if
unable to agree, that the line shall be indicated by
representative of mediator government while negotiations
for final settlement proceed immediately.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
521,
Doc.
522,
and
Doc.
523]
Mar. 21
(25)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Acceptability to Guatemala of Cuyamel as meeting place.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
523,
Doc.
524,
and
Doc.
525]
Mar. 21
(26)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to inquire whether Guatemala agrees to
Honduran suggestion for indication of provisional line by
the American representative in case the Commission is
unable to agree upon the line.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
523,

Doc.
524,
and
Doc.
525]
Mar. 22
(26)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Information that the matter will be considered by the
Cabinet at a special meeting.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
526,
Doc.
527,
and
Doc.
528]
Mar. 22
(28)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Note from Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs (text
printed), advising acceptance of suggestion for indication
of provisional line, with certain reservations regarding
Guatemalan rights.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
526,
Doc.
527,
and
Doc.
528]
Mar. 23
(27)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Transmittal of text of Guatemalan Foreign Office note
contained in telegram No. 28 of March 22 from the
Minister in Guatemala, with instructions to communicate
to the Foreign Minister.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
526,
Doc.
527,
and
Doc.
528]
Mar. 23
(8)
To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Transmittal of Honduran suggestion regarding designation
of provisional line by American representative and
Guatemalan acceptance contained in telegram No. 28, of
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
529 and

March 22, from the Minister in Guatemala; information
that the Department is taking up matter of detailing a Canal
Zone engineer to assist the American representative.
Doc.
530]
Mar. 27
(45)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Note from Foreign Minister, March 26 (text printed),
advising that qualified acceptance by Guatemala has been
noted, that Honduran Government abstains from making
any declarations at the present time, but that it rejects
Guatemalan accusation of Honduran incursions into
Guatemalan territory.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
529 and
Doc.
530]
Mar. 28
(28)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to communicate the Honduran reply to the
Guatemalan Government.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
530,
Doc.
531,
Doc.
532,
and
Doc.
533]
Mar. 29
(11)
To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission
Information that the Department is advising Guatemala and
Honduras that the American representative plans to arrive
at Puerto Cortes on April 4 and is suggesting that the first
meeting of Commission take place at Cuyamel on April 6.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
530,
Doc.
531,
Doc.
532,
and
Doc.
533]
Apr. 5
(1)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Arrival at Puerto Cortes; plan of Commission to proceed to
Cuyamel the following day. Inquiry whether Department
[Pg.
includes
portions

considers essential permanent arbitration by a North
American or whether arbitration by the Central American
Tribunal established by treaties of 1923 would be
acceptable.
of Doc.
530,
Doc.
531,
Doc.
532,
and
Doc.
533]
Apr. 7
From the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission
Expression of gratitude for U. S. cooperation in the
boundary matter.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
533,
Doc.
534,
and
Doc.
535]
Apr. 8
(2)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Report that the Commission met and organized April 7,
electing American representative President; summary of
informal conferences in which Honduran and Guatemalan
representatives stated their territorial claims; advice that
conciliatory spirit is lacking.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
533,
Doc.
534,
and
Doc.
535]
Apr. 9
(1)
To the Consul at Puerto Cortes (tel.)
For Davis: Instructions to inform colleagues that their
telegram is greatly appreciated.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
535,
Doc.
536,
and
Doc.
537]
Apr. 10
(2)
To the Consul at Puerto Cortes (tel.)
For Davis: Department’s favorable attitude toward
[Pg.

definitive arbitration by the Central American Tribunal.
includes
portions
of Doc.
535,
Doc.
536,
and
Doc.
537]
Apr. 13
(3)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Improbability that Honduran and Guatemalan
commissioners will establish provisional line by mutual
accord; conviction that the only means of avoiding future
conflicts is by permanent arbitration; plan of American
representative to propose formally at session on April 18
that the two Governments through their Commissions
agree to nominate special plenipotentiaries to meet in
Washington or other neutral country to consider proposals
for arbitration or mutual agreement; desire that Department
instruct the two Legations concerned to make strong
representations in favor of this proposal.
[Pg.
733 is
part of
Doc.
538]
Apr. 16
(3)
To the Consul at Puerto Cortes (tel.)
For Davis: Belief that if Guatemala will make some
compromise to meet compromise already offered by
Honduras, it should be possible to bring the two
delegations into accord; opinion that if both countries are
prepared to submit question to Central American Tribunal,
the Commission now in session might well be empowered
to draw up the necessary agreement; preference, however,
for present Commission to work out and put into effect
some constructive agreement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
538 and
Doc.
539]
Apr. 18
(5)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Information that Commissioners are unable to agree and
have filed signed statements calling upon the mediator to
fix a provisional line; desire that Department instruct
Legations in Guatemala and Honduras to make
representations urging that respective Commissions be
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
539 and
Doc.
540]

empowered to draw up treaty submitting controversy to
final arbitration; intention to make arbitration proposal at
meeting on April 23.
Apr. 19 To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Telegram to Legations in Guatemala and Honduras (text
printed), advising contents of American representative’s
telegram No. 5 of April 18, and instructing that
representations be made upon notification that American
representative has made his proposal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
540 and
Doc.
541]
Apr. 20
(6)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Suggestions by Guatemalan Commissioner for settling
boundary controversy (summary printed); information that
Honduran Commission refuses to consider settlement
along those lines.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
541 and
Doc.
542]
Apr. 23
(8)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Advice that Guatemalan representations (excerpt printed)
against Honduran case indicate they will use their
conditional acceptance of mediation as a basis for refusing
to accept a provisional line which is not in accord with
Guatemalan aspirations.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
542 and
Doc.
543]
Apr. 23
(9)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Decision of Commission to recess subject to call of the
American representative; information that American
representative made his proposal for negotiation of an
arbitration convention and both Commissions agreed to
consult their Governments.
(Repeated to Guatemala and Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
543 and
Doc.
544]
Apr. 24
(52)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Honduran instructions to Commission to accept American
representative’s proposal.
[Pg.
710 is
part of
Doc.
496]

(Repeated to American representative and Legation in
Guatemala.)
Apr. 24
(51)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Intention of Guatemalan Government to do nothing until
its Commissioners have returned and reported; disposition
of Foreign Minister to negotiate very extensively before
entering into a final treaty of arbitration.
(Repeated to American representative and Legation in
Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
545,
Doc.
546,
and
Doc.
547]
Apr. 25
(6)
To the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Instructions not to make formal commitment to draw a
provisional line.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
545,
Doc.
546,
and
Doc.
547]
May 11
(31)
From the Representative of the United States on the
Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (tel.)
Communication from Honduran Foreign Minister
protesting Guatemalan activities in boundary zone and
asking the American representative to take steps to prevent
constant aggressions (text printed); American
representative’s instruction to Legation in Honduras to
acknowledge receipt, advising that matter should be
referred to Department (text printed).
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
547 and
Doc.
548]
May 14
(38)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions to make representations to Government to
which accredited that disturbing incidents in disputed
territory be avoided while further steps toward settlement
of boundary question are under consideration.
(Sent also to the Minister in Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
548,
Doc.
549,

and
Doc.
550]
May 16
(62)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Memorandum from Foreign Minister (text printed),
advising complete confidence in American representative,
hope that American representative will be able to lay down
provisional line, and policy to give no cause for
disturbances in disputed zone, despite continuance of
Guatemalan activities.
(Repeated to Guatemala and Salvador.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
548,
Doc.
549,
and
Doc.
550]
May 17
(43)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to inquire of Guatemalan Government what its
answer is to American representative’s proposal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
550,
Doc.
551,
and
Doc.
552]
May 17
(63)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Information from President Paz that there is no reason to
apprehend any serious incident in disputed territory.
(Repeated to Tegucigalpa.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
550,
Doc.
551,
and
Doc.
552]
May 19
(65)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Submission to Cabinet for formal action of Guatemalan
reply to American representative’s proposal, which reply
states that Assembly authorization is required before
boundary treaty can be negotiated and sets forth lengthy
argument of Guatemalan case; information that Minister
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
552,
Doc.
553,

does not concur in interpretation of the Constitution and
has requested conference to discuss matter.
and
Doc.
554]
May 23
(69)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Receipt of Guatemalan memorandum omitting reference to
Assembly authorization, setting forth Guatemalan case,
and concluding with statement that Boundary Commission
will be authorized to enter into conversations upon a treaty
of arbitration which contemplates a frontier protecting the
rights and economic, commercial, and political necessities
of Guatemala.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
552,
Doc.
553,
and
Doc.
554]
May 23
(70)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Suggestion by President that Washington or San José de
Costa Rica would be acceptable places for next boundary
conference.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
554,
Doc.
555,
and
Doc.
556]
May 25
(45)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Information that American representative has reported that
he discussed various possible boundary lines with
Commission but that he never formally proposed as
mediator any of the lines that were discussed.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
554,
Doc.
555,
and
Doc.
556]
June 4
(51)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Note for Foreign Minister (text printed), proposing that the
boundary question be submitted to Central American
Tribunal, that Tribunal be empowered to fix definitive line,
and that existing Commission, now in recess, be convened
by Chairman to draw up and sign necessary protocol
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
556 and
Doc.
557]

covering submission of question to Tribunal.
(Sent also to Legation in Honduras.)
June 6
(71)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
President’s instructions to Foreign Minister to accept
Secretary of State’s proposal.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
557,
Doc.
558,
and
Doc.
559]
June 7
(78)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Note from Foreign Minister (excerpt printed), stating
acceptance of Secretary of State’s proposal.
(Repeated to Legation in Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
557,
Doc.
558,
and
Doc.
559]
June 11
(81)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Desire of Foreign Minister to be advised of names of 15
jurists submitted by the United States for permanent list
from which members of Tribunal are to be chosen; also
those communicated under the convention to the Honduran
Foreign Office by other signatories including Honduras.
(Repeated to Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
559 and
Doc.
560]
June 12
(73)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Honduran note (excerpt printed) inquiring whether, since a
definite obligation for arbitration under President of the
United States exists as a result of negotiations in 1923, the
proposed arbitration by the Central American Tribunal
would be precluded.
(Repeated to Guatemala and Salvador.)
[Pg.
749 is
part of
Doc.
561]
June 15
(50)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Opinion that because no protocol was executed to make
[Pg.

1923 agreement effective, arbitration by Central American
Tribunal is not precluded; instructions to so advise Foreign
Minister.
includes
portions
of Doc.
561 and
Doc.
562]
June 18
(88)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Submission of boundary question to Assembly.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
563 and
Doc.
564]
June 25
(78)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Note from Foreign Minister (text printed) suggesting that
the U. S. Government consider directing its efforts toward
the formalization of the protocol required to make the 1923
agreement effective, and advising that reply to this
suggestion will be awaited before sending definite reply to
Secretary of State’s proposal regarding arbitration by
Central American Tribunal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
563 and
Doc.
564]
June 28
(264)
From the Minister in Nicaragua (tel.)
Transmittal by Nicaraguan Government to Honduran
Government of names of national and non-national judges
on Central American Tribunal.
(Repeated by the Department on June 29 to the Ministers
in Guatemala and Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
564,
Doc.
565,
and
Doc.
566]
July 10
(58)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Information that existence of other agreements has not
been in the past and should not now be considered an
obstacle to another course of action which promises
solution of the difficulty; instructions to convey this
information to the Foreign Minister and express the hope
that the Honduran Government will soon signify its
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
564,
Doc.
565,
and

agreement on proposal to submit dispute to arbitration of
Central American Tribunal.
Doc.
566]
July 17
(95)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Passage by Assembly of bill authorizing submission of
boundary question to Central American Tribunal.
(Repeated to Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
566 and
Doc.
567]
July 20
(65)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Conversation with the Honduran Minister, July 17, in
which the Secretary corrected misinterpretation that
boundary question would be decided purely on political,
economic, and commercial considerations and also
explained that the Honduran objection to Nicaraguan panel
of judges on political grounds might possibly be met by
selecting from the Costa Rican-Nicaraguan panels judges
who would not be Nicaraguans or even Central Americans
at all. Instructions to explain these matters to Honduran
Government.
(Copy to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
755 is
part of
Doc.
568]
July 25
(89)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Issuance of Executive decree, July 24, dissolving
Boundary Commission on ground that in view of new U. S.
proposals now being considered, there is no longer reason
for existence of Commission.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
569,
Doc.
570,
and
Doc.
571]
July 26
(91)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Belief of President Paz that Guatemala is preparing to
occupy Honduran territory east of the Motagua River; his
insistence that U. S. Minister inquire if Department would
use its good offices to prevent such action on part of
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
569,
Doc.

Guatemala.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
570,
and
Doc.
571]
July 27
(98)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Possibility that dissolving of Honduran Boundary
Commission may cause Guatemala to take position that
this constitutes a premature termination of the agreement
that mediating government may propose a provisional line.
(Repeated to Honduras.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
569,
Doc.
570,
and
Doc.
571]
July 27
(67)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Desire for report as to motives which impelled Honduras to
dissolve its Boundary Commission.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
571,
Doc.
572,
Doc.
573,
and
Doc.
574]
July 27
(68)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions to inform Honduran Government that
Nicaraguan panel was appointed in 1923 and that this fact
should dispel Honduran objections on political grounds.
Instructions to report status of proposal for arbitration by
Central American Tribunal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
571,
Doc.
572,
Doc.
573,
and
Doc.
574]
July 27
(62)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Instructions to inform Guatemalan Government of
Honduran apprehensions as to aggressive action and to
[Pg.
includes

point out importance of avoiding the appearance of such
action.
(Repeated to Honduras.)
portions
of Doc.
571,
Doc.
572,
Doc.
573,
and
Doc.
574]
July 30
(666)
From the Minister in Honduras
Opinion that real reason for delay in accepting arbitration
by the Central American Tribunal is reluctance to bind the
country to a decision which it does not believe will be a
just one.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
574 and
Doc.
575]
July 30
(668)
From the Minister in Honduras
Memorandum from the Foreign Minister, dated July 25
(text printed), advising that the Boundary Commission was
dissolved because the Honduran Government considers its
mission had terminated with the failure to reach ends for
which appointed and with the consideration of a new
proposal. Information that U. S. Minister stated that in his
opinion the decree dissolving the Commission was
unnecessary.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
576 and
Doc.
577]
July 31
(94)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Note of July 27 from the Foreign Minister (excerpt
printed), stating regret that Honduran Government is
unable to accept arbitration in the form proposed by the
Secretary of State, at the same time declaring intention to
accept any other arbitration under President or Chief
Justice of the United States or any other tribunal
established in regular and permanent form.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
576 and
Doc.
577]
Aug. 6
(102)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Receipt from Guatemalan Foreign Minister of note sent to
Honduran Foreign Minister, August 4, stating that if
Honduran Government by issuing decree has put an end to
[Pg.
includes
portions

the functions of the Mixed Commission, the Guatemalan
Government records its formal protest.
of Doc.
577 and
Doc.
578]
Aug. 6
(70)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Note for Foreign Minister (text printed), stating
disappointment at Honduran decision not to accept the
proposal made by the Secretary of State, commenting on
certain of the grounds mentioned in Honduran note as basis
for refusal, and expressing hope that careful
reconsideration will be given to the matter.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
578 and
Doc.
579]
Aug. 8
(72)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Hope that nothing in Honduran reply to Guatemalan note
may tend to precipitate a break between the two countries;
that Honduran decree was not issued for purpose of
withdrawing permanently from existing Mixed
Commission; and that Honduras is prepared to appoint a
representative on the Commission should there be further
business for the Commission to transact. Instructions to
convey this information to the Foreign Minister.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
580 and
Doc.
581]
Aug. 8
(63)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Belief that Guatemalan note of August 4 indicates desire to
have American representative lay down a provisional line;
information that while the Department has not yet reached
a decision, it feels that the American representative should
not undertake to lay down a provisional line unless
unhampered by reservations by either side and unless both
countries are committed unreservedly to accept such a line.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
580 and
Doc.
581]
Aug. 17
(98)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Information that the Honduran reply to Guatemalan note
was dispatched August 16 and is unprovocative and mild
in tone.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
581,
Doc.
582,
and
Doc.
583]

Aug. 23
(103)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Note from Foreign Minister, dated August 22 (text
printed), stating that he must again regretfully decline to
reconsider the Secretary of State’s proposal.
(Repeated to Guatemala.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
581,
Doc.
582,
and
Doc.
583]
Aug. 23
(105)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Memorandum signed by Foreign Minister and U. S.
Minister on August 22 (text printed), stating that
Guatemalan President and Foreign Minister declared
confidentially to the U. S. Minister that in case Honduras
should propose that the President of the United States or
the Chief Justice preside over the Central American
Tribunal in accordance with the proposal made by the
Secretary of State in June 1928, Guatemala would accept.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
583,
Doc.
584,
and
Doc.
585]
Aug. 30
(81)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Decision that, in view of last Honduran note, no useful
purpose will be served by pursuing the correspondence
further at the present time; observations concerning the
situation.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
583,
Doc.
584,
and
Doc.
585]
GOOD OFFICES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE IN BEHALF OF AMERICAN INTERESTS DESIRING TO ESTABLISH AIR LINES IN
LATIN AMERICA
PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS, INCORPORATED
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
From the Pan American Airways, Inc.
775 [Pg.

Feb. 16 Plans for flight to survey feasible airway route from Key
West to Colon in anticipation of award of air mail
contract; request that Department secure permission for
flight over certain Central American countries and
exemption from clearance formalities, and also that
Department instruct consular officers to render all
possible assistance.
includes
portions of
Doc. 585
and Doc.
586]
Feb. 25 To the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Dispatch of instructions to missions in Central America
to obtain permission for flight and exemptions from
clearance formalities; instructions to consular officers to
render all possible assistance.
776 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 586
and Doc.
587]
Mar. 7
To the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Reports from missions in Central America that the
desired arrangements have been made.
777 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 587
and Doc.
588]
Mar. 7
To the American Diplomatic Representatives in Costa
Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and Salvador (cir. tel.)
Postponement of Pan American Airways flight for
approximately 30 days.
778 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 589,
Doc. 590,
Doc. 591,
and Doc.
592]
Mar. 16
(21)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Information that Mr. John D. MacGregor, vice president
of Pan American Airways, will arrive on March 20 for
purpose of obtaining a transport concession; instructions
to render all possible and proper assistance.
778 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 589,
Doc. 590,
Doc. 591,
and Doc.
592]
Mar. 17
(331)
To the Minister in Nicaragua
Plan of Mr. MacGregor to visit country to which
Minister is accredited, for the purpose of obtaining
airplane transport concessions. Authorization to extend
all possible and proper assistance.
778 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 589,
Doc. 590,

(Sent also to the Ministers in Costa Rica, Honduras, and
Salvador.)
Doc. 591,
and Doc.
592]
Mar. 26
(1861)
From the Minister in Guatemala
Report that Mr. MacGregor was received by President
Chacón, that their preliminary discussion of project was
pleasant, and that matter of details will be discussed
with Minister of Interior.
778 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 589,
Doc. 590,
Doc. 591,
and Doc.
592]
Apr. 18
(36)
To the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Understanding that Mr. MacGregor is having difficulties
in his negotiations; instructions to report present
situation and to render all possible assistance.
779 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 592,
Doc. 593,
and Doc.
594]
Apr. 24
(49)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Report that delay is due to consideration of matter by
Council, that the Minister requested the President to
receive Mr. MacGregor again, and that the latter has
been assured that the President and Minister of Interior
will sign contract when returned by the Council.
779 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 592,
Doc. 593,
and Doc.
594]
May 2
(59)
From the Minister in Guatemala (tel.)
Departure of Mr. MacGregor for Honduras to open
negotiations; disinclination of Guatemalan Government
to take action on company’s application while Cabinet
resignations are pending.
(Repeated to Honduras and Salvador.)
780 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 595
and Doc.
596]
May 5
(1118)
From the Minister in Salvador
Report that Mr. MacGregor advised that he did not then
desire to take up negotiations with Salvadoran
Government, that because of failure of Guatemalan
Government to take any action, he had been instructed
to endeavor to interest the Honduran Government, and
that plans had been radically changed so that route
would not pass through either Guatemala or Salvador.
780 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 595
and Doc.
596]
May 11 To the Ambassador in Mexico (tel.)
781 [Pg.

(125)
Instructions to request permission of Mexican
Government for Pan American Airways planes to fly
over Yucatan and Quintana Roo on their regular trips
and to land at Merida when necessary.
includes
portions of
Doc. 597
and Doc.
598]
June 23
(166)
From the Chargé in Mexico (tel.)
Receipt of note dated June 21 from the Acting Foreign
Minister stating that permission of a provisional
character has been granted, with the reservation that
definite permission may be given after ratification of the
Pan American commercial aviation convention.
781 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 597
and Doc.
598]
June 23
(712)
From the Minister in Nicaragua
Signature of contract by Nicaraguan Government and
Mr. MacGregor on June 18; information that the
contract as signed contains article previously not
brought to Legation’s attention which so completely
protects company from interference that it might be
impossible for a rival company to engage in commercial
aviation in Nicaragua (excerpt printed).
782 [Pg.
782 is part
of Doc.
599]
June 26
(161)
To the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that the British Honduran Government will
grant permission for landings and take-offs and airport
facilities, but that Colonial Office has withheld its
approval because of absence of a general U. S.-British
aviation agreement; instructions to take up matter with
appropriate authorities and endeavor to bring about
favorable decision.
784 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 599,
Doc. 600,
and Doc.
601]
June 28
(12)
To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Desire of Pan American Airways to inaugurate
passenger service between San Antonio, Cuba, and San
Juan, Porto Rico, via Port au Prince and Santo
Domingo; instructions to request permission for initial
flight and to inquire whether Government would be
disposed to give permission for the establishment of
regular service.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Chargé in Haiti.)
784 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 599,
Doc. 600,
and Doc.
601]

June 29
(39)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Dominican permission for initial flight; favorable
attitude toward establishment of regular service.
785 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 601,
Doc. 602,
Doc. 603,
and Doc.
604]
June 29
(69)
From the Chargé in Haiti (tel.)
Haitian permission for initial flight; consideration of
permission for regular service.
785 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 601,
Doc. 602,
Doc. 603,
and Doc.
604]
June 29
(99)
From the Ambassador in Cuba (tel.)
For White: Request that Postmaster General be advised,
in connection with Pan American Airways’ bid for air
mail contract, that Cuban aviation commission has acted
favorably on company’s request for permission to pass
through Cuba and to use landing fields, and that
necessary decree will be signed by Cuban President.
785 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 601,
Doc. 602,
Doc. 603,
and Doc.
604]
July 5
(56)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions, in view of newspaper opposition to
granting of Pan American Airways contract, to make
known the company’s assurance that it has no
connection whatsoever with United Fruit Co.
786 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 604,
Doc. 605,
and Doc.
606]
July 11
(60)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Desire of Pan American Airways that Minister discuss
contract with President in its behalf; instructions to do
so as soon as possible.
786 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 604,
Doc. 605,
and Doc.
606]
July 11
(23)
To the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Instructions to render all possible assistance to Pan
American Airways representative who will arrive in
787 [Pg.
includes
portions of

Caracas soon in connection with bid for air mail service
between Key West and Porto Rico.
Doc. 606,
Doc. 607,
and Doc.
608]
July 12 To the Counselor of Embassy in Cuba
Instructions to advise Secretary of Communications that
Pan American Airways is anxious to obtain concession
to carry Cuban domestic mails and hopes that Cuban
Government will not give German interests the contract
until Pan American has had a chance to make a
proposition. Information that Department is anxious to
further American aviation in the Caribbean.
787 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 606,
Doc. 607,
and Doc.
608]
July 12 To the Minister in Guatemala
Suggestion that Guatemalan Government may now wish
to be included in the air mail service; instructions to
advise what the situation is and whether this is now a
favorable moment for Pan American Airways to take up
the matter again.
788 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 608
and Doc.
609]
Undated
[Rec’d
July 26]
From the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Proposed survey flight from Habana through Central
America to Canal Zone about August 18; desire that
Department instruct U. S. Ministers to secure
permission to land, refuel, and make incidental survey
nights in Honduras, Salvador, Costa Rica, and Panama.
789 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 610
and Doc.
611]
Aug. 14 To the Pan American Airways, Inc. Information that
desired instructions were sent promptly.
789 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 610
and Doc.
611]
Sept. 10
(24)
To the Chargé in the Dominican Republic (tel.)
Instructions to accord assistance to Mr. P. E. D. Nagle,
Pan American Airways representative, in connection
with the taking over of the West Indies Aerial Express
for establishment of commercial air service between
Miami, Florida, and San Juan, Porto Rico.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Chargé in Haiti.)
790 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 611,
Doc. 612,
and Doc.
613]

Sept. 14
(285)
To the Minister in Honduras
Understanding that Mr. MacGregor has encountered
difficulties; information that satisfactory contract with
Honduran Government is necessary for fulfillment of
Pan American contract for air mail service to Panama.
790 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 611,
Doc. 612,
and Doc.
613]
Sept. 26 To the Chargé in France
Instructions to render assistance to Pan American
Airways president in connection with any negotiations
with Latécoère Co.
791 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 613
and Doc.
614]
Oct. 1
To the Vice Consul at Nassau (tel.)
Instructions to render all proper assistance to vice
president of Pan American Airways in negotiations for
proposed air mail service between Miami and Nassau.
792 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 614,
Doc. 615,
and Doc.
616]
Oct. 15
(1058)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Readiness of Dominican Government to accord every
possible facility to Pan American Airways
representatives in connection with establishment of
Miami-San Juan air service; understanding that formal
agreement will be discussed in near future; report that
Legation accorded every possible and proper assistance.
792 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 614,
Doc. 615,
and Doc.
616]
Nov. 26
(1324)
From the High Commissioner in Haiti
Report of negotiations between Haitian Government and
Pan American Airways over proposed contract, as well
as opposition of Financial Adviser-General Receiver to
certain preferential provisions thereof; request for
Department’s views; draft articles of the contract (texts
printed).
793 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 616
and Doc.
617]
Nov. 28
(1327)
From the High Commissioner in Haiti
Opinion that benefits accruing to Haiti from the
contemplated services of Pan American Airways are
such as to permit of most liberal action on part of
795 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 617

Haitian Government; recommendation that Department,
while not approving of certain monopolistic provisions,
not object to their being incorporated if the Haitian
Government so desires.
and Doc.
618]
Dec. 1
(267)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Foreign Office note (excerpt printed), advising that
necessary arrangements have been made; understanding
that the position is now for direct negotiation between
the British Honduran Government and the company.
796 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 618,
Doc. 619,
and Doc.
620]
Dec. 4
(91)
From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Belief that temporary suspension of railway service
between San José and Limon due to floods, offers the
opportunity for Pan American Airways to establish itself
by arranging for service by amphibian plane;
recommendation for immediate action in order to
forestall activies by non-American aviation interests.
796 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 618,
Doc. 619,
and Doc.
620]
Dec. 6
(94)
From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Indications that non-American interests are active;
recommendation that Pan American Airways act
immediately if it desires to take advantage of the
opportunity.
797 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 620,
Doc. 621,
and Doc.
622]
Dec. 8
(30)
To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.)
Information from Pan American Airways that W. R.
Grace & Co. is applying for operating concession in
Ecuador similar to concession recently granted to
German air interests; instructions to render all possible
and proper assistance.
797 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 620,
Doc. 621,
and Doc.
622]
Dec. 8
(48)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Immediate shipment by Pan American Airways of plane
to Canal Zone for assembly, which should reach Costa
Rica by December 25; permission to use this
information to further company’s interests.
798 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 623,
Doc. 624,
Doc. 625,
and Doc.
626]

Dec. 11
(89)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Understanding that Pan American Airways and W. R.
Grace & Co. are negotiating with Chilean Government
for air mail concession from Arica south.
798 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 623,
Doc. 624,
Doc. 625,
and Doc.
626]
Dec. 12
(50)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Advice that Lieut. Donald Duke has been granted leave
in order to fly a plane from Colon to Port Limon for
delivery to Pan American Airways; instructions to
request permission for flight and landing facilities.
798 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 623,
Doc. 624,
Doc. 625,
and Doc.
626]
Dec. 12
(51)
To the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Instructions to render all proper assistance to Mr. Frank
Whiting of Pan American Airways in negotiations for
establishment of San José-Limon air mail service.
798 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 623,
Doc. 624,
Doc. 625,
and Doc.
626]
Dec. 14
(757)
From the Chargé in Honduras
Information that Mr. MacGregor has résuméd
negotiations with Honduran Government and that
prospects are favorable for the conclusion of an
agreement.
799 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 627,
Doc. 628,
and Doc.
629]
Dec. 16
(99)
From the Minister in Costa Rica (tel.)
Receipt of permission requested in telegram No. 50 of
December 12.
799 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 627,
Doc. 628,
and Doc.
629]
Dec. 17
(88)
To the High Commissioner in Haiti (tel.)
Approval of suggestion in despatch No. 1327 of
November 28.
799 [Pg.
includes
portions of

Doc. 627,
Doc. 628,
and Doc.
629]
Dec. 24
(147)
From the Chargé in Honduras (tel.)
Signature of contract between Pan American Airways
and Honduran Government.
800 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 630
and Doc.
631]
HUFF—DALAND DUSTERS AND KEYSTONE AIRPLANE CORPORATION
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Jan. 19
(4)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that American interests are planning, with the
encouragement and approval of the U. S. Government, to
establish air service along western coast of South America,
and that it is important that the Peruvian Government grant
no exclusive or other concessions to foreign interests which
might prevent activities of American interests; instructions
to discuss matter confidentially with Peruvian President,
intimating that the U. S. Government would appreciate it if
field were kept open pending maturing and presentation of
American propositions.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Minister in Ecuador.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
630 and
Doc.
631]
Jan. 21
(4)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Report that several days previously the Ambassador
presented to President Leguia, Mr. Woolman, representative
Of Huff-Daland Dusters and Keystone Aircraft
Corporation, American companies, and that the Peruvian
Government is entertaining proposal to award contract for
Lima-Panama service to Woolman’s principals; inquiry
whether cable No. 4 of January 19 is intended to oppose
Woolman proposition.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
631,
Doc.
632,
and
Doc.
633]

Jan. 25
(6)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that the American interests referred to in
Department’s telegram No. 4 of January 21 are Keystone,
Huff-Daland Dusters, Pan American Airways, and possibly
eventually others; instructions to give all possible and
proper support to Mr. Woolman.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
631,
Doc.
632,
and
Doc.
633]
Feb. 8
(1042)
From the Minister in Ecuador
Assurance by Ecuadoran President of fullest cooperation
with plans for American participation; his agreement to the
request that any applications for concessions be discussed
with U. S. Minister prior to taking any action.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
634 and
Doc.
635]
Apr. 16
(932)
From the Chargé in Peru
Report that Mr. Woolman has for some months been
attempting to secure an air service concession; that efforts
of German air interests have been receiving support of
German military mission, but that American proposition
appears to be receiving favorable consideration.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
634 and
Doc.
635]
Apr. 19
(29)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Assurance by President Leguia that reports of signature of
contract with German air interests are incorrect; his advice
that the present intention is to enter into contracts with both
American and German interests and let them compete.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
636 and
Doc.
637]
PROPOSED AIR MAIL SERVICE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CHILE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)

Apr. 13
(27)
Understanding that Compagnie Latécoère has applied for
concession of monopoly for air service from east to west
between Chile and Brazil. Information that plans of the U.
S. Government to launch project for air mail service
between United States and Chile would be seriously
interfered with if Chile were to grant any exclusive
concession. Instructions to discuss matter confidentially
with President Ibanez, expressing hope that the field will be
kept open pending maturing and presentation of project.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
636 and
Doc.
637]
Apr. 19
(54)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Assurance by President Ibanez that no more exclusive
concessions will be granted; his opinion that existing
Latécoère contract is not exclusive. Ambassador’s opinion
that Chile probably would not favor proposed American
service unless Chilean pilots were to be used within Chilean
territory.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
637 and
Doc.
638]
June 7
(1410)
From the Ambassador in Chile
Belief of Director General of Posts that principle of
coastwise trade should be extended to air ships. Information
that Ambassador offered arguments against these views in
conversations with him and with Foreign Minister.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
638 and
Doc.
639]
Oct. 8
(112)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Desire for any pertinent information regarding Chilean
section of proposed air mail service which would facilitate
securing more precise indication as to extent of Chilean
Government’s cooperation and facilities.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
639,
Doc.
640,
and
Doc.
641]
Oct. 13 To the Pan American Airways
Inquiry for information requested by the Ambassador in
Chile.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

639,
Doc.
640,
and
Doc.
641]
Oct. 16 From the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Reply that it will be several months before negotiations can
be undertaken with the Chilean Government, unless the
State Department feels it of vital importance to begin the
negotiations sooner.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
642 and
Doc.
643]
Oct. 19 To the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Warning that delay may seriously jeopardize possibility of
reaching a satisfactory agreement; opinion that it is of great
importance to undertake negotiations at an early date.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
642 and
Doc.
643]
Oct. 24 From the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Information that company is considering plans to undertake
negotiations with Chilean Government within the
reasonably near future; observation that extension of
operations is dependent upon a satisfactory arrangement
with Chilean Government and an advantageous contract for
the transport of U. S. mail.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
643,
Doc.
644,
and
Doc.
645]
Oct. 27
(72)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information that the Department will advise immediately
company’s definite plans when available.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
643,
Doc.
644,
and
Doc.
645]

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE FLIGHT—DEMONSTRATIONS BY CURTISS COMPANY AND CONSOLIDATED AIRCRAFT CORPORATION
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Jan. 7
(1)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Advice from Department of Commerce that arrangements
have been made to send two Curtiss planes to South
America on an experimental and pathfinding flight.
Instructions to request permission for flight.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to missions
in Bolivia, Chile, and Uruguay.)
[Pg. 811
includes
portions
of Doc.
646 and
Doc.
647]
Jan. 7
(2)
To the Chargé in Brazil (tel.)
Advice similar to that sent in telegram No. 1 to Argentina.
Instructions to request free entry for equipment;
information that name of steamer and date of arrival will be
cabled later.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Ambassador in Peru.)
[Pg. 811
includes
portions
of Doc.
646 and
Doc.
647]
Jan. 17
(1)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian permission for flight and authorization for free
entry of planes, equipment, and supplies.
[Pg. 812
includes
portions
of Doc.
648,
Doc.
649,
Doc.
650, and
Doc.
651]
Jan. 18
(3)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that expedition will sail January 19 on the
Santa Luisa.
[Pg. 812
includes
portions
of Doc.
648,
Doc.
649,
Doc.
650, and
Doc.
651]

Jan. 20
(2)
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Desire of Department of Commerce that Legation and
Consulate cooperate with local Curtiss representative in
promoting interest in American aircraft products and
aeronautics; instructions to comply and inform Consulate.
[Pg. 812
includes
portions
of Doc.
648,
Doc.
649,
Doc.
650, and
Doc.
651]
Jan. 25
(7)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Argentine permission for flight.
[Pg. 812
includes
portions
of Doc.
648,
Doc.
649,
Doc.
650, and
Doc.
651]
Feb. 2
(7)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Uruguayan permission for flight.
[Pg. 813
includes
portions
of Doc.
652,
Doc.
653, and
Doc.
654]
Feb. 8
(28)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean permission for flight.
[Pg. 813
includes
portions
of Doc.
652,
Doc.
653, and
Doc.
654]
Apr. 11
(50)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Opinion of representatives of Curtiss Company,
Consolidated Aircraft Corporation, and other American
[Pg. 813
includes
portions

aircraft and arms manufacturing companies that their
difficulties in obtaining orders are due to belief of Chilean
Government that if Chile becomes involved in war the U.
S. Government will prevent subsequent deliveries or will
rule that airplanes are in same category as armed ships and
may not be outfitted in territory of neutrals; inquiry
whether Department has any suggestions to meet the
situation.
(Footnote: Information that in February and March 1928
the missions in Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil were
instructed to accord assistance and to request free entry and
clearance for the Consolidated airplane for demonstration
purposes; also that on February 29, the mission in Peru was
instructed to secure refund of customs charges paid when
the airplane entered Peru.)
of Doc.
652,
Doc.
653, and
Doc.
654]
Apr. 16
(28)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to avoid discussion of the subject, but to render
appropriate assistance to obtain for companies fair
consideration of their propositions.
[Pg. 814
includes
portions
of Doc.
654,
Doc.
655, and
Doc.
656]
May 1
(1367)
From the Ambassador in Chile
Information that the Ambassador has made most vigorous
efforts with Chilean officials to influence them to give
American firms a part of the airplane contracts about to be
awarded.
[Pg. 814
includes
portions
of Doc.
654,
Doc.
655, and
Doc.
656]
June 8
(642)
From the Chargé in Uruguay
Information that demonstrations of Curtiss and
Consolidated planes by Lieutenants Doolittle and Wade,
respectively, were highly successful.
[Pg. 815
includes
portions
of Doc.
656 and
Doc.
657]

June 26
(325)
From the Ambassador in Cuba
Telegram of June 25 from the U. S. Ambassador in
Argentina (text printed), conveying request by Lieutenant
Doolittle that permission be secured for him to refuel at
Cienfuegos en route from Buenos Aires to New York and
to be granted customs courtesies; request for instructions.
[Pg. 816
includes
portions
of Doc.
657 and
Doc.
658]
July 12
(191)
To the Chargé in Cuba
Authorization to request permission for Lieutenant
Doolittle’s flight and free entry for equipment.
[Pg. 817
includes
portions
of Doc.
659 and
Doc.
660]
July 17
(3037)
From the Ambassador in Brazil
Information concerning Embassy’s assistance to Lieutenant
Doolittle and his demonstrations in Rio de Janeiro.
[Pg. 817
includes
portions
of Doc.
659 and
Doc.
660]
BOEING AIRPLANE COMPANY AND PRATT AND WHITNEY MOTOR CORPORATION
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 4
From the Assistant Secretary of Commerce
Information that Ralph A. O’Neill, representing Boeing
Airplane Company and Pratt and Whitney Motor
Corporation, is leaving on February 11 to demonstrate
Boeing planes to army and navy air services of the South
American countries. Request that necessary permission
be secured for flight and for free entry of equipment.
818 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 660
and Doc.
661]
Feb. 6
(3)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Instructions to request free entry for equipment and
permission for flight of Captain O’Neill.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
missions in Argentina, Chile, Peru, and Uruguay.)
820 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 661,
Doc. 662,

and Doc.
663]
Feb. 8 To the Secretary of Commerce
Issuance of appropriate instructions to missions in South
America.
820 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 661,
Doc. 662,
and Doc.
663]
Feb. 9
(1036)
To the Minister in Colombia
Instructions to request permission for O’Neill’s flight
and free entry of equipment.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
missions in Bolivia, Ecuador, and Venezuela.)
821 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 664,
Doc. 665,
and Doc.
666]
Feb. 9
(10)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Inquiry whether O’Neill intends to demonstrate before
Argentine Army and Navy air service; request to be
advised as to date of arrival and method of travel.
821 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 664,
Doc. 665,
and Doc.
666]
Feb. 10
(8)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Information that O’Neill will give demonstration if
invited to do so, that date of arrival will be
communicated by Embassy at Rio de Janeiro, and that he
will fly from Rio to Buenos Aires and thence to
Santiago.
821 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 664,
Doc. 665,
and Doc.
666]
Mar. 8
(38)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Report that, although application for free entry was
denied, airplane and accessories will be admitted under
bond canceled upon leaving Chile.
822 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 667
and Doc.
668]
Mar.
(907)
From the Ambassador in Peru
Foreign Office note of February 23 (text printed)
advising that Peruvian Government is glad to receive
822 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 667

O’Neill and will grant all necessary facilities and free
entry for equipment.
and Doc.
668]
Apr. 24
(1076)
From the Minister in Ecuador
Receipt from Foreign Ministry of notification that
request for flight in Ecuador and extension of facilities
has been granted.
823 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 668
and Doc.
669]
Apr. 27
(1312)
From the Minister in Colombia
Receipt from Foreign Ministry of permission for
O’Neill’s flight; advice that Minister is again addressing
Foreign Office as to free entry for his equipment.
824 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 670,
Doc. 671,
and Doc.
672]
May 11
(15)
From the Chargé in Uruguay (tel.)
Report that O’Neill and companion were slightly injured
in airplane crash.
824 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 670,
Doc. 671,
and Doc.
672]
May 11
(16)
From the Chargé in Uruguay (tel.)
Information that O’Neill was unaccompanied on flight,
and is expected to leave the hospital the next day.
824 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 670,
Doc. 671,
and Doc.
672]
TRI-MOTORS AIRWAYS CONCESSION IN ARGENTINA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Sept.
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Understanding that Capt. Ralph A. O’Neill negotiated a
favorable air mail concession with Argentine postal
authorities which the Remington-Rand Corporation has
agreed to finance, but that the time limit has practically
[Pg. 825
includes
portions
of Doc.

expired and there may therefore be some difficulty in
actually securing the grant; hope of Department of
Commerce that Ambassador might be in a position to
assist in securing the concession.
673 and
Doc. 674]
Sept.
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Information that O’Neill’s representative was advised by
Director of Posts and Telegraphs that no contracts could be
consummated in short time remaining of present
administration.
[Pg. 825
includes
portions
of Doc.
673 and
Doc. 674]
Jan. 8
(7)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Advice from O’Neill that the Director of Posts signed
contract with Tri-Motors Airways on December 22,
subject to approval by other officials. Instructions to report
present status and possibilities of final ratification, and to
lend all appropriate assistance to O’Neill’s representative.
[Pg. 826
includes
portions
of Doc.
675, Doc.
676, and
Doc. 677]
Jan. 9
(7)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Information that the new negotiations are not yet
concluded and have been subject to delay by reason of
recent change of administration.
(Footnote: Signature of decree. February 28, 1929,
granting Tri-Motors Airways the right to establish an air
service with the United States.)
[Pg. 826
includes
portions
of Doc.
675, Doc.
676, and
Doc. 677]
POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF AMERICAN AIR LINES TO VENEZUELA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 17
(5)
From the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Inquiry whether the Department desires the Legation to
ascertain discreetly the Venezuelan Government’s attitude
toward proposed air line mentioned in Department of
Commerce communication to commercial attaché in
Caracas, January 12.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
675,
Doc.
676,
and

Doc.
677]
Mar. 3
(5)
To the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Opinion that representatives of the U. S. Government
should not initiate or conduct private business negotiations
on behalf of private American interests with foreign
governments; instructions not to approach Venezuelan
Government, but to give all proper assistance to responsible
American interests engaged in legitimate activities. Advice
that Department is informing Department of Commerce.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
678 and
Doc.
679]
Mar. 3 To the Secretary of Commerce
Expression of Department’s attitude in the matter;
information as to Department’s instructions to Legation in
Venezuela.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
678 and
Doc.
679]
Mar.
To the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Instructions to endeavor to ascertain discreetly Venezuelan
attitude toward establishment by American interests of air
lines, but to make no statement that could possibly be
interpreted as favoring any specific interest or project.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
679,
Doc.
680,
and
Doc.
681]
Mar.
(1502)
From the Chargé in Venezuela
Doubt of Minister of Fomento that an application for an air
line would receive favorable consideration. Chargé’s
suggestion that inquiry in question referred to proposed line
between Maracaibo and Curaçao and that Department might
wish to learn Venezuelan attitude toward commercial
aviation in general.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
679,
Doc.
680,
and
Doc.
681]
May 26
(1248)
To the Chargé in Venezuela
Information that American interests are planning, with the
[Pg.

encouragement and approval of the U. S. Government, to
establish air service in the Caribbean area, and that it is
important that the Venezuelan Government grant no
exclusive or other concessions to foreign interests which
might prevent activities of American interests; instructions
to discuss matter confidentially with Venezuelan President,
intimating that the U. S. Government would appreciate it if
field were kept open pending maturing and presentation of
American projects.
includes
portions
of Doc.
681 and
Doc.
682]
July 3
(70)
From the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Advice that the information has been conveyed to President
by the Foreign Minister, that no concessions appear as yet
to have been granted to any foreign interests, but that
German Colombian Company has been trying to obtain one,
and British interests have advanced a vague proposal.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
683,
Doc.
684,
and
Doc.
685]
July 3
(71)
From the Chargé in Venezuela (tel.)
Receipt of intimation that the United States has been slow
in entering the field and cannot hope to keep out foreign
interests indefinitely.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
683,
Doc.
684,
and
Doc.
685]
REPRESENTATIONS BY FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS WITH RESPECT TO SENATE BILL RELATING TO PAYMENT OF ADVANCE WAGES TO
SEAMEN ON FOREIGN VESSELS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Senate Bill No. 2945, 70th Congress, First Session
Relating to the payment of advance wages and allotments
[Pg. 830
includes

in respect of seamen on foreign vessels, and making further
provision for carrying out the Seamen’s Act of March 4,
1915.
(Footnote: Introduced in the Senate by Mr. La Follette,
January 27 (calendar day, January 31); read twice and
referred to the Committee on Commerce.)
portions
of Doc.
683,
Doc.
684, and
Doc.
685]
Feb. 25 Memorandum by Mr. C. B. Hosmer, Division of Foreign
Service Administration
Conversation with Mr. J. Balfour, First Secretary of the
British Embassy, in which there was clear inference that
Mr. Balfour felt that Senate Bill 2945 would constitute a
very radical departure from long-established practices
among nations. Doubt whether Congress will request the
Department for a report unless it is called to the attention of
the appropriate committees that this class of legislation
might involve the United States in perplexing questions
with other nations.
[Pg. 831
includes
portions
of Doc.
685 and
Doc.
686]
Apr. 26 From the British Embassy
Observation that the effect of the Senate bill appears to be
contrary to generally accepted principles of international
law; desire to draw attention to difficulties which may
attend the bill’s enactment into law.
[Pg. 832
includes
portions
of Doc.
686 and
Doc.
687]
Apr. 28 To the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.
Transmittal of British memorandum of April 26; belief that
the Senate bill contravenes accepted principles of law that
contracts of all kinds are to be governed as to their nature,
validity, and interpretation by the law of place where they
were made; information that Italian Embassy has made
reservations; opinion that proposed bill will give rise to
numerous conflicts of laws and may render American
merchant marine subject to retaliatory measures by foreign
governments.
(Footnote: Mr. White was Chairman of the Committee on
Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of
Representatives.)
[Pg. 833
is part
of Doc.
688]

Apr. 30 From the Italian Embassy
Observation that, while Senate bill provides that U. S.
courts shall be open to seamen for claims concerning wages
earned upon American or foreign vessels, article 11 of the
consular convention between Italy and United States
reserves such questions to Italian consular officials.
[Pg. 834
includes
portions
of Doc.
688,
Doc.
689, and
Doc.
690]
Apr. 30 From the Swedish Legation
Representations against the Senate bill as being contrary to
the fundamental principles of international law.
(Footnote: Copy transmitted to Mr. White on May 4, 1928.)
[Pg. 834
includes
portions
of Doc.
688,
Doc.
689, and
Doc.
690]
May 3
(1413)
From the Netherlands Legation
Opinion that proposed bill is contrary to international law.
(Footnote: Copy transmitted to Mr. White on May 10,
1928.)
[Pg. 835
includes
portions
of Doc.
690 and
Doc.
691]
June 12
(82)
From the Danish Minister
Opinion that extension of jurisdiction contemplated in the
proposed bill would conflict not only with Danish law but
also with generally accepted principles of international law;
desire that this view be presented to the proper Committees,
in anticipation that bill will come up at December session
of Congress.
[Pg. 836
includes
portions
of Doc.
692 and
Doc.
693]
June 29 To the Italian Embassy
Observation that article 11 of the consular convention cited
is no longer in force.
[Pg. 836
includes
portions
of Doc.
692 and
Doc.
693]
Dec. 8 To the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.
Transmittal of Danish note of June 12; observation that
[Pg. 837

article 11 of the consular convention with Italy is no longer
in force; opinion that the passage of the proposed bill would
be undesirable
includes
portions
of Doc.
693 and
Doc.
694]
REPRESENTATIONS BY FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS REGARDING SENATE BILLS FOR THE DEPORTATION OF CERTAIN ALIEN SEAMEN
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 4
(74)
From the British Ambassador
Opinion that Senate bill 3574, providing for the
deportation of certain alien seamen and other purposes
will meet with strenuous opposition of British
shipping interests; request for authoritative
interpretation of the meaning of certain sections.
(Footnotes: Information that an official of the
Department of State advised the British Embassy
regarding status of the bill, stating that it was unlikely
that any House committee action would be taken
without the Department having an opportunity to be
heard.
Information that the British and other representations
were brought to the attention of the Senate Committee
on Immigration.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 694 and
Doc. 695]
Feb. 5
From the German Ambassador
Observation that proposed bill would prove an
extraordinary burden to German shipping interests.
includes
portions of
Doc. 695,
Doc. 696, and
Doc. 697]
Feb. 7
From the French Chargé
Opinion that proposed bill would prove cumbersome
to the French colonial merchant marine; request for
official interpretation of certain sections.
(Footnote: Information that in a note of February 17,
1927, the Department stated that if it were decided to
includes
portions of
Doc. 695,
Doc. 696, and
Doc. 697]

consider the bill further, hearings would be held which
would undoubtedly bring out more clearly the
purposes of the proposed measure.)
Jan. 4
From the British Embassy
Representations against Senate bill 717, which is
almost identical with Senate bill 3574 which was
killed in the House of Representatives the preceding
year.
(Footnote: Receipt from British Embassy of a
memorandum dated May 3, 1929, with reference to
with Senate bill 717.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 697 and
Doc. 698]
Jan. 13 From the Swedish Legation
Representations against Senate bill 717.
includes
portions of
Doc. 698,
Doc. 699, and
Doc. 700]
Jan. 17
(170)
From the Netherlands Legation
Representations against Senate bill 717.
includes
portions of
Doc. 698,
Doc. 699, and
Doc. 700]
Undated
[Rec’d
Jan. 21]
From the German Embassy
Objections to Senate bill 717.
includes
portions of
Doc. 700 and
Doc. 701]
Jan. 28 From the Norwegian Legation
Representations against Senate bill 717.
includes
portions of
Doc. 701 and
Doc. 702]
ALBANIA
RECOGNITION OF ZOG I, KING OF THE ALBANIANS
Date
and
Subject
Page

number
Aug. 4
(48)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Decision of Ahmet Zogu, President of Albania, to
proclaim himself King within 30 days.
845 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 703,
Doc. 704,
and Doc.
705]
Aug.
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Instructions to keep Department advised concerning the
proposed change of regime and the action colleagues will
take concerning recognition and attendance at coronation.
845 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 703,
Doc. 704,
and Doc.
705]
Aug.
(510)
From the Minister in Albania
Apparent finality of decision to proclaim Ahmet Zogu
the King on September 1.
845 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 703,
Doc. 704,
and Doc.
705]
Sept. 1
(56)
From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Proclamation of Ahmet Zogu as “Zog I, King of the
Albanians;” probability that there will be no coronation
or ceremonies; information that colleagues are
proceeding cautiously with regard to question of
recognition; opinion that change of government has been
brought about in a regular manner and will be accepted
by Albania.
846 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 705
and Doc.
706]
Sept. 5
(30)
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Note from Albanian Minister, dated September 3 (text
printed), announcing that on September 1 the
Constitutional Convention unanimously voted the
restoration of the monarchy and elected President Zogu
as King of the Albanians. Instructions to cable
information as to action taken or contemplated by
colleagues concerning recognition.
847 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 707
and Doc.
708]
Sept. 6 From the Minister in Albania (tel.)
847 [Pg.

(58)
Note from Foreign Minister (excerpt printed) requesting
recognition and stating intention to observe treaties
signed by the Republic and to promote peace in the
Balkans. Information that because change of regime is by
statute, no question of treaty observance is involved, and
that recognition has been granted by Italy, Greece, and
Hungary.
includes
portions of
Doc. 707
and Doc.
708]
Sept.
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
Note for Foreign Minister extending U. S. recognition
and telegram of felicitation from President Coolidge to
King Zog (texts printed).
848 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 709
and Doc.
710]
Sept.
From King Zog to President Coolidge (tel.)
Appreciation for telegram of felicitation.
848 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 709
and Doc.
710]
Sept.
(493)
From the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats
and Slovenes
Opinion of Albanian Chargé that U. S. recognition has
gone far to establish King Zog’s government in the eyes
of the world and has no doubt stimulated recognition by
Yugoslavia.
849 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 710
and Doc.
711]
Sept.
(525)
From the Minister in Albania
Information concerning the intense gratification with
which U. S. recognition was received in Albania. Foreign
Minister’s note (text printed) in reply to U. S. Minister’s
note extending recognition.
850 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 711
and Doc.
712]
TREATIES OF ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND ALBANIA, SIGNED OCTOBER 22, 1928
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
To the Minister in Albania (tel.)
852 [Pg. 852 includes

Apr. 24
(10)
Delivery to Albanian Minister of draft treaties
of arbitration and conciliation.
portions of Doc. 712
and Doc. 713]
Oct. 9
From the Albanian Minister
Receipt of instructions to sign the treaties of
arbitration and conciliation, and also the treaty
for the renunciation of war.
853 [Pg. 853 includes
portions of Doc. 714
and Doc. 715]
Oct. 22 Treaty Between the United States of America
and Albania
Of arbitration.
853 [Pg. 853 includes
portions of Doc. 714
and Doc. 715]
Oct. 22 Treaty Between the United States of America
and Albania
Of conciliation.
855 [Pg. 855 includes
portions of Doc. 715
and Doc. 716]
AUSTRIA
NEGOTIATIONS RESPECTING SUBORDINATION OF THE AUSTRIAN RELIEF LOAN TO A PROPOSED NEW AUSTRIAN LOAN;
AUTHORIZATION OF A DEBT AGREEMENT
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Dec. 29
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Summary of present status of negotiations concerning
proposed new Austrian internal reconstruction loan.
[Pg. 858
is part
of Doc.
717]
Jan. 14
(13)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Decision by Reparation Commission to give favorable
consideration to Austrian application for deferment of the
lien on Austrian assets and revenues under Treaty of St.
Germain, in order to insure service of the proposed new
Austrian loan.
[Pg. 859
includes
portions
of Doc.
717 and
Doc.
718]
Jan. 16
(7)
From the Austrian Minister
Deferment by Reparation Commission and all other
creditor nations, except the United States, of their liens for
a period of 30 years beginning from the issue of the
proposed new Austrian loan; request that recommendation
[Pg. 860
includes
portions
of Doc.
718 and

be made to Congress for a bill authorizing 30–year
deferment of U. S. lien, in order that the loan negotiations
may proceed without further obstruction; desire for
separate treatment of deferment of lien and debt questions.
Doc.
719]
Jan. 19
(4)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Chancellor’s hope that U. S. Government is convinced of
Austria’s earnest attempt to effect relief debt settlement and
will therefore be satisfied with expediting action without
awaiting a final settlement by agreement.
[Pg. 861
includes
portions
of Doc.
719 and
Doc.
720]
Jan. 21
(5)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Observation that the Executive cannot decide on Austrian
request to approach Congress with a recommendation for
deferment of lien without first making an independent
investigation of the proposed loan’s bearing upon Austria’s
economic and financial status; information that Austrian
Minister has been thus informed and advised that additional
data will be welcomed.
[Pg. 862
includes
portions
of Doc.
720,
Doc.
721,
and
Doc.
722]
Jan. 23
(1692)
From the Minister in Austria
Information that Chancellor will furnish Minister duplicates
of material Austrian Government is supplying to J. P.
Morgan & Co. representative now making a thorough
investigation of Austria’s financial status; also that Morgan
representative will furnish substance of the data he collects.
[Pg. 862
includes
portions
of Doc.
720,
Doc.
721,
and
Doc.
722]
Jan. 28
From the Austrian Minister
Correspondence between Austrian Government and the
International Relief Bonds Committee in London,
comprising original Austrian proposal for settlement of
relief debt, counterproposal by Committee, and Austrian
reply of January 14, 1928 (texts printed); Austrian proposal
for funding of relief debt to the United States (text printed).
[Pg. 864
includes
portions
of Doc.
722 and
Doc.
723]
Feb. 2
To the Austrian Legation
Principal aspects of the proposed loan on which the
[Pg. 869
is part

Department lacks adequate data.
of Doc.
724]
Feb. 3
(1704)
From the Minister in Austria
Transmittal of documents furnished by Finance Ministry to
the Morgan representative; latter’s opinion that general
situation in Austria has substantially improved since two or
three years previously.
[Pg. 870
includes
portions
of Doc.
724 and
Doc.
725]
Feb. 4
(15)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain whether League Financial
Committee has studied proposed Austrian loan or whether
it has any reason for not interesting itself in this loan as it
did in the 1923 loan.
(Instructions to repeat to the Legation at Vienna, together
with reply when ready, and to mail texts to the Embassies at
London and Paris.)
[Pg. 872
includes
portions
of Doc.
725 and
Doc.
726]
Feb. 7
From the Austrian Minister
Arguments in favor of the proposed loan; plea, however,
that legislation for deferment of lien be recommended to
Congress and that judgment as to merits of Austrian loan be
postponed to a time when question of American
participation comes up for decision.
[Pg. 873
includes
portions
of Doc.
726 and
Doc.
727]
Feb. 9
(10)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Information that League Financial Committee is not
interesting itself in the present loan because it was not
requested by Austria to set up the machinery for a loan nor
is Austria taking any action that might jeopardize seriously
the country’s entire financial structure.
(Repeated to the Legation in Austria.)
[Pg. 876
is part
of Doc.
728]
Feb. 15
(9)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Austrian statement (text printed) setting forth
improvements in railways and posts which are
contemplated under the proposed loan.
(Request that copy be given to Austrian Minister.)
[Pg. 877
includes
portions
of Doc.
728 and
Doc.
729]
Feb. 16 From the Minister in Austria (tel.)

(10)
Information that the Government is beginning to be sharply
criticized by the opposition press, that it is known that the
United States is the sole remaining obstruction to the
negotiations and flotation of loan, and that the Chancellor
hopes that early congressional action will be deemed
justified by the information now furnished.
(Copies of this telegram and No. 9 of February 15 to
missions at London, Paris, and Berne.)
[Pg. 879
includes
portions
of Doc.
729,
Doc.
730,
and
Doc.
731]
Feb. 17
(12)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to clarify certain points in telegram No. 9 of
February 15; information that the Department is giving
immediate consideration to the matter.
[Pg. 879
includes
portions
of Doc.
729,
Doc.
730,
and
Doc.
731]
Feb. 18
(11)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information as requested in Department’s telegram No. 12
of February 17.
[Pg. 880
includes
portions
of Doc.
731 and
Doc.
732]
Feb. 21
(15)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Issuance by Secretary of the Treasury of press statement
summarizing Austrian loan situation and announcing that
recommendation will be made to Congress for legislation to
permit subordination of the American lien; instructions to
so advise appropriate officials informally.
(Instructions to repeat to London, Paris, and Berne.)
[Pg. 881
includes
portions
of Doc.
733 and
Doc.
734]
Mar. 5 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Disinclination of Morgan & Co. to go ahead with the
proposed loan unless suitable arrangements are made
regarding European relief creditors’ stipulation that their
agreement to subordinate lien is dependent upon Austria’s
agreement to a definite settlement of the relief credits and
unless reparation debt is postponed as well as subordinated.
[Pg. 881
includes
portions
of Doc.
733 and
Doc.
734]

Mar. 5
(16)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain correctness of report regarding
conditional agreement of European relief creditors to
subordination of their lien; to inquire status of relief debt
negotiations; and to state that U. S. Government expects
treatment on an equal footing with the other governments
involved.
[Pg. 882
includes
portions
of Doc.
734,
Doc.
735,
and
Doc.
736]
Mar. 5
(56)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Desire for information concerning report that European
relief creditors are making subordination of lien conditional
upon Austrian agreement to settle relief credits.
(Instructions to repeat reply to Legation in Austria.)
[Pg. 882
includes
portions
of Doc.
734,
Doc.
735,
and
Doc.
736]
Mar. 7
From the Austrian Minister
Proposal for funding of relief debt to all creditor nations,
including the United States.
[Pg. 883
includes
portions
of Doc.
736 and
Doc.
737]
Mar. 7 From the Austrian Minister
Memorandum stating that the Austrian Government does
not know of any change in status of case whereby European
creditor nations make their agreement to subordination of
lien dependent on funding of relief credits and advising that
there must be some misapprehension (text printed).
[Pg. 884
includes
portions
of Doc.
737 and
Doc.
738]
Mar. 7
(12)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Understanding in Vienna that subordination of relief bonds
lien becomes automatic assuming U. S. Government acts;
Foreign Office assurance that the French, Italian, Swiss,
and Netherlands Governments have indicated willingness
to accept Austrian proposal for settlement of relief debt
provided British Government will do the same. Inquiry
[Pg. 885
includes
portions
of Doc.
738 and
Doc.
739]

whether situation might not be fully met by passage of a
joint resolution similar to that of April 6, 1922, so that
Secretary of Treasury could exercise his discretion in light
of action of other interested powers.
Mar. 7 From the Minister in Austria
Concurrence in Austrian contention that the other relief
credit states cannot now in good faith make a prior relief
credit settlement a condition precedent to lien
subordination; reiteration of suggestion as to joint
resolution.
[Pg. 886
includes
portions
of Doc.
739 and
Doc.
740]
Mar. 9
(46)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Information that report in Department’s telegram No. 56 of
March 5 appears to be correct; understanding that
representatives of the interested governments will meet
soon.
(Repeated to Vienna.)
[Pg. 887
includes
portions
of Doc.
740,
Doc.
741,
and
Doc.
742]
Mar. 9
(66)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Inquiry whether there have been any recent developments
as to fixing Austrian reparations and liability for army
costs.
(Instructions to forward telegram and reply to missions at
Vienna and London.)
[Pg. 887
includes
portions
of Doc.
740,
Doc.
741,
and
Doc.
742]
Mar. 10
(17)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to mention informally to appropriate official
the general nature of the report contained in London
Embassy’s telegram No. 46 of March 9 and to telegraph
further comment.
[Pg. 888
includes
portions
of Doc.
742 and
Doc.
743]
Mar. 10
(58)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to have frank talk with Foreign Office
regarding meeting of the Control Committee to be held
[Pg. 889
is part

March 15, inquiring whether definite action in authorizing
proposed loan is to be conditioned on settlement of relief
indebtedness, or whether both propositions may be settled
simultaneously.
(Instructions to repeat to missions at Paris and Vienna.
Information that missions at London, Paris, and Vienna
should keep each other mutually informed.)
of Doc.
744]
Mar. 12
(13)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information that the Control Committee advanced their
meeting at Geneva to March 8 and approved investment
plan set forth in telegram No. 9 of February 15. Plan of
Relief Bonds Committee to meet at London on March 30;
understanding that governments have given assurances that
there is no disposition to force settlement of loan
authorization and relief indebtedness simultaneously.
[Pg. 890
includes
portions
of Doc.
745 and
Doc.
746]
Mar. 13
(48)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Understanding that Relief Bonds Committee will meet on
March 30 in effort to reach terms for settlement of
European relief debts, the settlement to provide that priority
of relief debts over reparations is maintained; observation
that approval of Reparation Commission will be required.
[Pg. 890
includes
portions
of Doc.
745 and
Doc.
746]
Mar. 13
(49)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Report of expectation that meeting of March 30 will accept
general terms of last Austrian offer for settlement of
European relief debts.
[Pg. 891
includes
portions
of Doc.
746,
Doc.
747,
and
Doc.
748]
Mar. 13
(64)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Absence of further developments in the fixing of Austrian
reparation liabilities; status of the several claims for army
costs; impression that European creditors are not likely to
stultify their efforts toward rehabilitation of Austria by
unduly burdensome reparation or other treaty payments.
[Pg. 891
includes
portions
of Doc.
746,
Doc.
747,
and

Doc.
748]
Mar. 14
(65)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Possibility that if Austria should begin payment on relief
bonds account in 1929 in accordance with funding
proposal, Italy and perhaps France might raise question of
obtaining some payment for army costs in view of priority
of army costs over the relief bonds.
[Pg. 893
includes
portions
of Doc.
748 and
Doc.
749]
Mar. 14
(18)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information that the situation is sufficiently clarified to
warrant forwarding to President Coolidge recommendation
that he ask Congress to grant to Secretary of the Treasury
authority to subordinate lien; authorization to inform
Chancellor.
[Pg. 894
includes
portions
of Doc.
749,
Doc.
750,
and
Doc.
751]
Mar. 15
(19)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to cable the dollar equivalent of the total
amount of relief indebtedness of Austria to the creditor
governments, including the United States.
[Pg. 894
includes
portions
of Doc.
749,
Doc.
750,
and
Doc.
751]
Mar. 16
(52)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Report that the Control Committee met March 8 and raised
no objection to proposed Austrian expenditure.
[Pg. 895
includes
portions
of Doc.
751,
Doc.
752,
and
Doc.
753]
Mar. 16
(14)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information that total principal amount of Austrian relief
indebtedness is equivalent of $119,846,673.80.
[Pg. 895
includes
portions

of Doc.
751,
Doc.
752,
and
Doc.
753]
Mar. 19 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Approval by the Secretaries of State and the Treasury of
procedure for the drafting of a bill to authorize
subordination of the lien and to authorize the latter to
conclude a debt-funding agreement with Austria.
[Pg. 896
includes
portions
of Doc.
754 and
Doc.
755]
Mar. 19
From the Austrian Minister
Assurance that the Austrian Government intends to make
an early settlement of the relief debt and will make a
settlement with the United States on a basis no less
favorable than that made with any of the other relief
creditor governments.
[Pg. 896
includes
portions
of Doc.
754 and
Doc.
755]
Mar. 20 President Coolidge to the Congress of the United States
Recommendation that Congress enact the legislation
proposed in enclosed report of the Secretary of the
Treasury, dated March 19 (text printed).
[Pg. 897
includes
portions
of Doc.
755 and
Doc.
756]
Mar. 20
(21)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions to inform the Chancellor of President
Coolidge’s recommendation to Congress.
[Pg. 901
includes
portions
of Doc.
756,
Doc.
757,
and
Doc.
758]
Mar. 22
From the Austrian Minister
Appreciation for the President’s action.
[Pg. 901
includes
portions
of Doc.

756,
Doc.
757,
and
Doc.
758]
Mar. 23 To the Minister in Austria
Observation that it is too early to predict the reaction in
Congress, but that the State and Treasury Departments will
do what is possible in helping the legislation through.
[Pg. 902
includes
portions
of Doc.
758,
Doc.
759,
and
Doc.
760]
Apr. 3
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Information from the Austrian Minister that at the meeting
of relief creditors, all governments except Italy agreed to
accept the Austrian proposal for settlement of relief debts;
his observation that as long as the United States has not yet
adopted the pending legislation, Italy could defer action
and not be isolated.
[Pg. 902
includes
portions
of Doc.
758,
Doc.
759,
and
Doc.
760]
Apr. 7
To the Austrian Minister
Assurance that the Department of State will continue its
collaboration with the Treasury Department in connection
with consideration of the proposed legislation.
[Pg. 903
includes
portions
of Doc.
760 and
Doc.
761]
Apr. 11 To the Honorable Willis C. Hawley
Importance, from the standpoint of international relations,
of early and favorable action on the proposed legislation.
[Pg. 904
includes
portions
of Doc.
761 and
Doc.
762]
Apr. 18 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Telephonic advice to the Austrian Minister that if the
proposed legislation were adopted, the Secretary of the
[Pg. 905
includes

Treasury would not have authority to settle with Austria on
the basis now under consideration unless Italy should
accept similar terms.
portions
of Doc.
762 and
Doc.
763]
May 21
(128)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Opinion that draft decision of Reparation Commission
concerning Austrian application for exception of certain
revenues from first charge under Treaty of St. Germain is
satisfactory; inquiry, however, whether reference should be
made in preamble to the legislation pending in Congress of
the United States. Request for instructions.
[Pg. 906
includes
portions
of Doc.
763 and
Doc.
764]
May 22
(143)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Opinion that there would be no advantage in mentioning
the United States in preamble or decision.
[Pg. 907
includes
portions
of Doc.
764,
Doc.
765,
and
Doc.
766]
May
(137)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that the Italian delegation on the Reparation
Commission blocked any action on Austrian application,
and that further consideration of question has been
postponed to next meeting to be held June 23; opinion that
the Italian reasons given are only a pretext and that there
are other reasons back of their attitude.
[Pg. 907
includes
portions
of Doc.
764,
Doc.
765,
and
Doc.
766]
May 29
(139)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Understanding that the Italian representative on Relief
Bonds Committee now opposes Austrian loan on much the
same grounds as those advanced in Reparation Commission
meeting.
[Pg. 909
includes
portions
of Doc.
767,
Doc.
768,
Doc.
769,
and

Doc.
770]
May 29
(27)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Adjournment of Congress without action on proposed
legislation.
[Pg. 909
includes
portions
of Doc.
767,
Doc.
768,
Doc.
769,
and
Doc.
770]
May 31
(24)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Report of keen disappointment and some despondency in
official quarters.
[Pg. 909
includes
portions
of Doc.
767,
Doc.
768,
Doc.
769,
and
Doc.
770]
June 1
(28)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Authorization to point out that proposed legislation did not
get as far as floor of either House owing to the pressure of
pending legislation toward close of the session, but that it
will be taken up at December session.
[Pg. 909
includes
portions
of Doc.
767,
Doc.
768,
Doc.
769,
and
Doc.
770]
June 2
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Information that the Italian Ambassador called on June 1 to
say officially that Italy feels the arrangement to make a
further loan to Austria is not satisfactory.
[Pg. 910
includes
portions
of Doc.
770,
Doc.

771,
and
Doc.
772]
June 4
(25)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Parliamentary declaration by the Chancellor with regard to
status of the proposed loan, in which he attributed Italy’s
attitude in Reparation Commission to the strained relations
still existing between the two countries.
[Pg. 910
includes
portions
of Doc.
770,
Doc.
771,
and
Doc.
772]
June 14 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Conversation in which the Austrian Minister advised that
he now felt that it would probably be best to conclude a
definite debt settlement with the United States, and was
told that the matter would be reviewed.
(Footnote: Similar expression by the Austrian Minister to
the Assistant Secretary of State on June 21.)
[Pg. 911
includes
portions
of Doc.
772,
Doc.
773,
and
Doc.
774]
June 21
(691)
To the Minister in Austria
Desire of U. S. Government to avoid, if possible, sharing
with Italy the responsibility for blocking proposed loan;
instructions to continue to report any developments of
interest which may have a bearing on U. S. course of
action.
(Similar instructions to missions at Rome, Paris, and
London.)
[Pg. 911
includes
portions
of Doc.
772,
Doc.
773,
and
Doc.
774]
July 27
(1798)
From the Ambassador in Italy
Information that there has been no change in Italian
Government’s attitude.
[Pg. 912
includes
portions
of Doc.
774,
Doc.
775,
and
Doc.
776]

Aug.
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Conversation in which the Austrian Minister stated
expectation of an early adjustment of the difficulties with
Italy which led to blocking of the loan proposal and
inquired whether it would not be better to drop the bill
introduced at last session of Congress and submit the
definitive terms of a debt settlement; Economic Adviser’s
reply that Austrian Government should submit full data in
support of any proposal it might make.
[Pg. 912
includes
portions
of Doc.
774,
Doc.
775,
and
Doc.
776]
Aug.
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Information from the Austrian Minister, in conversation on
August 27, that Vienna has word that the Italians will not
make any trouble, but that he feels that Congress will not
pass on the legislation unless a debt-funding agreement has
been made; his inquiry whether Austria should send a debt
funding commission.
[Pg. 913
includes
portions
of Doc.
776 and
Doc.
777]
Sept.
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Conversation with the Austrian Minister who stated that he
would soon submit an exhaustive economic and financial
study in support of the proposed debt settlement and was
advised that the Department did not believe that his
previous suggestion for an Austrian debt funding
commission was desirable; the Austrian Minister’s further
statement that he had already recommended that Dr.
Schüller be sent and that it would be difficult now to
recommend against his trip.
(Footnote: The American Minister to Austria and Mr.
Livesey of the Office of the Economic Adviser were also
present.)
[Pg. 914
includes
portions
of Doc.
777 and
Doc.
778]
Oct. 22
(1992)
From the Minister in Austria
Reasons why the Austrian Government desires that Dr.
Schüller go to Washington.
[Pg. 915
includes
portions
of Doc.
778 and
Doc.
779]
Nov. 14 From the Austrian Minister

(158/R) Formal proposal for the final settlement of Austrian relief
bond indebtedness to the United States.
[Pg. 917
includes
portions
of Doc.
779 and
Doc.
780]
Nov. 20 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Report of the interview at which Austrian Minister
presented Dr. Schüller to the Secretary of State.
[Pg. 921
includes
portions
of Doc.
780,
Doc.
781,
and
Doc.
782]
Nov. 20 Memorandum by the Economic Adviser
Conversation with the Austrian Minister and Dr. Schüller in
which the latter conveyed the information that Austria
considers the relief debt agreement negotiated June 15 with
Denmark, France, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, and Switzerland, to be now in force, and that it
will begin payments on January 1, 1929, at the same time
making corresponding payments to the United States and to
Italy.
[Pg. 921
includes
portions
of Doc.
780,
Doc.
781,
and
Doc.
782]
Dec. 7
(40)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Submission of the proposed debt agreement to the House
Ways and Means Committee; Committee’s consideration of
amended joint resolution authorizing subordination of the
lien in favor of the proposed loan and the conclusion of a
debt agreement set forth in general terms in the resolution.
[Pg. 923
includes
portions
of Doc.
782,
Doc.
783,
and
Doc.
784]
Dec. 12
(42)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Adoption by the House, December 11, of the amended
resolution.
to the Embassy in France, stating that the joint resolution
[Pg. 923
includes
portions
of Doc.
782,
Doc.

passed Congress and was approved by the President on
February 4, 1929, that Austria made the payment due
January 1, 1929, and that the agreement will not be signed
until Reparation Commission has taken action indicated in
paragraph 6 of the agreement and the Secretary of the
Treasury is satisfied that such action is adequate to
guarantee security and priority over the costs of reparation.)
783,
and
Doc.
784]
TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP, COMMERCE AND CONSULAR RIGHTS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRIA, SIGNED JUNE 19,
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
May 12
(459)
To the Minister in Austria
Instructions to renew negotiations with regard to the
proposed treaty of friendship, commerce and consular
rights; U. S. views on changes to be made in draft and on
Austrian counter proposals concerning articles 1 to 6.
924 [Pg.
924 is part
of Doc.
785]
July 20
(1106)
From the Minister in Austria
Information that understanding has been reached with Dr.
Schüller of the Foreign Office concerning practically all
matters in controversy in the first six articles.
932 [Pg.
932 is part
of Doc.
786]
Dec. 1
(527)
To the Minister in Austria
Instructions with regard to articles 7 to 14.
937 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 786
and Doc.
787]
Feb. 11
(552)
To the Minister in Austria
Continuation of instructions; consideration of articles 15
to 25.
943 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 787
and Doc.
788]
Feb. 24
(556)
To the Minister in Austria
Comments on results of negotiations regarding the first
956 [Pg.
includes

six articles.
portions of
Doc. 788
and Doc.
789]
Apr. 2
(566)
To the Minister in Austria
Supplementary instructions concerning articles 7 and 25.
960 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 789
and Doc.
790]
Apr. 30
(1372)
From the Minister in Austria
Acknowledgment of receipt of full powers to sign treaty
as finally approved by Department; report of progress of
negotiations.
965 [Pg.
965 is part
of Doc.
791]
June 23
(602)
To the Minister in Austria
Supplementary instructions; hope that steady progress
will be made so that treaty may be signed in time for
submission to the Senate at the December session.
969 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 791
and Doc.
792]
June 30
(605)
To the Minister in Austria
Additional instructions regarding articles 11 and 12.
972 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 792
and Doc.
793]
July 11
(1468)
From the Minister in Austria
Report that negotiations are practically concluded; review
of the chief articles which have been the subject of the
most controversy; hope that Department can meet
974 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 793
and Doc.
794]
Sept.
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Desire for telegraphic instructions regarding articles 7, 11,
and 12, which alone remain open for discussion.
984 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 794,
Doc. 795,
and Doc.
796]
Sept.
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
984 [Pg.

13 (15) Approval of text as it now stands, with exception of
soon as possible.
includes
portions of
Doc. 794,
Doc. 795,
and Doc.
796]
Sept.
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions with regard to article 7, relating to most-
favored-nation treatment of commerce.
985 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 796
and Doc.
797]
Sept.
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Comments on discussions with Dr. Schüller regarding
article 7.
986 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 797
and Doc.
798]
Oct. 4
(1554)
From the Minister in Austria
Foreign Office suggestion with regard to certificates of
identity for commercial travelers provided under article
11; report that another conference has been held with
Austrian officials regarding article 7; desire that
Department review suggestions contained in telegram No.
56 of September 26 to see whether they do not to all
intents and purposes secure what the United States
desires.
987 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 798
and Doc.
799]
Mar.
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions for certain revisions of article 7.
990 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 799
and Doc.
800]
Apr. 12
(24)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Views on article 11, and suggested provision to meet
Austrian views; understanding that no questions are now
before the Department in respect of which instructions
have been requested.
991 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 801
and Doc.
802]

Apr. 20
(18)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information that revised draft of article 7 as authorized by
the Department has finally been accepted; desire for early
instructions on minor points regarding identification
certificates for commercial travelers and duration and
termination of the treaty, so that negotiations can be
completed and the treaty signed in May.
991 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 801
and Doc.
802]
Apr. 24
(20)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Austrian preference for new phraseology in article 11;
their willingness to accept term of 7 years for duration of
treaty.
992 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 802
and Doc.
803]
Apr. 27
(25)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Gratification at Austrian acceptance of article 7;
information that Department’s suggestions as to
identification certificates are regarded as essential;
Austrian negotiator prefers.
993 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 803,
Doc. 804,
and Doc.
805]
May 9
(23)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Revision of article 11 pursuant to Department’s telegram
year term. Information that Cabinet Council is taking the
necessary formalities and that treaty will probably be
signed in the current month.
993 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 803,
Doc. 804,
and Doc.
805]
June 5
(29)
To the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Instructions, if treaty is not yet signed and if agreeable to
Austria, to revise portion of article 25 relating to
termination of sixth paragraph of article 7; information
that Department has altered policy toward Senate
reservation to article 7 in treaty with Germany, and wishes
to include provision for national treatment of snipping,
obligatory for full term of treaty.
994 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 805,
Doc. 806,
and Doc.
807]
June 16
(28)
From the Minister in Austria (tel.)
Information that the changes indicated in Department’s
telegram No. 29 of June 5 have been made and that the
994 [Pg.
includes
portions of

treaty will be signed June 18.
(Footnote: Telegraphic advice from the Minister that the
treaty was signed on June 19.)
Doc. 805,
Doc. 806,
and Doc.
807]
June 19 Treaty Between the United States of America and Austria
Of friendship, commerce and consular rights.
(Bracketed note: Information that a Senate reservation on
February 11, 1929, was accepted by both Governments in
an exchange of notes dated January 20, 1931.)
995 [Pg.
995 is part
of Doc.
808]
Jan. 20
From the American Minister in Austria to the Austrian
Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
Hope that Austrian Government will accept the
reservation regarding duration of provision for national
shipping contained in article 7 as specified in Senate
resolution of February 11, 1929, giving advice and
consent to ratification (text printed).
[Pg. 1006
includes
portions of
Doc. 808
and Doc.
809]
Jan. 20 From the Austrian Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs to the American Minister in Austria
Declaration of agreement with Senate reservation, subject
to ratification.
[Pg. 1007
includes
portions of
Doc. 809,
Doc. 810,
and Doc.
811]
Jan. 20 Supplementary Agreement Between the United States of
America and Austria
Providing that the treaty may be terminated on February
11, 1935, or any date thereafter, upon one year’s notice by
either party.
[Pg. 1007
includes
portions of
Doc. 809,
Doc. 810,
and Doc.
811]
TREATIES OF ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRIA, SIGNED AUGUST 16, 1928
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Mar.
To the Minister in Austria
Information that drafts of proposed treaties of
includes portions of Doc.
811 and Doc. 812]

arbitration and conciliation have been handed
to the Austrian Minister.
May 3
From the Austrian Minister
Readiness of Austria to conclude the proposed
treaties of arbitration and concilation.
includes portions of Doc.
813 and Doc. 814]
Aug.
Treaty Between the United States of America
and Austria
Of arbitration.
includes portions of Doc.
813 and Doc. 814]
Aug.
Treaty Between the United States of America
and Austria
Of conciliation.
includes portions of Doc.
814 and Doc. 815]
DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO ENTER INTO A TREATY WITH AUSTRIA GRANTING TO IMMIGRANTS EQUAL RIGHTS
WITH CITIZENS IN MATTERS OF LEGAL PROTECTION
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
July 21
From the Austrian Minister
Memorandum (text printed) stating desire of the Austrian
Government to enter into a convention assuring legal
protection in certain cases to the citizens of both countries.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
815 and
Doc.
816]
Feb. 10
To the Austrian Minister
Memorandum (text printed) stating that the U. S.
Government is disinclined to enter into the convention
suggested, in view of the fact that even in absence of treaty
provisions aliens in the United States are placed upon an
equality with American citizens in the matter of legal
remedies and also because the questions of procedure in the
courts of the different States are matters to be determined in
accordance with the laws of the several States.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
816 and
Doc.
817]
BOLIVIA

GOOD OFFICES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE IN BEHALF OF THE STANDARD OIL COMPANY IN ESTABLISHING RADIO STATION AT
YACUIBA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
June 12
(12)
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Desire of Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey to establish a
radio station at Yacuiba and their request to Bolivian
Government for assignment of short wave channels;
instructions to advise the Foreign Minister informally that
the Department would be glad to see this additional
channel of communication established between Bolivia
and the United States.
[Pg. 1018
includes
portions
of Doc.
818 and
Doc. 819]
Aug.
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Signature of Executive decree, August 23, authorizing the
Standard Oil Co. to construct a radio station at Yacuiba.
[Pg. 1018
includes
portions
of Doc.
818 and
Doc. 819]
BRAZIL
DISAPPROVAL BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OF PROPOSED REFUNDING IN THE AMERICAN MARKET OF STATE OF SÃO PAULO
LOAN OF 1926
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Feb. 2
From Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins &
Sons. New York
Desire for approval of proposed refunding in the
American market of the loan of the State of São
Paulo which was brought out in London in 1926
through the São Paulo Coffee Institute.
is part of Doc.
820]
Feb. 16 To Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins & Sons,
New York
includes portions

Inability to modify position taken by U. S.
Government prior to flotation of the loan of 1926
that the issue in the American market of a loan in
connection with coffee valorization would not be
viewed with favor.
of Doc. 820, Doc.
821, and Doc.
822]
REFUSAL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE TO DISAPPROVE LOAN TO STATE OF SÃO PAULO BECAUSE OF CLAIM OF AMERICAN
FIRM AGAINST STATE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
Mar.
To the Consul at São Paulo (tel.)
Request by Baker, Kellogg & Co. and Ulen & Co. that the
Department use its informal good offices to endeavor to
induce State of São Paulo to deliver an issue of vicinal
bonds to the Itararé-Fartura Railroad which were assigned
by the railroad to the American interests as security for a
loan; instructions to discuss matter informally with the
appropriate authorities, expressing hope that a mutually
satisfactory solution may be reached in the near future.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
820,
Doc.
821,
and
Doc.
822]
Apr. 2 From the Consul at São Faulo (tel.)
Information from the State Secretary of Fazenda that the
bonds have not been issued because the State has been
judicially notified by another creditor that bonds should be
delivered to him, and that the matter is now being studied
by State’s legal adviser.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
822 and
Doc.
823]
May 3
(15)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Intention of the American interests, if State will not agree to
make a satisfactory settlement, to bring influence to bear on
bankers’ associations both in the United States and in
Europe to prevent flotation of future loans by the State, on
the ground that it does not live up to its financial
obligations; instructions to express to Brazilian President
the hope that for the best interests of all a satisfactory
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
824 and
Doc.
825]

settlement may be reached, but to be careful not to appear
to be making any threats on behalf of the bankers.
June 19 From Speyer & Co.
Hope that the Department will have no objection to a
proposed flotation in the United States of an international
loan to the State of São Paulo.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
824 and
Doc.
825]
June 21 To Speyer & Co.
Nonobjection to proposed loan.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
825 and
Doc.
826]
June 23
(26)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Difficulty of securing information for American interests in
regard to the Itararé-Fartura Railway matter because of the
antagonism which their peremptory methods have
developed among members of the São Paulo Government;
information that illness of the President has prevented
conferences with him.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
826 and
Doc.
827]
June 29
(23)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Belief that as soon as the President’s health permits the
Ambassador should take action suggested in Department’s
telegram No. 15 of May 3.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
828,
Doc.
829,
and
Doc.
830]
July 10 From Speyer & Co.
Information that American portion of the loan has been
reduced from $25,000,000 to $15,000,000.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.

828,
Doc.
829,
and
Doc.
830]
July 17 From Field, Glore & Co., International Acceptance Bank,
Baker, Kellogg & Co., and Ulen & Company
Inquiry whether the Department would give its approval to
the reported new loan to State of São Paulo when the
borrower is known to be in default.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
828,
Doc.
829,
and
Doc.
830]
July 20
(3039)
From the Ambassador in Brazil
Willingness of Brazilian President to endeavor to interest
President of São Paulo in affording some assistance to the
American groups concerned with the Itararé-Fartura
Railway; Ambassador’s inability to prophesy how
successful the representations may be, in view of the threat
contained in bankers’ telegram of March 1 (excerpt
printed).
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
830 and
Doc.
831]
July 28 To Field, Glore & Co., International Acceptance Bank,
Baker, Kellogg & Co., and Lien & Company
Inability to establish any connection between bankers’
grievance against the State of São Paulo and the flotation of
a loan of that State.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
831 and
Doc.
832]
ASSISTANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE IN PROTECTING PATENT RIGHTS OF THE SYMINGTON COMPANY IN BRAZIL FROM
INFRINGEMENT BY BELGIAN FIRM
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
From the Chargé in Belgium

Feb. 29
(92)
Information that the Symington Co. alleges that the Société
Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux is
infringing their patents on railway equipment in connection
with order for Brazilian railroads. Opinion that the action of
the Belgian firm contravenes the convention for the
protection of industrial property of June 2, 1911, to which
the United States and Belgium are parties. Instructions to
inquire of Foreign Office whether it will not be possible for
Belgian authorities to take action with a view to preventing
violation of treaty rights of U. S. citizens.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
832 and
Doc.
833]
Mar. 9
(1342)
To the Ambassador in Brazil
Information similar to that telegraphed on February 29 to
the Chargé in Belgium. Instructions to bring the matter
urgently to the attention of the Foreign Office, with the
request that the shipment in question be prevented from
entering Brazil until the Symington rights under the laws of
Brazil and the patent convention of 1910 have been
recognized and due compensation paid them by the
infringers of the patents.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
833 and
Doc.
834]
Mar.
From the General Counsel of The Symington Company
Advice that the Belgian company has recognized the
validity of the Brazilian patents owned by the Symington
Company and has agreed to pay royalties; expression of
appreciation for the Department’s assistance.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
834,
Doc.
835,
and
Doc.
836]
Mar.
(2978)
From the Ambassador in Brazil
Satisfactory settlement of the Symington difficulties;
expression of appreciation by the company’s representatives
in Rio de Janeiro for the assistance rendered by the
commercial attaché.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
834,
Doc.
835,
and

Doc.
836]
Apr. 5
(1355)
To the Ambassador in Brazil
Receipt of letter from the General Counsel of the
Symington Company dated March 22, stating that matter
has been satisfactorily settled. Instructions to take no further
action in the matter.
(Sent also, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the
Ambassador in Belgium.)
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
836,
Doc.
837,
and
Doc.
838]
Apr. 23
(234)
From the Ambassador in Belgium
Foreign Office note of April 20 (text printed) replying to
Embassy’s note sent in accordance with instruction No. 92
of February 29, in which Belgian Government advises that
the matter is one of private law rather than violation of the
international convention, and states that it could only
interpose its good offices in order to obtain eventually a
friendly settlement.
[Pg.
includes
portions
of Doc.
836,
Doc.
837,
and
Doc.
838]
BULGARIA
DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO PARTICIPATE IN AGREEMENT REGARDING APPORTIONMENT OF BULGARIAN REPARATION
PAYMENTS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
May 21
(841)
From the Greek Minister
Request that the powers signatory to the agreement of
January 14, 1925, regarding distribution of the Dawes
annuities, take steps to effect a new apportionment of
Bulgarian payments; reservation of right to request that
the Greek share be increased.
1035 [Pg.
1035 is part
of Doc. 839]
June 12 To the Greek Minister
Information that the formal relationship of the U. S.
1036 [Pg.

Government to the proposed action is receiving
consideration.
includes
portions of
Doc. 839,
Doc. 840,
and Doc.
841]
June 28 From the Ambassador in France
Concurrence in Department’s opinion that U. S.
Government would not wish to sign any new distribution
agreement because the United States does not participate
in Bulgarian payments.
1036 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 839,
Doc. 840,
and Doc.
841]
July 11
(187)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that protocol has been prepared by British,
French, and Italian representatives granting to Greece a
special advance from the Bulgarian blocked payments;
request for authorization to advise General Secretary that
the United States does not feel called upon to sign a
protocol drawn up following the proposed discussions.
1038 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 842
and Doc.
843]
July 12
(211)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Authorization as requested in telegram No. 187 of July
11.
1038 [Pg.
includes
portions of
Doc. 842
and Doc.
843]

General:
Negotiation of the treaty (Documents 1-135)
Notifications of adherence (Documents 136-197)
Preliminaries (Documents 356-363)
Conventions (Documents 364-369)
Bolivia and Paraguay (Documents 437-482)
Colombia and Nicaragua (Documents 483-492)
Dominican Republic and Haiti (Documents 493-499)
Guatemala and Honduras (Documents 500-585)
Pan American Airways, Incorporated (Documents 586-630)
Huff-Daland Dusters and Keystone Airplane Corporation
(Documents 631-636)
Proposed air mail service between the United States and
Chile (Documents 637-645)
Department of Commerce flight—Demonstrations by Curtiss
Company
and
Consolidated
Aircraft
Corporation
(Documents 646-660)
Boeing Airplane Company and Pratt and Whitney Motor
Corporation (Documents 661-672)

Tri-Motors Airways concession in Argentina (Documents
Possible extension of American air lines to Venezuela
(Documents 677-684)

Treaty for the renunciation of war as
an instrument of national policy,
signed at Paris, August 27, 19281
ff. See also Department of State Publication No. 468, Treaty for the
Renunciation of War: Text of the Treaty, Notes Exchanged, Instruments of
Ratification and of Adherence, and Other Papers (Washington, Government
Printing Office, 1933).
Negotiation of the treaty
[1] The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 6, 1928.
[2] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[3] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)
Washington, January 11, 1928.
[4] The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 21, 1928.
[5] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, February 14, 1928.

[6] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)
Washington, February 27, 1928.
[7] Memorandum by Mr. Spencer Phenix, Assistant to the Under
Secretary of State, of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State
and the French Ambassador (Claudel), February 27, 1928
February 27, 1928
[8] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[9] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[10] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[11] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[12] The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 30, 1928.
[13] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[14] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[15] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[16] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[17] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[18] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[19] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[20] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[21] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[22] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds) of a
Conversation With the Counselor of the French Embassy (Sartiges),
April 20, 1928
April 20, 1928

[23] French Draft of Treaty for the Condemnation and Renunciation of
War as am, Instrument of National Policy
[24] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[25] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[26] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[27] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[28] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[29] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[30] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[31] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[32] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[33] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[34] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[35] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[36] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[37] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[38] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[39] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

[40] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[41] The Ambassador in Cheat Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[42] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[43] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[44] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[45] The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State

[46] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[47] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[48] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Canada (Phillips)
[49] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[50] The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State

[51] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[52] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[53] The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[54] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Poland (Stetson)
[55] The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[56] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State

[57] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[58] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[59] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, May 25, 1928.
[60] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[61] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[62] The Minister in the Irish Free State (Sterling) to the Secretary of
State

[63] The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[64] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, 3 June, 1928.
[65] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[66] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
Washington, June 9, 1928.
[67] The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[68] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds) of a
Conversation With the Japanese Chargé (Sawada), June 12, 1928

June 12, 1928
[69] The British Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , 18 June, 1928.
[70] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[71] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[72] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[73] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Marriner)
[Washington,] June 23, 1928.

[74] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds)
[Washington,] June 23, 1928.
[75] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[76] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[77] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
Washington, June 29, 1928—noon.
[78] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[79] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State

[80] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[81] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[82] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[83] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)
[84] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
Washington, July 6, 1928.
[85] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[86] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[87] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[88] The Minister in the Irish Free State (Sterling) to the Secretary of
State
[89] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[90] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[91] The Chargé in Canada (Baldwin) to the Secretary of State

[92] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[93] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[94] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[95] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[96] The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[97] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Marriner)
[Washington,] July 19, 1928.

[98] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
[99] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[100] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, July 23, 1928—noon.
[101] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
[102] The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
Washington, July 26, 1928.
[103] The Ambassador in Frame (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[104] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[105] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[106] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[107] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[108] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
[109] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[110] The Minister in Portugal (Dearing) to the Secretary of State
[111] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[112] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[113] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Dearing)
[114] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[115] The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State

[116] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[117] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[118] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[119] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[120] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[121] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[122] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[123] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[124] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
[125] The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Representatives
[126] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, August 16, 1928—midnight.
[127] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)

[128] The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State
[129] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[130] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
[131] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[132] President Coolidge to President Downergue
Washington, August 26, 1928.
[133] Treaty Between the United States and Other Powers, Signed at
Paris, August 27, 1928
Done at Paris, the twenty-seventh day of August in the year one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-eight.

Treaty Series No. 796
[134] President Doumergue to President Coolidge
[135] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Acting Secretary of
State

[Document 1]
The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, January 6, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In reply to the letter which Your Excellency kindly
addressed to me on the 28th of December last,2 I have the honor to inform
you that M. Briand, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic, has
authorized me to transmit to you the attached letter.
Please accept [etc.]
CLAUDEL
[Enclosure—Translation]
The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: By a letter of December 28th last your Excellency was
kind enough to make known the sentiments of the Government of the
United States concerning the suggestion of a treaty proposed by the
Government of the Republic in the month of June 1927,3 with a view to the
condemnation of war and the renunciation thereof as an instrument of
national policy between France and the United States.
According to your Excellency, the two governments, instead of limiting
themselves to a bilateral treaty, would contribute more fully to the peace of
the world by uniting their efforts to obtain the adhesion of all the principal
powers of the world to a declaration renouncing war as an instrument of
their national policy.

Such a declaration, if it were subscribed to by the principal powers, could
not fail to be an impressive example to all the nations of the world and
might very well lead them to subscribe in their turn to the same pact, thus
bringing into effect as among all the nations of the world an arrangement
which at first was only suggested as between France and the United States.
The Government of the United States, therefore, would be disposed to join
the Government of the Republic with a view to concluding a treaty between
the principal powders of the world which, open to the signature of all
nations, would condemn war, would contain a declaration to renounce it as
an instrument of national policy and would substitute therefor the pacific
settlement of disputes between nations.
Your Excellency added that if the Government of the Republic agrees thus
to join the Government of the United States and the other principal powers
of the world in an appropriate multilateral treaty, your Excellency would be
happy to undertake immediately conversations leading to the elaboration of
a draft inspired by the suggestions of M. Briand and destined to be
proposed jointly by France and the United States to the other nations of the
world.
The Government of the Republic appreciated sincerely the favorable
reception given by the Government of the United States to the proposal of
M. Briand. It believes that the procedure suggested by your Excellency and
carried out in a manner agreeable to public opinion and to the popular
sentiment of the different nations would appear to be of such nature as to
satisfy the views of the French Government. It would be advantageous
immediately to sanction the general character of this procedure by affixing
the signatures of France and the United States.
I am authorized to inform you that the Government of the Republic is
disposed to join with the Government of the United States in proposing for
agreement by all nations a treaty to be signed at the present time by France
and the United States and under the terms of which the high contracting
parties shall renounce all war of aggression and shall declare that for the
settlement of differences of whatever nature which may arise between them
they will employ all pacific means. The high contracting parties will engage
to bring this treaty to the attention of all States and invite them to adhere.

The Government of the Republic is convinced that the principles thus
proclaimed cannot but be received with gratitude by the entire world, and it
does not doubt that the efforts of the two governments to insure universal
adoption will be crowned with full success.
Accept [etc.]
CLAUDEL

[Document 2]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)4
An English translation of the proposal which Briand submitted to me last
June reads as follows:
[Here follows the text of the draft pact of perpetual friendship contained in
Foreign Relations , 1927, volume II, page 615.]
Please deliver to the Foreign Office for the consideration of the
Government to which you are accredited a memorandum containing the
foregoing text and the text of my reply5 which was telegraphed to you in the
Department’s circular, December 28, 8 p.m.
KELLOGG
4 The same telegram was sent to the Embassies in Germany, Italy, and
Japan.

[Document 3]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)
WASHINGTON, January 11, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: In the reply which your Government was good enough to make to
my note of December 28, 1927, His Excellency the Minister of Foreign
Affairs summarized briefly the proposal presented by the Government of
the United States, and stated that it appeared to be of such a nature as to
satisfy the views of the French Government. In these circumstances he
added that the Government of the Republic was disposed to join with the
Government of the United States in proposing for acceptance by all nations
a treaty to be signed at the present time by France and the United States,
under the terms of which the High Contracting Parties should renounce all
wars of aggression and should declare that they would employ all peaceful
means for the settlement of any differences that might arise between them.
The Government of the United States is deeply gratified that the
Government of France has seen its way clear to accept in principle its
proposal that, instead of the bilateral pact originally suggested by M.
Briand, there be negotiated among the principal powers of the world an
equivalent multilateral treaty open to signature by all nations. There can be
no doubt that such a multilateral treaty would be a far more effective
instrument for the promotion of pacific relations than a mere agreement
between France and the United States alone, and if the present efforts of the
two Governments achieve ultimate success, they will have made a
memorable contribution to the cause of world peace.
While the Government of France and the Government of the United States
are now closely in accord so far as the multilateral feature of the proposed
treaty is concerned, the language of M. Briand’s note of January 5, 1928, is
in two respects open to an interpretation not in harmony with the idea which
the Government of the United States had in mind when it submitted to you
the proposition outlined in my note of December 28, 1927. In the first

place, it appears to be the thought of your Government that the proposed
multilateral treaty be signed in the first instance by France and the United
States alone and then submitted to the other Powers for their acceptance. In
the opinion of the Government of the United States this procedure is open
to the objection that a treaty, even though acceptable to France and the
United States, might for some reason be unacceptable to one of the other
great Powers. In such event the treaty could not come into force and the
present efforts of France and the United States would be rendered abortive.
This unhappy result would not necessarily follow a disagreement as to
terminology arising prior to the definitive approval by any Government of a
proposed form of treaty, since it is by no means unreasonable to suppose
that the views of the Governments concerned could be accommodated
through informal preliminary discussions and a text devised which would
be acceptable to them all. Both France and the United States are too deeply
interested in the success of their endeavors for the advancement of peace to
be willing to jeopardize the ultimate accomplishment of their purpose by
incurring unnecessary risk of disagreement with the other Powers
concerned, and I have no doubt that your Government will be entirely
agreeable to joining with the Government of the United States and the
Governments of the other Powers concerned for the purpose of reaching a
preliminary agreement as to the language to be used in the proposed treaty,
thus obviating all danger of confronting the other Powers with a definitive
treaty unacceptable to them. As indicated below, the Government of the
United States would be pleased if the Government of France would agree
that the draft treaty submitted by M. Briand last June should be made the
basis of such preliminary discussions.
In the second place, and this point is closely related to what goes before, M.
Briand’s reply of January 5, 1928, in expressing the willingness of the
Government of France to join with the Government of the United States in
proposing a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war, apparently
contemplates that the scope of such treaty should be limited to wars of
aggression. The form of treaty which your Government submitted to me last
June which was the subject of my note of December 28, 1927, contained no
such qualification or limitation. On the contrary it provided unequivocally
for the renunciation by the High Contracting Parties of all war as an
instrument of national policy in the following terms:

“ARTICLE 1
The High Contracting Powers solemnly declare, in the name of
the French people and the people of the United States of America,
that they condemn recourse to war and renounce it respectively as
an instrument of their national policy towards each other.
ARTICLE 2
The settlement or the solution of all disputes or conflicts, of
whatever nature or of whatever origin they may be, which may
arise between France and the United States of America, shall
never be sought by either side except by pacific means.”
I am not informed of the reasons which have led your Government to
suggest this modification of its original proposal, but I earnestly hope that it
is of no particular significance and that it is not to be taken as an indication
that the Government of France will find itself unable to join with the
Government of the United States in proposing, as suggested above, that the
original formula submitted by M. Briand which envisaged the unqualified
renunciation of all war as an instrument of national policy be made the
subject of preliminary discussions with the other great Powers for the
purpose of reaching a tentative agreement as to the language to be used in
the proposed treaty.
If your Government is agreeable to the plan outlined above and is willing
that further discussions of the terms of the proposed multilateral treaty be
based upon the original proposal submitted to me by M. Briand last June, I
have the honor to suggest that the Government of France join with the
Government of the United States in a communication to the British,
German, Italian and Japanese Governments transmitting the text of M.
Briand’s original proposal and copies of the subsequent correspondence
between the Governments of France and the United States for their
consideration and comment, it being understood, of course, that these
preliminary discussions would in no way commit any of the participating
Governments pending the conclusion of a definitive treaty.
Accept [etc.]

Frank B. Kettoce

[Document 4]
The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, January 21, 1928.
Mr. SECRETARY OF STATE: Your Excellency was pleased to inform me in your note of
the 11th instant, of the considerations suggested to you by my letter of
Government has asked me to express to you its satisfaction at the
harmonizing, thanks to your Excellency, of the views of the two
Governments concerning the best method of accomplishing a project upon
the essential principles of which they apparently are in agreement.
The original French proposal of June, 1927, contemplating an act confined
to France and the United States, appeared to the French Government to be
both desirable and feasible by reason of the historical relations between the
two Republics.
The American Government was only willing, however, to embody the
declaration proposed by the French Government in the preamble of the
Franco-American Arbitration Convention now in process of renewal,6 and
considered on the other hand, for reasons of its own which the French
Government has not failed to take into account, that it would be opportune
to broaden this manifestation against war and to make it the subject of a
separate act in which the other Powers would be invited to participate.
The Government of the Republic was not opposed to this expansion of its
original plan, but it could not but realize, and it felt bound to point out that
the new negotiation as proposed would be more complex and likely to meet
with various difficulties.

The question as to whether there would be any advantage in having such an
instrument, of a multipartite nature, signed in the first place by France and
the United States, or else first elaborated by certain of the principal Powers
of the World and then presented to all for their signature, is essentially one
of procedure.
The Government of the Republic offered a suggestion upon this point only
because of its desire more speedily and more surely to achieve the result
which it seeks in common with the United States. This is tantamount to
saying that it is ready to concur in any method which may appear to be the
most practicable.
There is, however, a situation of fact to which my Government has
requested me to draw your particular attention.
The American Government cannot be unaware of the fact that the great
majority of the Powers of the world, and among them most of the principal
Powers, are making the organization and strengthening of peace the object
of common efforts carried on within the framework of the League of
Nations. They are already bound to one another by a covenant placing them
under reciprocal obligations, as well as by agreements such as those signed
at Locarno in October 1925,7 or by international conventions relative to
guarantees of neutrality, all of which engagements impose upon them duties
which they cannot contravene.
In particular, your Excellency knows that all States members of the League
of Nations represented at Geneva in the month of September last, adopted,
in a joint resolution tending to the condemnation of war,8 certain principles
based on the respect for the reciprocal rights and duties of each. In that
resolution the Powers were led to specify that the action to be condemned
as an international crime is aggressive war and that all peaceful means must
be employed for the settlement of differences, of any nature whatsoever,
which might arise between the several States.
This is a condition of affairs which the United States, while a stranger
thereto, cannot decline to take into consideration, just as must any other
State called upon to take part in the negotiation.

Furthermore, the United States would not in any way be bound thereby to
the provisions of the covenant of the League of Nations. The French
proposal of June last looking to the conclusion of a bi-lateral compact, had
been drawn up in the light of the century old relations between France and
the United States; the French Government still stands ready to negotiate
with the American Government on the same conditions and on the same
basis. It has never altered its attitude in that respect. But when confronted
by the initiative of the United States in proposing a multipartite covenant, it
had to take into consideration the relations existing among the various
Powers which would be called upon to participate therein. This it has done,
with the object of assuring the success of the treaty contemplated by the
United States. Its suggestions of January 5 as to the terms of the multipartite
treaty are inspired by the formula which has already gained the unanimous
adherence of all of the States members of the League of Nations, and which
for that very reason might be accepted by them with regard to the United
States, just as it has already been accepted among themselves.
This is the explanation of our proposal of January 5.
The Government of the Republic has always, under all circumstances, very
clearly and without mental reservation declared its readiness to join in any
declaration tending to denounce war as a crime and to set up international
sanctions susceptible of preventing or repressing it. There has been no
change in its sentiments in that respect: its position remains the same. Your
Excellency may therefore be assured of its sincere desire to respond to the
idea of the American Government and to second its efforts to the full extent
compatible with the situation of fact created by its international obligations.
It is this preoccupation which inspired the formula proposed on January 5, a
formula which does indeed seem to be the most apt at this time to assure the
accomplishment of the American project. The Government of the Republic
accordingly cannot but hope that the American Government will share this
view. Subject to these observations, the Government of the Republic would,
moreover, very gladly welcome any suggestions offered by the American
Government which would make it possible to reconcile an absolute
condemnation of war with the engagements and obligations assumed by the
several nations and the legitimate concern for their respective security.

Pray accept [etc.]
CLAUDEL
6 See vol.  II, pp. 810 ff.

[Document 5]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, February 14, 1928.
No. 2632
SIR: There is transmitted below the substance of a conversation which took
place on February 2, 1928, between the Secretary and the French
Ambassador with regard to the so-called Briand proposal for the outlawry
of war.
The Secretary asked the Ambassador whether M. Briand’s reply to his
proposition was to be construed as a definite rejection of the latter to which
the Ambassador answered emphatically in the negative. Mr. Kellogg had
put this question to M. Claudel merely for his own information in replying
to M. Briand although, of course, he would not make use of the
Ambassador’s statement in replying to the French Government. The
Ambassador thereupon stated that the answer which he had given came
from M. Briand personally; that the Foreign Minister had telegraphed the
Ambassador that he did not wish the Secretary to construe his answer as
being a definite refusal to make the treaty which Mr. Kellogg proposed but
merely as a suggestion that other French obligations be taken into
consideration. In thanking the Ambassador for this message the Secretary
assured him that he would answer the note as soon as possible.
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

[Document 6]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)9
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: Our recent discussions of the question whether the United States
and France could join in suggesting to the other principal Powers of the
world the conclusion of a treaty proscribing war as an instrument of
national policy in their mutual relations have been brought by your note of
January 21, 1928, to a point where it seems necessary, if success is to be
achieved, to examine the problem from a practical point of view.
It is evident from our previous correspondence that the Governments of
France and the United States are of one mind in their earnest desire to
initiate and promote a new international movement for effective world
peace, and that they are in agreement as to the essential principles of the
procedure to be followed in the accomplishment of their common purpose.
As I understand your note of January 21, 1928, the only substantial obstacle
in the way of the unqualified acceptance by France of the proposals which I
Government’s doubt whether as a member of the League of Nations and a
party to the treaties of Locarno and other treaties guaranteeing neutrality,
France can agree with the United States and the other principal world
Powers not to resort to war in their mutual relations, without ipso facto
violating her present international obligations under those treaties. In Your
Excellency’s last note this question was suggested for consideration.
Without, of course, undertaking formally to construe the present treaty
obligations of France, I desire to point out that if those obligations can be
interpreted so as to permit France to conclude a treaty with the United
States such as that offered to me last June by M. Briand and offered again in
your note of January 21, 1928, it is not unreasonable to suppose that they
can be interpreted with equal justice so as to permit France to join with the
United States in offering to conclude an equivalent multilateral treaty with

the other principal Powers of the world. The difference between the
bilateral and multilateral form of treaty having for its object the unqualified
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy, seems to me to be
one of degree and not of substance. A Government free to conclude such a
bilateral treaty should be no less able to become a party to an identical
multilateral treaty since it is hardly to be presumed that members of the
League of Nations are in a position to do separately something they cannot
do together. I earnestly hope, therefore, that your Government, which
admittedly perceives no bar to the conclusion of an unqualified anti-war
treaty with the United States alone, will be able to satisfy itself that an
equivalent treaty among the principal world Powers would be equally
consistent with membership in the League of Nations. If, however,
members of the League of Nations cannot, without violating the terms of
the Covenant of the League, agree among themselves and with the
Government of the United States to renounce war as an instrument of their
national policy, it seems idle to discuss either bilateral or multilateral
treaties unreservedly renouncing war. I am reluctant to believe, however,
that the provisions of the Covenant of the League of Nations really stand in
the way of the cooperation of the United States and members of the League
of Nations in a common effort to abolish the institution of war. Of no little
interest in this connection is the recent adoption of a resolution by the Sixth
International Conference of American States expressing in the name of the
American Republics unqualified condemnation of war as an instrument of
national policy in their mutual relations.10 It is significant to note that of the
twenty-one States represented at the Conference, seventeen are members of
the League of Nations.
I trust, therefore, that neither France nor any other member of the League of
Nations will finally decide that an unequivocal and unqualified renunciation
of war as an instrument of national policy either violates the specific
obligations imposed by the Covenant or conflicts with the fundamental idea
and purpose of the League of Nations. On the contrary, is it not entirely
reasonable to conclude that a formal engagement of this character entered
into by all of the principal Powers, and ultimately, I trust, by the entire
family of Nations, would be a most effective instrument for promoting the
great ideal of peace which the League itself has so closely at heart? If,
however, such a declaration were accompanied by definitions of the word

“aggressor” and by exceptions and qualifications stipulating when nations
would be justified in going to war, its effect would be very greatly
weakened and its positive value as a guaranty of peace virtually destroyed.
The ideal which inspires the effort so sincerely and so hopefully put
forward by your Government and mine is arresting and appealing just
because of its purity and simplicity; and I cannot avoid the feeling that if
Governments should publicly acknowledge that they can only deal with this
ideal in a technical spirit and must insist upon the adoption of reservations
impairing, if not utterly destroying the true significance of their common
endeavors, they would be in effect only recording their impotence, to the
keen disappointment of mankind in general.
From the broad standpoint of humanity and civilization, all war is an assault
upon the stability of human society, and should be suppressed in the
common interest. The Government of the United States desires to see the
institution of war abolished, and stands ready to conclude with the French,
British, Italian, German and Japanese Governments a single multilateral
treaty open to subsequent adherence by any and all other Governments,
binding the parties thereto not to resort to war with one another. The precise
language to be employed in such a treaty is a matter of indifference to the
United States so long as it clearly and unmistakably sets forth the
determination of the parties to abolish war among themselves. I therefore
renew the suggestion contained in my note of January 11, 1928, that the
Government of France join with the Government of the United States in
transmitting to the British, Italian, German and Japanese Governments for
their consideration and comment the text of M. Briand’s original proposal,
together with copies of the subsequent correspondence between France and
the United States as a basis for preliminary discussions looking to the
conclusion of an appropriate multilateral treaty proscribing recourse to war.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
9 The text of this note was also communicated through the respective
American Embassies to the French, British, German, Italian, and Japanese
Foreign Offices.

[Document 7]
Memorandum by Mr. Spencer Phenix, Assistant to the Under
Secretary of State, of a Conversation Between the Secretary of
State and the French Ambassador (Claudel), February 27, 1928
February 27, 1928
The Secretary handed to the French Ambassador at 2:30 this afternoon a
note replying to the Ambassador’s note of January 21, 1928, with further
reference to the so-called Briand proposal. The Ambassador read the note
and said he wanted to ask one question, namely, whether the Secretary
agreed with the view expressed by Senator Borah in a recent newspaper
article (the New York Times of February 5, 1928) to the effect that the
breach by one party of a general multilateral treaty renouncing war would
release the other parties from their obligations thereunder. The Ambassador
said that if a treaty could be drawn along such lines or be interpreted in the
manner indicated by Senator Borah, he thought that an agreement might
readily be reached.
After a brief discussion of the Locarno treaties and reference to Senator
Borah’s article, the Secretary replied that while he had not given particular
attention to that point since it seemed to him to be more a question of
drafting than anything else, he saw no objection in principle and that he
would be glad to consider the question and discuss it with Senator Borah
with a view to ascertaining whether there would be any objection to
including such a provision in the treaty if negotiations should progress to a
point where the language to be employed needed to be considered. The
Secretary pointed out that in his note he stated explicitly that the precise
language to be used in the treaty was a matter of indifference to the United
States provided the purpose was accomplished.
The Secretary informed the Ambassador that the English text of the note
was being telegraphed to the American Embassy at Paris for
communication to the Foreign Office for its convenience so that the

Ambassador need only telegraph a French translation. The Secretary also
informed the Ambassador that the note was being released to the press for
publication in Wednesday morning’s papers.
Mr. Olds11 and Mr. Phenix were present during the Secretary’s interview
with the Ambassador.
S[PENCER] P[HENIX]
11 Under Secretary of State.

[Document 8]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)12
Press reports from Paris indicate some confusion as to the resolution of the
Havana Conference referred to in my note of February 27, 1928. For your
information and such use as may seem to you desirable, there were two
anti-war resolutions adopted by the Havana Conference, one dealing only
with wars of aggression and the other expressing unqualified condemnation
of all war.
The text of the general resolution referred to in my note is as follows:
“The Sixth International Conference of American States resolves:
Whereas: The American Republics desire to express that they
condemn war as an instrument of national policy in their mutual
relations; and
Whereas: The American Republics have the most fervent desire
to contribute in every possible manner to the development of
international means for the pacific settlement of conflicts between
States:
1. That the American Republics adopt obligatory
arbitration as the means which they will employ for the
pacific solution of their international differences of a
juridical character.
2. That the American Republics will meet in
Washington within the period of one year in a
conference of conciliation and arbitration to give
conventional form to the realization of this principle,
with the minimum exceptions which they may consider

indispensable to safeguard the independence and
sovereignty of the States, as well as matters of a
domestic concern, and to the exclusion also of matters
involving the interest or referring to the action of a
State not a party to the convention.
3. That the Governments of the American Republics
will send for this end plenipotentiary jurisconsults with
instructions regarding the maximum and the minimum
which they would accept in the extension of obligatory
arbitral jurisdiction.
4. That the convention or conventions of conciliation
and arbitration which may be concluded should leave
open a protocol for progressive arbitration which would
permit the development of this beneficent institution up
to its maximum.
5. That the convention or conventions which may be
agreed upon, after signature, should be submitted
immediately to the respective Governments for their
ratification in the shortest possible time.”
The text of the resolution against aggression is as follows:
“The Sixth International Conference of American States:
Considering:
That the American nations should always be inspired in solid
cooperation for justice and the general good:
That nothing is so opposed to this cooperation as the use of
violence:
That there is no international controversy, however serious it may
be, which cannot be peacefully arranged if the parties desire in
reality to arrive at a pacific settlement:

That war of aggression constitutes an international crime against
the human species:
It resolves:
1. All aggression is considered illicit and as such is
declared prohibited.
2. The American States will employ all pacific means to
settle conflicts which may arise between them.”
[Paraphrase]
Both of the said resolutions, it appears, were passed at final plenary session
Havana Conference. The Conference obviously intended to go on record as
opposed to all war; having condemned war as an instrument of national
policy, the Conference found no difficulty in condemning aggressive war as
well. It is not necessary, perhaps, to point out the difference between
resolutions like these adopted at an international conference and formal
treaties which are entered into with idea of preventing recourse to war as far
as it is possible so to do. The objection we have to concluding a treaty
limited by incorporation of an attempted definition of aggression is that,
first, it seems to us to be difficult, if not impossible, to obtain working
definition of aggressive war; and second, that even if it were theoretically
possible to obtain such a definition, the result in practice would be to defeat
largely if not entirely the main object that all of us are seeking.
Repeat to Embassies at London, Berlin and Rome.
KELLOGG
12 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to the American Embassies
in Germany, Great Britain, and Italy. Also sent to the Embassy in Japan.

[Document 9]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
42. Department’s circular telegram, March 1. In the second resolution
quoted, the term “aggression” and not “war of aggression” is used. Does
“aggression” as here used mean merely hostile acts preceding or leading up
to war? If all war is renounced then certainly all acts of aggression which
might result in war must be renounced also. Is this interpretation correct?
HOUGHTON

[Document 10]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
passed is substantially in language of Briand proposal condemning war as
instrument of national policy. This includes, naturally, everything in other
resolution which was passed last. As originally framed and presented to
plenary session of the Conference by the Mexican delegate, this resolution
against aggression contained in article I the word “war” so that the
resolution would read: “All war of aggression is considered illicit and as
such is declared prohibited.” Señor Guerrero13 moved that it be amended by
striking out “war of”, so that as passed the resolution reads: “All aggression
is considered illicit and as such is declared prohibited.” I understand that
Guerrero explained that there were acts of aggression which stopped short
of war, and that he wished to declare against those. First resolution passed
would not only include war, naturally, but acts of aggression which, as you
state in your telegram, might result in war. At all events, the resolution
which the committee reported and which was unanimously passed
condemned all war as an instrument of national policy, and it is significant
fact that of the countries voting for this resolution 17 were also members of
the League of Nations.
KELLOGG
13 Gustavo Guerrero, chairman of the Salvadoran delegation to the Sixth
International Conference of American States at Habana.

[Document 11]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
52. Yesterday evening I talked for an hour with Stresemann.14 Since his
return to Berlin Tuesday he has been much occupied with political and
diplomatic matters, especially the difficulty which has arisen over the arrest
in Russia of German engineers, on which the German Government is taking
a strong stand. …
Stresemann said, in reply to an inquiry by me, that your war prevention
treaties had been discussed by the big five at Geneva only once, and then
informally. Briand had said to his colleagues, in lighter vein, that when he
had proposed to America a treaty providing that France and the United
States should renounce war as an instrument of their national policy toward
each other he had meant it rather as a gesture, but now that the Secretary of
State’s reply had invested it with importance he might wish in the future to
consult them on the subject; that in the meantime he wanted only to ask
them one question: Had the American Government communicated with
their Governments in regard to it? To this inquiry Chamberlain,15 Adachi16
and Stresemann said that it had.
SCHURMAN
14 Dr. Gustav Stresemann, German Minister for Foreign Affairs.
15 Sir Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
16 Japanese representative on the Council of the League of Nations.

[Document 12]
The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In reply to your note of February 27 last regarding the
proposal for a multilateral treaty proscribing war, I have the honor to inform
Your Excellency that M. Briand has been pleased to find in the observations
which you have submitted for his consideration a new and cordial
affirmation of the common inspiration which animates our two
Governments equally anxious to cooperate in an international movement
toward the effective establishment of peace in the world. Assured of such a
solidarity in the pursuit of an identical purpose, M. Briand remains
convinced, as does Your Excellency, that a mutually acceptable formula
may well result from the exchange of views which has taken place up to
now between our two Governments, if on both sides there is a disposition to
adhere to those essential realities which must be preserved in this
discussion, by subordinating thereto those differences of form to which
questions of terminology not affecting the substance of the discussion may
upon analysis be reduced.
That is to say, that the French Government at this point of the discussion,
when all the aspects of the problem have been examined, proposes to adopt
as practical a point of view as possible and to facilitate as far as it can the
effort of the American Government in the direction of an immediate
decision.
The observations which M. Briand has ventured to offer in support of his
last suggestion were inspired by a very sincere desire to facilitate in a
practical manner the realization of the proposal for the contemplated
multilateral treaty by pointing out the conditions best adapted to bring about
the consent thereto of all the Governments whose agreement is necessary.

The French wording, therefore, tending to limit to war of aggression the
proscription proposed in the form of a multilateral rather than a bilateral
treaty, was intended to obviate in so far as the American plan was
concerned those serious difficulties which would assuredly be encountered
in practice. In order to pay due regard to the international obligations of the
signatories, it was not possible, as soon as it became a question of a
multilateral treaty, to impart thereto the unconditional character desired by
Your Excellency without facing the necessity of obtaining the unanimous
adherence of all the existing States, or at least of all the interested States,
that is to say, those which by reason of their situation are exposed to the
possibility of a conflict with any one of the contracting States. In the
relations between the States of the American Continent there are similar
difficulties which led the American Government at the Pan American
Conference at Habana to approve a resolution limited to the very terms
“war of aggression” which the French Government felt compelled to use in
characterizing the renunciation to which it was requested to bind itself by
means of a multilateral treaty. To be sure, the same reservation does not
appear in another resolution to which Your Excellency referred in your note
of February 27, but it must be observed that this resolution in itself
constituted only a kind of preliminary tending toward a treaty of arbitration
with regard to which numerous reservations were formulated.
Your Excellency appears to have been surprised that France should not be
able to conclude with all the Powers in the form of a multilateral treaty the
same treaty which she offered to conclude separately with the United States
in the form of a bilateral treaty. My Government believes that it has
explained this point with sufficient clearness in recalling the fact that the
project of a treaty of perpetual friendship between France and the United
States proposed last June was drafted in such a way as to limit strictly the
mutual undertakings which it contained to those relations in law resulting
from intercourse between the two signatory States alone. Within such limits
an absolutely unconditional agreement might be entered into, since that
agreement would not expose the signatories, as would a multilateral treaty,
to juridical difficulties resulting from the respective positions of various
Powers with regard to one another, and since furthermore, as regards two
countries like France and the United States morally united as they are by
ties of time-honored friendship, other contractual engagements concluded

by one or the other Power could never constitute in fact anything but purely
theoretical obstacles.
In order to attain the result which Your Excellency has in view, you have
considered it preferable to adhere to the conception of a multilateral treaty,
and you have deemed it necessary to insist that even in the multilateral form
the proposed treaty should include an unconditional pledge. If Your
Excellency really believes that greater chances of success may be found in
this formula in spite of the consequences which it involves, especially the
necessity of attaining a treaty world-wide in its scope, the French
Government would hesitate to discuss longer the question of its adherence
to a plan which the American Government originated and for which it is
responsible. Without in any way losing sight of its international obligations,
both as a member of the League of Nations and as a party to the Treaties of
Locarno or treaties guaranteeing neutrality, France, for the purpose of
finding a common basis for initial negotiations, is wholly disposed, after a
new examination of the proposals formulated by Your Excellency, to
suggest immediately to the German, British, Italian and Japanese
Governments that they join in seeking, in the spirit and in the letter of the
last American note, any adjustments which in the last analysis may be
forthcoming with respect to the possibility of reconciling previous
obligations with the terms of the contemplated new treaty. The French
Government notes at once with satisfaction that while advocating the
conclusion among the Governments specifically mentioned of a treaty
binding the signatories not to resort to war, the Government of the United
States admits the participation in that treaty of all the other Governments of
the world. This conception accords with a reservation actually necessary for
obtaining a real instrument for the establishment of peace by means of a
formal engagement among all Powers among whom political controversies
may arise. Such an engagement would in fact involve the risk of exposing
the signatories to dangers and misunderstandings unless based upon the
complete equality in the application of the treaty among themselves of all
the States with respect to other States and not only upon the equality of
certain States among them. The treaty contemplated could not operate in
respect of one Power which is a party thereto unless the other States
exposed to the possibility of grave controversies with that party were also
signatories thereof.

At the same time it is clear that in order not to turn an instrument of
progress and peace into a means of oppression, if one of the Signatory
States should fail to keep its word, the other Signatories should be released
from their engagement with respect to the offending state. On this second
point, as on the first, the French Government believes itself fully in accord
with the Government of the United States.
My Government likewise gathers from the declarations which Your
Excellency was good enough to make to me on the first of last March, the
assurance that the renunciation of war, thus proclaimed, would not deprive
the Signatories of the right of legitimate defense. Such an interpretation
tends to dissipate apprehensions, and the French Government is happy to
note it.
If such is the attitude of the American Government on these three
fundamental points, and if it is clearly understood in a general way that the
obligations of the new pact should not be substituted for, or prejudice in any
way, previous obligations contained in international instruments such as the
Covenant of the League of Nations, the Locarno Agreements or treaties
guaranteeing neutrality whose character and scope can not be modified
thereby, then the differences of opinion which have appeared in the course
of previous phases of the negotiation have to do more with words than with
the reality of the problem facing the two Governments today.
Hence, in accordance with the proposal contained in your note of January
11, which you kindly renewed in your note of the 27th of February, the
French Government would be prepared forthwith to join with the
Government of the United States in submitting for the consideration of the
Governments of Germany, Great Britain, Italy and Japan, the
correspondence exchanged between France and the United States since
June, 1927, and in proposing at the same time for the assent of the four
Governments, a draft agreement essentially corresponding in purpose to the
original proposal of M. Briand, in the multipartite form desired by the
United States with the changes of wording made necessary by the new
concept; the Signatory Powers of such an instrument, while not prejudicing
their rights of legitimate defense within the framework of existing treaties,
should make a solemn declaration condemning recourse to war as an

instrument of national policy, or in other words as a means of carrying out
their own spontaneous, independent policy.
They would specifically undertake, among themselves to refrain from any
attack or invasion, and never to seek the settlement of any difference or
conflict of whatsoever nature or origin which might arise between them
save by pacific means. It would, however, be clearly understood that an
obligation could only exist for the Signatories in the event that the
engagement were contracted by all States, that is to say, that the treaty, open
to the accession of all powers, would only come into force after having
received universal acceptance, unless the powers having signed this treaty
or acceded thereto should agree upon its coming into force, despite certain
abstentions. Finally, in case one of the contracting powers should happen to
contravene the treaty, the other contracting powers would be automatically
relieved, with respect to that power, of the obligations contained in the
treaty.
It is in this form, it would seem, that the negotiation of a plan for a
multilateral pact such as conceived by the American Government could be
pursued with the greatest chances of success. Your Excellency may be
assured, in any case, in the conduct of this negotiation of the most sincere
and most complete collaboration of my Government which is always ready
to associate itself without ambiguity or reservation, with any solemn and
formal undertaking tending to ensure, strengthen or extend the effective
solidarity of the Nations in the cause of peace.
In responding to these ideas, whose happy inspiration cannot be gainsaid,
France would feel confident that she was continuing the work to which she
has never ceased to apply herself in her foreign policy, and, faithful to her
previous international engagements of that nature, that she was contributing
nobly, as Your Excellency has said, in “promoting the great ideal of peace
which the League itself has so closely at heart”.
Pray accept [etc.]
CLAUDEL

[Document 13]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, April 3, 1928.
[Received April 13.]
No. 8494
SIR: I have the honor to report that the general reaction here to M. Briand’s
last peace pact note has been very favorable.
A limited section of public opinion still appears to feel that the proposed
pact in its present form is absolutely in contradiction with the League of
Nations, and there is a disposition in some quarters to contend that the
reservations set forth by M. Briand amount after all to limiting the
condemnation of war to wars of aggression—in other words, if the other
signatories are to be released in case the pact is violated, who is to decide
upon or define the violator?—but on the whole there is no undue tendency
to argue or criticize.
Sentiment is practically unanimous as to M. Briand’s reply being effective
both tactically and substantially, and as to France having gone as far as she
or any other nation could go along the path of conciliation while taking into
account her contractual obligations.
Likewise, attention is called with emphasis and approbation to the passage
of the note stating that the French Government would not feel justified in
discussing longer “its adhesion to a project the responsibility, as well as the
conception, of which pertains to the American Government itself.” Coupled
with this idea of our moral responsibility for the proposal in its present form
—which undoubtedly will continue to be popular here for sometime—is, I
think, a growing realization of the possibilities with respect to our eventual
moral obligation in case of a violation of the pact. As has been reported in
previous despatches, the Socialist Oeuvre has consistently set forth this

view; it would appear to be growing increasingly widespread and bids fair
to become the main consideration in the new phase of negotiations which
has now been opened.
This is perhaps the most appropriate place to report to the Department that
in its comment on M. Briand’s note, the Journal des Débats revives the
confusion concerning the two Havana resolutions attendant upon the
publication of our note of February 27. This paper states that the preamble
to the resolution of February 18 condemning war as an instrument of
national policy was omitted from the Final Act of the Conference as signed,
a copy of which, containing the full text of the resolutions adopted, it
claimed reached Paris on March 29 and was in its hands. The Department
will undoubtedly be interested in reading the whole article which is
herewith transmitted.18 As the Department is aware, this Embassy is not yet
in receipt of any such document or final report nor, I find upon inquiry, is
the Cuban Legation here. It should, however, be borne in mind that the
French journalists attending the Latin Press Conference at Havana have
been drifting back into Paris for the last few days.
I should appreciate having the Department’s instructions in the premises
definitively clearing up this confusion.19
I have [etc.]
For the Ambassador:
GEORGE A. GORDON
First Secretary of Embassy

[Document 14]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)20
[Paraphrase]
79. I am convinced that it is important that without further delay we submit
to the British, German, Italian, and Japanese Governments, for the
consideration and comment of those Governments, the correspondence
which has been exchanged between this Government and that of France in
regard to an anti-war treaty so that preliminary discussions may be
undertaken for purpose of reaching a general agreement.
To this end I sent for the French Ambassador today and asked him
informally to make inquiry for me from the French Government as
follows:21
“In view of the exceedingly full and frank statement of the French
position contained in your note of March 30, and of the position
of the United States as expressed in its notes, and with the definite
understanding that neither France nor the United States stands
committed to any formula, but that both sincerely desire to
cooperate with each other and with other Powers for the purpose
of determining the possibility of reaching a general agreement on
a form of treaty renouncing war, may I understand that the French
Government is now agreeable to the submission of the entire
correspondence in the first instance to the four Powers mentioned
in my notes of January 11 and February 27 for their consideration
and comment?”22
Above is for your information and discreet use.

KELLOGG
20 The same telegram was sent to the Embassies in France (No. 97),
21 Quoted portion not paraphrased.
22 On April 7 the French Ambassador made an affirmative answer to the
Secretary’s inquiry.

[Document 15]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)23
British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments and text of draft treaty
to be transmitted therewith.25 Please repeat immediately to London, Berlin
and Rome. Note begins:
“As Your Excellency is aware, there has recently been exchanged
between the Governments of France and the United States a series
of notes dealing with the question of a possible international
renunciation of war. The views of the two Governments have
been clearly set forth in the correspondence between them.
The Government of the United States, as stated in its note of
February 27, 1928, desires to see the institution of war abolished
and stands ready to conclude with the French, British, German,
Italian and Japanese Governments a single multilateral treaty
open to subsequent adherence by any and all other Governments
binding the parties thereto not to resort to war with one another.
The Government of the French Republic, while no less eager to
promote the cause of world peace and to cooperate with other
nations in any practical movement towards that end, has pointed
out certain considerations which in its opinion must be borne in
mind by those Powers which are members of the League of
Nations, parties to the Treaties of Locarno, or parties to other
treaties guaranteeing neutrality. My Government has not
conceded that such considerations necessitate any modification of
its proposal for a multilateral treaty, and is of the opinion that
every nation in the world can, with a proper regard for its own
interests, as well as for the interests of the entire family of

nations, join in such a treaty. It believes, moreover, that the
execution by France, Great Britain, Germany, Italy, Japan and the
United States of a treaty solemnly renouncing war in favor of the
pacific settlement of international controversies would have
tremendous moral effect and ultimately lead to the adherence of
all the other governments of the world.
The discussions which have taken place between France and the
United States have thus reached a point where it seems essential,
if ultimate success is to be attained, that the British, German,
Italian and Japanese Governments should each have an
opportunity formally to decide to what extent, if any, its existing
commitments constitute a bar to its participation with the United
States in an unqualified renunciation of war. In these
circumstances the Government of the United States, having
reached complete agreement with the Government of the French
Republic as to this procedure, has instructed me formally to
transmit herewith for the consideration of your Government the
text of M. Briand’s original proposal of last June, together with
copies of the notes subsequently exchanged between France and
the United States on the subject of a multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war.
I have also been instructed by my Government to transmit
herewith for consideration a preliminary draft of a treaty
representing in a general way the form of treaty which the
Government of the United States is prepared to sign with the
French, British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments and
any other Governments similarly disposed. It will be observed
that the language of Articles I and II of this draft treaty is
practically identical with that of the corresponding articles in the
treaty which M. Briand proposed to the United States.
The Government of the United States would be pleased to be
informed as promptly as may be convenient whether Your
Excellency’s Government is in a position to give favorable
consideration to the conclusion of a treaty such as that transmitted

herewith, and if not, what specific modifications in the text
thereof would make it acceptable.” Note ends.
Draft treaty to be transmitted with note begins:
“Draft of Suggested Treaty
The President of the United States of America
The President of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India
The President of the German Empire
His Majesty the King of Italy
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan
Deeply sensible that their high office imposes upon them a
solemn duty to promote the welfare of mankind;
Inspired by a common desire not only to perpetuate the peaceful
and friendly relations now happily subsisting between their
peoples but also to prevent war among any of the nations of the
world;
Desirous by formal act to bear unmistakable witness that they
condemn war as an instrument of national policy and renounce it
in favor of the pacific settlement of international disputes;
Hopeful that, encouraged by their example, all the other nations
of the world will join in this humane endeavor and by adhering to
the present treaty as soon as it comes into force bring their
peoples within the scope of its beneficent provisions, thus uniting
the civilized nations of the world in a common renunciation of
war as an instrument of their national policy;

Have decided to conclude a treaty and for that purpose have
appointed as their respective Plenipotentiaries
The President of the United States of America
The President of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the
British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India,
The President of the German Empire
His Majesty the King of Italy
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan
who, having communicated to one another their full powers found
in good and due form have agreed upon the following articles:
ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties solemnly declare in the names of
their respective peoples that they condemn recourse to war for the
solution of international controversies, and renounce it as an
instrument of national policy in their relations with one another.
ARTICLE II
The High Contracting Parties agree that the settlement or solution
of all disputes or conflicts of whatever nature or of whatever
origin they may be, which may arise among them, shall never be
sought except by pacific means.
ARTICLE III
The present treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting
Parties named in the Preamble in accordance with their respective
constitutional requirements, and shall take effect as between them

as soon as all their several instruments of ratification shall have
been deposited at . . . . . . .
This treaty shall, when it has come into effect as prescribed in the
preceding paragraph, remain open as long as may be necessary
for adherence by all the other Powers of the world. Every
instrument evidencing the adherence of a Power shall be
deposited at . . . . . . . and the treaty shall immediately upon such
deposit become effective as between the Power thus adhering and
the other Powers parties hereto.
It shall be the duty of the Government of . . . . . . . to furnish each
Government named in the Preamble and every Government
subsequently adhering to this treaty with a certified copy of the
treaty and of every instrument of ratification or adherence. It shall
also be the duty of the Government of . . . . . . . telegraphically to
notify such Governments immediately upon the deposit with it of
each instrument of ratification or adherence.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this
treaty in the French and English languages, both texts having
equal force, and hereunto affix their seals.
Done at . . . . . . . the . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . in the year of our
Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty . . . . . . .” Draft treaty
ends.
KELLOGG
23 The same telegram was sent to the Ambassador in Japan as Department’s
No. 39.
24 Not printed.
25 The note and draft treaty were delivered to the respective Foreign Offices
on April 13.

[Document 16]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
102. In response to the inquiry submitted to M. Briand through Claudel and
reported the receipt of a message from M. Briand which he said he
construed as a definite acceptance of our proposal as to procedure, namely,
the immediate submission of the entire correspondence to the other Powers
for their consideration and comment. I thereupon prepared the note of
submission which has been telegraphed to you. On Monday, Claudel having
in the meantime left Washington for the south, Count de Sartiges delivered
a textual copy of M. Briand’s message28 of which Claudel had only a rough
draft when he called on Saturday. The final and complete text of M.
Briand’s message as presented by De Sartiges leaves me frankly in some
doubt as to M. Briand’s precise meaning because the message opens with a
flat acceptance of the idea of submitting to the other Powers the entire
correspondence but in a subsequent paragraph speaks of reservations,
referring in that connection again to M. Briand’s note of March 30. I fully
appreciate that M. Briand feels obliged to proceed in this important matter
with quite understandable caution and am assuming that the reiteration of
his position in that part of his last message subsequent to the first paragraph
was intended only to guard against any possible misunderstanding of his
general attitude and not at all as an objection on his part to the submission
of the whole matter to the other Powers in the manner which I proposed.
In these circumstances it is my intention, already publicly expressed after
the conversation with Claudel on Saturday, and also explained to De
Sartiges yesterday, to transmit to the four other Powers for consideration
and comment the correspondence, together with the general form of treaty
which has been the subject of the correspondence. I consider that such
action is taken on the following definite understanding so far as France is
concerned:

(a) That the United States is so proceeding upon its own
responsibility;
(b) That no commitment on the part of France is in any way
involved;
(c) That any further observations that France may deem necessary
or appropriate either at this time or later will of course be
addressed by France to the other interested Powers as well as to
the United States so that the entire situation may be fully explored
by us all.
I am most anxious not only to avoid any conceivable appearance of
discourtesy but also to leave no room for the slightest misunderstanding
between the United States and France, and therefore before giving final
instructions for the delivery of my note of submission to the other Powers, I
should like to have you at once see M. Briand personally and explain fully
my views and intention as set forth in this telegram. It seems to me clearly
that the procedure thus outlined absolutely protects M. Briand’s position
throughout and that there can be no possible objection to it. Please report
promptly the result of your conversation.
The text of M. Briand’s message referred to above will, of course, be
available to him.
I am today conveying orally to De Sartiges the substance of this telegram to
you.
KELLOGG
28 Not printed.

[Document 17]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
90. Mr. Gordon, of the Embassy staff, has just seen Corbin30 again who told
him that Briand had arrived in Paris this afternoon but was returning
immediately to his election district. Corbin stated that he had personally
acquainted Briand fully regarding conversation with Gordon this morning
on submission to the other four powers of the draft treaty correspondence.
Briand requested that he transmit the following reply:
The Minister for Foreign Affairs understands views and intentions
set forth in Department’s telegram No. 102, April 10, and is in
agreement with procedure therein indicated under the heads (a),
(b), and (c) thereof. In view of fact that in submitting the
correspondence to Germany, Great Britain, Italy, and Japan the
Department intends to submit also the draft general form of treaty,
Briand reserves right to do likewise; that is to say, he intends to
submit to the said four powers a draft form of treaty embodying
French point of view as it has been set forth in the
correspondence that has been exchanged with the United States.
Corbin gave evidence of no desire that Department delay giving final
instructions for delivery of note to the four powers, together with its
enclosures, until such time as the French shall have prepared their proposed
draft treaty.
HERRICK
29 Telegram in three sections.

30 Charles Corbin, director of political and commercial affairs in the French
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

[Document 18]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
91. Message has just been telephoned from French Foreign Office to add
following to Briand’s message which was transmitted last night:
Briand requests, so that there be no room for any possible misunderstanding
on part of the other four powers, that when our note of submission and its
enclosures are delivered to said powers the Department will also
Embassy; that is to say, Briand wishes us to inform the four other powers of
the definite understanding which the Department communicated to him, on
basis of which he has agreed to procedure contemplated by Department.
Briand also requests that Department inform him of date when it proposes
to make the aforesaid communication to the other four powers.
HERRICK

[Document 19]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
and Tokyo,31 to deliver note, draft treaty and seven other enclosures
consisting of Briand proposal of last June and the six notes subsequently
exchanged between France and the United States, Friday, April 13 at 3 p.m.
London time, 4 p.m. Berlin and Borne time, and 5 p.m. Tokyo time,
respectively. I have also asked that the several Foreign Offices be informed
that the texts of the note and draft treaty will be given out in Washington for
publication in the afternoon papers Friday, April 13, and that the several
Embassies have been instructed to make copies available to the foreign
press for publication in Europe and Japan Saturday morning, April 14.
In these circumstances please furnish French Foreign Office with advance
copy of note and draft treaty as soon as possible after the receipt of this
telegram with the understanding, of course, that they will regard it as
confidential until published. At the same time inform the Foreign Office
that the notes are to be delivered as above set forth and explain the
arrangements as to publication. You should also make copies available to
Paris press for publication Saturday morning, April 14, and telegraph text to
Berne for informal communication to the Information Section of the League
of Nations through Tuck.
Please also express to the Foreign Office my warm appreciation of the
cordial spirit of cooperation which M. Briand has manifested throughout the
discussions leading up to the present submission, and say that I attach the
very greatest importance to the negotiations which are thus being initiated
among the six Powers and earnestly hope that our efforts may be crowned
with success after a common exploration of the problem by the six Powers,
all of whom are equally interested in agreeing upon a practicable method
for the promotion of the cause of world peace.

have been instructed to state when presenting note and enclosures that the
submission has been agreed to by M. Briand on the definite understanding
so far as France is concerned set forth in paragraphs a, b and c of my 102,
April 10, 3 p.m. which paragraphs have been quoted to those embassies in
Department’s instructions. Please repeat at once to London, Berlin and
p.m.
Please telegraph immediate acknowledgment of receipt of this instruction.32
KELLOGG

[Document 20]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, April 16, 1928.
[Received May 14.]
No. 830
SIR: In obedience to the instructions contained in the Department’s telegram
Minister for Foreign Affairs for Friday, April 13th, at 5 P.M. I was informed
that Baron Tanaka could not see me at that hour but would see me at 4 P.M.,
but that I could see the Vice Minister at 5 P.M., if is [I?] so desired. I
therefore took the liberty of making the appointment for four o’clock
instead of five o’clock in order that I might deliver the note and other
papers to the Minister for Foreign Affairs in person rather than to the Vice
Minister.
I stated to Baron Tanaka that, in my opinion, this was a solemn and—I
hoped it would prove to be—an historic occasion; that I was proud to be the
representative of my country in delivering to Japan, as one of the six great
powers of the world, a proposal for joint action toward the establishment of
universal peace; that it was the earnest hope of my Government that Japan,
in common with the other three great powers to whom this note was now
being addressed, would give the subject matter the most careful
consideration; and that our joint efforts toward the promotion of the cause
of world peace would be crowned with success.
I then explained the situation so far as France is concerned, as set forth in
the attention of the Foreign Minister to the clause in the note expressing the
desire of my Government for an early consideration of the note and draft
treaty, and for any expression of his views. Baron Tanaka expressed himself
as being in accord, in principle, with the idea embodied in the note and

suggested treaty, and stated that he would give the matter careful
consideration and as soon as possible would let me know his views. I said
that I felt sure that he personally was in full accord with my Government in
its desire to put an end to war, and I hoped he would see his way clear to
joining with us, and the other four powers, in a treaty substantially as we
now suggested, which, if adopted by the six powers, would have a good
chance of being adopted by all the countries of the world; and he replied
that I was correct in thinking that personally he was anxious to do all in his
power toward securing the peace of the world, and would do all that he
possibly could to that end.
I explained to the Prime Minister that my instructions were to deliver this
note and enclosures to him at 5 P.M., to-day, but as his engagements did not
permit him to receive me at that hour, but only at 4 P.M., I had taken the
liberty of delivering the papers at four o’clock, as I wished to have the
honor of handing them in person to the Foreign Minister; but that I should
be glad if he would consider them as delivered at 5 P.M., the time named in
my instructions, and to this he smilingly assented.
I then stated, that, as instructed by my Government, I proposed to give the
note and suggested treaty to the Press this afternoon, so that they might
appear in the Tokyo papers to-morrow morning, and asked whether he had
any objection to this course. He replied that he had no objection.
On coming out of the room of the Minister for Foreign Affairs I met Mr.
Debuchi, who asked me whether I proposed to give to the Press any of the
papers I had handed to Baron Tanaka. I said that I intended to give to the
Press the note and suggested Treaty, and asked if he, Mr. Debuchi, had any
objection. He replied that he did not see any reason why we should not do
so, but merely wanted to know—possibly, I thought, having in mind that he
would give them to the Press if we did not do so.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES MACVEAGH

in France, supra.

[Document 21]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
BERLIN, April 17, 1928.
[Received April 30.]
No. 3411
to transmit herewith, in copy and translation, Dr. Stresemann’s formal
acknowledgment of the receipt together with his reply to the Note
proposing a multilateral treaty to prevent war and its enclosures and the
draft treaty presented by me on the 13th instant.
As stated in my telegram, Dr. Stresemann has requested that this
communication from him be not given to the press.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure—Translation]
The German Minister for Foreign Affairs (Stresemann) to the American Ambassador (Schurman)
BERLIN, April 13, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: I beg to enclose herewith the text of the statement
which I had the honor of making to you today when, in the name of the
American Government, you handed me the text of the notes regarding the
pact to renounce war.
May I request that you be so kind as not to give any of these statements to
the press.

I avail myself [etc.]
STRESEMANN
[Subenclosure—Translation]
Statement Made by the German Minister for Foreign Affairs (Stresemann) to the American Ambassador (Schurman)
[BERLIN, April 13, 1928.]
1. We have followed currently with the greatest interest the
exchange of notes, the text of which has indeed already been
known from the press and has also been placed unofficially at our
disposal by the American Government, so that we are already
informed as to the position of the matter in its essentials.
2. Since it was at the outset a question of Franco-American
negotiations, we have refrained from publicly taking any position
in order to avoid creating the impression that we wished to mix in
any way in the negotiations. I nevertheless thought it appropriate
to give expression in a general way in my last formal speech in
the Reichstag to our great interest in the matter.
3. We have welcomed it in an extraordinary degree that the
American Government has from the first been determined not to
content itself with a treaty between America and France but has
taken the initiative of M. Briand as an occasion to work out a
fundamental structure of peace among the most important world
powers. The exchange of notes seems indeed to have already
achieved at least the result that France and America are agreed
upon this point.
4. The two underlying thoughts of the original Briand proposal
are completely identical with the underlying conceptions of
German foreign policy. It is indeed one of the most essential
foundations of German foreign policy to eliminate all armed
conflicts and to create instead, so far as it is at all possible, a
regulated pacific procedure for all kinds of State conflicts. For
Germany it is a question of an ideal motive: to secure peace and

on the other hand to establish regular processes for the settlement
of conflicts. I therefore hope most assuredly that the plan so
energetically furthered by the American Government will actually
be realized.
5. I can candidly say that I do not understand in all points the
difficulties which the French Government apparently finds and
has set out in its numerous reservations. Without going into
details, I believe that I can say even now that to my mind there
seems to be in the American pact idea no contradiction to the
League of Nations. Nor is Germany hindered by any of the
treaties concluded by her from adhering to a general pact of this
kind. Some of the French reservations, it seems to me, are self-
explanatory. It is perfectly clear that it is not intended to deprive a
State of the right of defense against attack. It is no doubt likewise
clear that if a State violates the antiwar pact the other parties to
the pact are no longer under obligation to the peace breaker. That
the pact shall be open also to all States not included among those
invited to participate at this time seems to me entirely reasonable.
However, it will surely suffice if the states first concluding the
treaty make it possible for the other countries to adhere later.
6. We will expedite our answer to the American note as much as
possible. I take it for granted also that it will not be necessary to
await the eventual formation of the new Cabinet. In these
fundamental questions there can be no difference of opinion
among the various German political parties.
34 Not printed.

[Document 22]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds) of a
Conversation With the Counselor of the French Embassy
(Sartiges), April 20, 1928
April 20, 1928
Count de Sartiges called this afternoon at 4:20 and handed me the French
text of the draft anti-war treaty which M. Briand is submitting for the
consideration of this Government, and the British, German, Italian and
Japanese Governments. Count de Sartiges said that no transmitting note had
been prepared and that M. Briand had instructed the Embassy to explain
that his draft was being submitted in the same spirit that the American draft
had been transmitted last week to the interested Governments. He added
that M. Briand had expressed a desire to receive the comments of this
Government on the draft treaty, but he said, he realized, of course, that the
United States would require some time to consider the draft before it would
be in a position to comment thereon.
Count de Sartiges said that he understood that the draft treaty was to be
published in Paris as soon as the Foreign Office had been informed of its
delivery in the five Capitals, and that it would then, of course, be available
for release to the American press. He offered to telegraph to Paris for
information as to the exact time of release, and said he would inform the
Department so that translations of the draft could be given by the
Department to the Washington correspondents.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]

[Document 23]
French Draft of Treaty for the Condemnation and Renunciation
of War as am, Instrument of National Policy35
[Translation]
The President of the German Empire, the President of the United States of
America, the President of the French Republic, His Majesty the King of
England, Ireland and the British Dominions, Emperor of India, His Majesty
the King of Italy, His Majesty the Emperor of Japan:
Equally desirous not only of perpetuating the happy relations of peace and
friendship now existing among their peoples, but also of avoiding the
danger of war between all other nations in the world,
Having agreed to consecrate in a solemn act their most formal and most
definite resolution to condemn war as an instrument of national policy and
to renounce it in favor of a peaceful settlement of international conflicts,
Expressing, finally, the hope that all the other nations of the world will be
willing to join in this humane effort to bring about the association of the
civilized peoples in a common renunciation of war as an instrument of
national policy, have decided to conclude a treaty and to that end have
designated as their respective plenipotentiaries:
The President of the German Empire:
The President of the United States of America:
The President of the French Republic:
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
Dominions, Emperor of India:

His Majesty the King of Italy:
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan:
who, after exchanging their full powers found to be in good and due form
have agreed on the following provisions:
ARTICLE ONE
The High Contracting Parties without any intention to infringe upon the
exercise of their rights of legitimate self-defense within the framework of
existing treaties, particularly when the violation of certain of the provisions
of such treaties constitutes a hostile act, solemnly declare that they
condemn recourse to war and renounce it as an instrument of national
policy; that is to say, as an instrument of individual, spontaneous and
independent political action taken on their own initiative and not action in
respect of which they might become involved through the obligation of a
treaty such as the covenant of the League of Nations or any other treaty
registered with the League of Nations. They undertake on these conditions
not to attack or invade one another.
ARTICLE TWO
The settlement or solution of all disputes or conflicts of whatever nature or
origin which might arise among the High Contracting Parties or between
any two of them shall never be sought on either side except by pacific
methods.
ARTICLE THREE
In case one of the High Contracting Parties should contravene this treaty,
the other Contracting Powers would ipso facto be released with respect to
that Party from their obligations under this treaty.
ARTICLE FOUR
The provisions of this treaty in no wise affect the rights and obligations of
the Contracting Parties resulting from prior international agreements to

which they are parties.
ARTICLE FIVE
The present treaty will be offered for the accession of all Powers and will
have no binding force until it has been generally accepted unless the
signatory Powers in accord with those that may accede hereto shall agree to
decide that it shall come into effect regardless of certain abstentions.
ARTICLE SIX
The present treaty shall be ratified.
The ratifications shall be deposited at . . . . . . .; within three months from
the date of the deposit of the ratifications it shall be communicated by the
Government of . . . . . . . to all the Powers with an invitation to accede.
The Government of . . . . . . . will transmit to each of the signatory Powers
and the Powers that have acceded a duly certified copy of the instruments of
accession as they are received.
One year after the expiration of the three months’ period provided in Article
Five, the Government of . . . . . . . will send out a statement of the
signatories and accessions to all the Powers that have signed or acceded.
In witness whereof the above named plenipotentiaries have signed this
treaty and sealed it with their seal.
Done at . . . . . . . in . . . . . . . copies drawn up in French and English and all
having equal force.
35 Handed to the Under Secretary of State by the Counselor of the French
Embassy on April 20.

[Document 24]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)36
[Paraphrase]
117. The French draft of the anti-war treaty seems entirely unacceptable,
but you will please avoid any discussion of matter awaiting receipt of full
advice on our position which you will receive by cable early in coming
week.
KELLOGG
36 The same telegram was sent to the Embassies in Great Britain (No. 95),

[Document 25]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)37
following telegram immediately to Embassy in Great Britain as
Embassy in Germany as Department’s No. 43, referring to Department’s
guide you in any discussions you may have at Foreign Office. [End
paraphrase.]
On April 13 you transmitted to the Government to which you are accredited
a copy of M. Briand’s original draft treaty for the renunciation of war
between France and the United States, a copy of the correspondence
exchanged on that subject and a preliminary draft of a treaty representing in
a general way the form of multilateral anti-war treaty which the United
States is prepared to sign. In your note of transmittal you stated that the
United States would be pleased to be informed whether the Government
addressed was in a position to give favorable consideration to the
conclusion of a treaty such as that suggested, and if not, what specific
modifications would make it acceptable. No formal reply to this inquiry has
been received from any Government but in formal comment has been made
as follows:
The British Government has indicated a genuine interest in the proposal of
the United States and attaches such importance thereto that its answer wall
be prepared only after consideration by the entire Cabinet and consultation
with the Self-Governing Dominions. The Japanese Government has given
its approval in principle and promises carefully to consider the text of the
draft treaty. The Italian Government has made no comment. The German
Government has expressed the earnest hope that the proposal of the United

States would be actually realized and has explicitly stated that there seems
to be in the draft treaty suggested by the United States no contradiction to
the League of Nations, adding that Germany is not hindered by any of her
treaties from becoming a party to a multilateral treaty of the kind proposed
by this Government. The French Government transmitted on April 20 to the
British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments and to the United States
a draft anti-war treaty apparently intended as an alternative to the draft
proposed by the United States.
A simple comparison of the two drafts discloses the extraordinary
difference not only between the French and American concepts but also
between the present French position and that illustrated by M. Briand’s
original proposal, for, as you are aware, the first two articles of the
American draft treaty are practically identical with the corresponding
articles of M. Briand’s treaty of last June. In its present form the French
draft treaty is wholly unacceptable to the United States since it cannot in
any respect be regarded as an effective instrument for the promotion of
world peace. It emphasizes war, not peace, and seems in effect to be a
justification rather than a renunciation of the use of armed force. The
United States will sign no treaty of the nature now under discussion which
cannot reasonably be expected to lessen the danger of an outbreak of war
and thus promote the cause of world peace.
In reserving the right to go to war in the many circumstances enumerated in
the French draft, France goes even farther than was to be expected from the
position taken in her correspondence with the United States during the past
few months, and if the present draft represents the limit to which the French
Government is prepared to go in renouncing war by treaty, it is idle for the
United States to endeavor to seek an agreement with France, the respective
positions of the two Governments in that event being totally irreconcilable.
The United States does not believe that world peace and national security
are best guaranteed by military alliances or by the threatened application of
military sanctions in certain previously defined circumstances, and the
United States will not become a party to any international agreement which,
while ostensibly devised for the preservation of peace, finds its ultimate
expression in a resort to arms and perpetuates a system of international
alliances. No treaty is an absolute guarantee against war and the United

States does not believe that the conclusion of a treaty such as it has
proposed will preclude the possibility of another war. It does believe,
however, that the danger of war would be greatly lessened were the Powers
of the world to join in such an instrument as it has suggested.
I am, however, unable to believe that France intends rigidly to insist upon
the form of treaty which she submitted on April 20. Neither can I believe
that the French draft accurately represents the views of the other interested
Powers. I am therefore still hopeful that a form of treaty may be agreed
upon which records unmistakably the determination of the nations of the
world not to go to war with one another. The United States would gladly
sign such a treaty without qualification or reservation. It is prepared,
however, to consider any modifications or qualifications of its draft which
may be necessary by reason of the special position of any of the interested
Governments provided the treaty is not vitiated thereby.
There seem to be six major considerations which the French Government
has emphasized in its correspondence and in its draft treaty, namely, that the
treaty must not (1) impair the right of legitimate self-defense; (2) violate the
Covenant of the League of Nations; (3) violate the treaties of Locarno; (4)
violate certain unspecified treaties guaranteeing neutrality; (5) bind the
parties in respect of a state breaking the treaty; (6) come into effect until
accepted by all or substantially all of the Powers of the world. The views of
the United States on these six points are as follows:
(1) Self-defense. There is nothing in the American draft of an anti-
war treaty which restricts or impairs in any way the right of self-
defense. That right is inherent in every sovereign state and is
implicit in every treaty. Every nation is free at all times and
regardless of treaty provisions to defend its territory from attack
or invasion and it alone is competent to decide whether
circumstances require recourse to war in self-defense. If it has a
good case, the world will applaud and not condemn its action.
Express recognition by treaty of this inalienable right, however,
gives rise to the same difficulty encountered in any effort to
define aggression. It is the identical question approached from the
other side. Inasmuch as no treaty provision can add to the natural

right of self-defense, it is not in the interest of peace that a treaty
should stipulate a juristic conception of self-defense since it is far
too easy for the unscrupulous to mold events to accord with an
agreed definition.
(2) The League Covenant. The Covenant imposes no affirmative
primary obligation to go to war. The obligation, if any, is
secondary and attaches only when deliberately accepted by a
state. Article ten of the Covenant has, for example, been
interpreted by a resolution submitted to the Fourth Assembly but
not formally adopted owing to one adverse vote to mean that “it is
for the constitutional authorities of each member to decide, in
reference to the obligation of preserving the independence and the
integrity of the territory of members, in what degree the member
is bound to assure the execution of this obligation by employment
of its military forces.” There is, in my opinion, no necessary
inconsistency between the covenant and the idea of an unqualified
renunciation of war. The covenant can, it is true, be construed as
authorizing war in certain circumstances but it is an authorization
and not a positive requirement. The German Government,
moreover, which is a member of the League of Nations does not
regard itself as barred thereby from becoming a party to the form
of anti-war treaty which the United States has proposed.
(3) The Treaties of Locarno. If the parties to the treaties of
Locarno are under any positive obligation to go to war, such
obligation certainly would not attach until one of the parties has
resorted to war in violation of its solemn pledges thereunder. It is
therefore obvious that if all the parties to the Locarno treaties
become parties to the multilateral anti-war treaty proposed by the
United States, there would be a double assurance that the Locarno
treaties would not be violated by recourse to arms. In such event
it would follow that resort to war by any state in violation of the
Locarno treaties would also be a breach of the multilateral anti-
war treaty and the other parties to the anti-war treaty would thus
as a matter of law be automatically released from their obligations
thereunder and free to fulfil their Locarno commitments. The

United States is entirely willing that all parties to the Locarno
treaties should become parties to its proposed anti-war treaty
either through signature in the first instance or by immediate
accession to the treaty as soon as it comes into force in the
manner provided in Article III of the American draft, and it will
offer no objection when and if such a suggestion is made.
(4) Treaties of neutrality. The United States is not informed as to
the precise treaties which France has in mind and cannot therefore
discuss their provisions. It is not unreasonable to suppose,
however, that the relations between France and the states whose
neutrality she has guaranteed are sufficiently close and intimate to
make it possible for France to persuade such states to adhere
seasonably to the anti-war treaty proposed by the United States. If
this were done no party to the anti-war treaty could attack the
neutralized states without violating the treaty and thereby
automatically freeing France and the other Powers in respect of
the treaty-breaking state from the obligations of the anti-war
treaty. If the neutralized states were attacked by a state not a party
to the anti-war treaty, the latter treaty would of course have no
bearing and France would be as free to act under the treaties
guaranteeing neutrality as if she were not a party to the anti-war
treaty. It is difficult to perceive, therefore, how treaties
guaranteeing neutrality can be regarded as necessarily preventing
the conclusion by France or any other power of a multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war.
(5) Relations with a treaty-breaking state. As indicated above,
there can be no question as a matter of law that violation of a
multilateral anti-war treaty through resort to war by one party
thereto would automatically release the other parties from their
obligations to the treaty-breaking state. Any express recognition
of this principle of law is wholly unnecessary.
(6) Universality. From the beginning it has been the hope of the
United States that its proposed multilateral anti-war treaty should
be world-wide in its application, and appropriate provision there

for was made in the draft submitted to the other Governments on
April 13. From a practical standpoint it is clearly preferable,
however, not to postpone the coming into force of an anti-war
treaty until all the nations of the world can agree upon the text of
such a treaty and cause it to be ratified. For one reason or another
a state so situated as to be no menace to the peace of the world
might obstruct agreement or delay ratification in such manner as
to render abortive the efforts of all the other Powers. It is highly
improbable, moreover, that a form of treaty acceptable to the
British, French, German, Italian and Japanese Governments as
well as to the United States would not be equally acceptable to
most, if not all, of the other Powers of the world. Even were this
not the case, however, the coming into force among the above-
named six Powers of an effective anti-war treaty and their
observance thereof would be a practical guaranty against a second
world war. This in itself would be a tremendous service to
humanity and the United States is not willing to jeopardize the
practical success of the proposal which it has made by
conditioning the coming into force of the treaty upon prior
universal or almost universal acceptance.
[Paraphrase]
In the foregoing paragraphs of this telegram the position of the Government
of the United States is fully and clearly set forth; you are authorized to use
any or all of the above exposition, at your discretion, in discussing at the
Foreign Office the question of a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of
war. You may even seek an opportunity, if you think it desirable, to present
in the appropriate quarter views as outlined above. I earnestly hope that
sooner or later there may develop out of the discussions which have been
initiated among the six powers an acceptable and effective form of treaty
for renunciation of war. The important thing is to get peoples and
governments to thinking in terms of peace, and I cannot refrain from belief
that once the initial inertia is overcome a rapid spread of the treaty’s sphere
of influence will occur.

Of course I realize that the political problems of Europe are more difficult
in some respects than are those of the Americas, and it may be that
considerations put forward by France will find more general support than I
expect. Under these circumstances and in order to prevent a complete
failure of the negotiations—an outcome which in my opinion would be a
tremendous disappointment to mankind—I would be willing to have
included in treaty a provision recording express understanding that should
any party to the treaty become involved in war, then the other parties shall
be released, ipso facto, from their obligations under the treaty so far as
regards the belligerent party. A provision of that nature would satisfy every
legitimate requirement of the League of Nations, the treaties of Locarno and
any normal treaty guaranteeing neutrality without compromising the
fundamental purpose of the anti-war treaty, and would also satisfy any
lingering doubts in any quarter on the question of self-defense. Neither the
Covenant of the League of Nations, nor the Locarno treaties, nor neutrality
treaties or emergencies requiring belligerent acts of self-defense obligate
any state to resort to war until a prior act of war has been committed by an
offending state. The perpetration of that act would release automatically,
under such a clause, the innocent parties to the anti-war treaty and would
leave them free to carry out their commitments under the League or
Locarno or any others.
At this time I do not wish you suggest inclusion of any such qualifying
clause or to make any reference to it in your discussions in any way, but I
should be pleased to have you feel out the general situation and to telegraph
full report.
KELLOGG
37 The same telegram, with the omission of the first paragraph, was sent to
the Embassy in Japan as No. 48.
38 See footnote 36, supra.

[Document 26]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 5:18 p.m.]
88. Chamberlain told me yesterday, in regard to the arbitration treaty,39 that
the replies from the Dominions were very slow in coming in and that he had
now urged immediate action on their part; from his own examination,
however, he thought that changes in the text would be necessary. He said
that at the moment he was thinking of Egypt, and added that Great Britain
also has her “Monroe Doctrine”. Probably he will find it necessary to ask
for extension of present treaty until he has his reply ready.
He could say nothing in regard to the multilateral anti-war treaty except that
its consideration would be approached sympathetically. As yet he has not
been able to give it any real study. The French proposal will also require his
attention. He said offhand that he thought that a meeting between the
Foreign Secretaries probably would be necessary at some later date; he
expressed his pleasure at your intimation to Sir Esme Howard40 that you
might be willing to come here to meet with them.
Chamberlain said that he would like to speak personally on one matter. His
assumption was that you would agree with his view that the right of self-
defense was not denied. I replied that of course such a right was inherent
and was implicit in any treaty. He asked, What then of the Monroe
Doctrine? It was not a part of international law but was merely an
expression of our national will; how would the United States regard its
violation? I replied, also speaking personally, that I thought he could answer
that question himself. I went on to say, however, that this approach to the
treaty seemed to me to be precisely the wrong one. The assumption I

preferred to make was that if we entered into an agreement to renounce war
we did so because we intended to keep it, and that having entered into such
an agreement we would not thereupon seek its violation through
committing an act of war. What we were talking about was, after all, the
renunciation of war, not a search to determine just how far one nation could
push another without bringing on war. Chamberlain agreed, but went on to
say that this doubt was the one which Briand had in mind. He closed our
interview by saying that as soon as the British attitude was determined he
would send for me; at that time he would wish to ask me certain questions
by way of interpretation.
There are two suggestions which I am venturing to make:
1. Would the addition of a further argument to paragraph headed
“Covenant” in your telegram No. 97, April 23,41 not be helpful?
Obviously the League of Nations can function only as soon as the
great powers or a sufficient majority of them agree. The entire
League structure falls when they seriously disagree. Your
proposal takes on special significance at precisely this point; for,
as it covers a wider field than the Covenant covers, it thereupon
brings into operation the pledges to renounce war made with
nations which are not in the League. Therefore it is a new and
added security.
2. As Briand has now made counterproposals, I am strongly of
opinion that Chamberlain will endeavor to act as mediator
between him and you, and thus by degrees gain for himself and
Great Britain full credit for whatever treaty may result. My
suggestion is, therefore, that it might possibly be expedient to
give to American press such a statement as that which is
embraced in your telegram No. 97. Its form and tone are
admirable, and it is most convincing. As far as we are concerned
it defines the possible limits of negotiations, and if a treaty results
from them it can be only along the lines that you and not
Chamberlain have laid down. Publication would also serve to
strengthen popular sentiment in all quarters in favor of your
proposal.

I learn that Grey of Falloden, in addressing a large meeting of Laborites and
Liberals a couple of days ago in a committee room of Parliament, made
statement that he thought treaty should be signed with no reservations, but
that each signatory, if it so desired, should make a supplementary statement
covering its interpretation of any phrase or portion of the text.
I have heard rumor that because of ill-health Briand may resign within the
next fortnight and that Poincaré will take over the Foreign Office.
HOUGHTON
39 See vol. ii , pp. 943 ff.
40 British Ambassador in the United States.

[Document 27]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
message to me. Your two suggestions are excellent and I have already acted
upon one of them. Although my intention had been to speak wholly
extemporaneously at the dinner of the American Society of International
Law on Saturday, April 28, I decided after reading your telegram to use in
p.m., containing the six numbered paragraphs.42 The last sentence of
paragraph 2 in regard to the German position I, of course, omitted. The
press has commented very favorably on this explanation of my position.
I agree with you thoroughly on the position you took in discussing the anti-
war treaty with Chamberlain. I hope that you will be able to impress on him
the desirability of an approach to this question from a broad point of view,
not a narrow legalistic one. Our Ambassador in Italy has telegraphed that
the French have suggested to Mussolini that question of compatibility of my
proposed treaty for renunciation of war with the League of Nations
Covenant and the Locarno treaties, et cetera, be referred to a commission of
jurists representing the principal Locarno powers and Japan.43 I hope that
this proposal will not meet with general acceptance. It seems absurd to me
that the question of whether the nations of the world should renounce war in
their relations with one another should be referred for determination to a
commission of jurists. Such a proposal would meet with no popular
sympathy in this country, I am sure.
The text of the German reply to my proposal of April 13 arrived from
Berlin Saturday.44 It seems to be a wholehearted acceptance. I am not

telegraphing it to you as I understand that the text will be published in the
newspapers tomorrow morning.
KELLOGG
infra.

[Document 28]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
BERLIN, May 1, 1928.
[Received May 14.]
No. 3473
SIR: With reference to the Department’s telegram No. 43, (Paris No. 118) of
April 23, 5 p.m., on the question of a multilateral treaty for the renunciation
of war, I have the honor to transmit herewith an Aide Memoire45 thereon
which I handed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Stresemann on April
27.
In addition to the foregoing and in confirmation of the Embassy’s telegram
well as translation, the reply of the German Government, dated April 27, to
the note which I handed Dr. Stresemann on April 13 on the same subject
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure—Translation47 ]
The German Minister for Foreign Affairs (Stresemann) to the American Ambassador (Schurman)
BERLIN, April 21, 1928.
V. M. 1990
MR. AMBASSADOR: In the note of April 13 and its enclosures Your Excellency
informed me of the negotiations between the Government of the United

States of America and the Government of France regarding the conclusion
of an international pact for the outlawry of war. At the same time you asked
me the question whether the German Government was disposed to conclude
such a pact in accordance with the draft put forward by the Government of
the United States or whether it considered certain changes in this draft
necessary.
The German Government has studied the question put by you with the care
appropriate to the extraordinary importance of the matter. It was possible
also in this study to take into consideration the draft treaty which had been
drawn up in the meantime by the French Government and handed to the
participating powers. As a result of this study I have the honor to inform
Your Excellency of the following in the name of the German Government:
The German Government welcomes most warmly the opening of
negotiations for the conclusion of an international pact for the outlawry of
war. The two main ideas on which are based the initiative of the French
Minister of Foreign Affairs and the resulting proposal of the United States
correspond fully to the principles of German policy. Germany has no higher
interest than to see the possibility of armed conflicts eliminated and a
development assured in the life of the nations which would guarantee the
peaceful settlement of all international disputes. The conclusion of a pact
such as the United States now has in view would certainly bring the nations
a good deal nearer to this goal.
As the need of the nations for the assurance of peace since the termination
of the World War has already led to other international agreements, the
necessity arises for the states concerned to make a decision as to the
relationship in which the pact now being planned would stand to these
international agreements which are already in effect. You have already, Mr.
Ambassador, referred in your note to the considerations which were put
forward in this connection by the French Government in its exchange of
views with the Government of the United States. So far as Germany is
concerned, the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Rhine Pact of
Locarno come into consideration as international agreements which might
affect the substance of the new pact. Other international obligations of this
kind have not been entered into by Germany. Respect for the obligations

arising from the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Rhine Pact
must, in the opinion of the German Government, remain inviolable. The
German Government is, however, convinced that these obligations contain
nothing which could in any way conflict with the obligations provided for
in the draft treaty of the United States. On the contrary it believes that the
binding obligation not to use war as an instrument of national policy could
only serve to strengthen the fundamental idea of the Covenant of the
League of Nations and of the Rhine Pact.
The German Government proceeds on the belief that a pact after the pattern
submitted by the Government of the United States would not put in
question the sovereign right of any state to defend itself. It is self-evident
that if one state violates the pact the other contracting parties regain their
freedom of action with reference to that state. The state affected by the
violation of the pact is therefore not prevented from taking up arms on its
own part against the breaker of the peace. In a pact of this kind to provide
expressly for the case of a violation seems to the German Government
unnecessary.
In agreement with the Government of the United States and with the French
Government, the German Government is also of the opinion that the
ultimate goal must be the universality of the new pact. In order to bring
about this universality, the draft treaty of the United States seems to open a
practical way. When the states primarily held in view as signatory powers
have concluded the pact it may be expected that the other states will
thereupon make use of the right of adhesion which is assured to them
without limitation or condition.
The German Government can accordingly declare that it is ready to
conclude a pact in accordance with the proposal of the Government of the
United States and to this end to enter into the necessary negotiations with
the Governments concerned. To this declaration the German Government
adds moreover its definite expectation that the realization of a pact of such
importance will not fail to make its influence felt at once in connection with
the shaping of international relations. Therefore this new guarantee for the
maintenance of peace must give a real impulse to the efforts for the carrying
out of general disarmament. And further still, the renunciation of war must

as a necessary complement enlarge the possibilities of settling in a peaceful
way the existing and potential conflicts of national interests.
STRESEMANN
45 Not printed.
45 Not printed.
47 File translation revised.

[Document 29]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
the Government is now inclined to accept without serious discussion your
proposal and to approach the entire subject of reservations, interpretations,
and similar matters only after the antiwar treaty is signed. I am told also that
the Government will urge France to follow the same procedure on ground
that too great insistence now on reservations may endanger whole scheme
and that the treaty must inevitably tend to maintain the status quo in
Europe, the maintenance of which is, of course, the dominant aim of French
policy.
I cannot vouch for the foregoing, but it does not seem unreasonable to
suppose that British mediation may take that line.
HOUGHTON

[Document 30]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
42. Grandi has given me confidentially copy of the memorandum reply of
the Italian Foreign Office to a memorandum of the British Ambassador,
dated [April] 28th. The Italian memorandum is dated May 1st and states
that in principle the Italian Foreign Office cannot help but consider with
sympathy the American proposal of a multilateral anti-war treaty.
The Italian memorandum further states that, as it believes uniformity of
view amongst the powers called upon to participate is indispensable, it
agrees that a preliminary meeting of the legal experts of the said powers
should be held. The Italian Foreign Office believes, however, that this
meeting would not prove efficacious unless participaiion therein of a legal
expert representing the Government of the United States were assured.
The Italian Foreign Office is also of the opinion that the conference of
which Mr. Kellogg spoke to the British Ambassador in Washington could
be held subsequently.
Repeated to London.
FLETCHER

[Document 31]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ROME, May 2, 1928—noon.
[Received 1:35 p.m.]
Government has suggested to Italians that an American expert be asked to
meet with the juristic experts of other powers, as Sir Austen Chamberlain
wishes more than all else to avoid appearance of a united European front
opposite the United States. Ambassador said that no place had been
suggested for the meeting; perhaps either Paris or London, he thought. He
agreed with my view that selection of Geneva would be unfortunate. The
suggestion for a conference of juristic experts apparently did not reach
Germany until after the Germans had accepted.
FLETCHER

[Document 32]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
therein does not seem to agree with the action of the British Government
from Rome.
submitting the question to a conference of technical experts. As a matter of
fact I would deplore any such step. Both the United States and Germany
have been able to take a clear and unequivocal position on this important
problem without any consultation with an international conference of
jurists, and I can see no reason whatsoever why the other Governments
concerned cannot, if they wish, make up their minds with equal
independence. I hope you will use your best efforts to discourage the idea of
a preliminary conference of jurists.
pleasure at a report from the British Ambassador at Washington that I had
intimated to him that I might be willing to come to London to attend a
meeting of the various Foreign Secretaries. It appears from Fletcher’s
telegram that the British Government has already raised with the Italian
Government the possibility of holding such a conference as that “of which
Mr. Kellogg spoke to the British Ambassador in Washington.” I am at a loss
to know upon what the British Ambassador could have based any such
report to his Government. I have never even contemplated the idea of going
to Europe to negotiate with respect to my proposed anti-war treaty, and I
can see not the slightest need for a preliminary conference of Foreign
Secretaries. A simple form of anti-war treaty has been proposed by the
United States for acceptance, modification or rejection. I have never

indicated a willingness to go abroad to negotiate the treaty. You should,
therefore, explain to Chamberlain that I never suggested a conference of
Foreign Ministers for the purpose of negotiating and agreeing upon a form
of treaty, and that in my opinion such a conference is wholly unnecessary.
The position of the United States is clearly set forth in its notes and in the
draft treaty it has proposed. The position of Germany is no less clearly
indicated in its unqualified acceptance of the American proposal. If the
United States and Germany can determine their respective positions on this
important subject without an international conference, I can see no reason
why the British, French, Italian and Japanese Governments cannot do
likewise.
KELLOGG

[Document 33]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
no need for submitting to a formal conference of jurists the question of
compatibility between my proposed anti-war treaty and the League
Covenant, the Treaties of Locarno, et cetera, and I hope that no such
conference is called. A preliminary meeting of Foreign Secretaries is, in my
opinion, equally unnecessary and undesirable. I cannot understand the basis
for the report from the British Ambassador at Washington to which
reference is made in the British memorandum. I have never indicated that I
would attend a meeting of Foreign Secretaries to discuss the anti-war treaty.
The position of the United States is clearly set forth in its notes and in the
draft treaty it has proposed. The position of Germany is no less clearly
indicated in its unqualified acceptance of the American proposal. If the
United States and Germany can determine their respective positions on this
important subject without an international conference, I can see no reason
why the British, French, Italian and Japanese Governments cannot do
likewise.
KELLOGG
48 Not printed.

[Document 34]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)49
122. I understand that as a result of inquiries by France and England the
several interested Governments are considering whether they shall refer to a
commission of legal experts representing the principal Locarno signatories,
Japan and possibly the United States the question whether the American
draft anti-war treaty is compatible with the League Covenant, the Treaties
of Locarno, et cetera. I can see absolutely no necessity for any such
conference. I am certain that such a proposal would meet with no popular
sympathy in the United States and I hope you will do all you can to
discourage the adoption of any such plan.
I am also informed that the British Government understands from a report
received from the British Ambassador at Washington that I have expressed
a willingness to attend a meeting in Europe of the several Foreign
Secretaries to discuss the proposed anti-war treaty. I am at a loss to know
upon what the British Ambassador can have based such a report. I have
never even contemplated going abroad to discuss or negotiate the treaty.
Such a conference of Foreign Secretaries seems to me both unnecessary and
undesirable and I hope you will take any favorable opportunity to
discourage the adoption of any such proposal. The position of the United
States is clearly set forth in its notes and in the draft treaty it has proposed.
The position of Germany is no less clearly indicated in its unqualified
acceptance of the American proposal. If the United States and Germany can
determine their respective positions on this important subject without an
international conference, I can see no reason why the British, French,
Italian and Japanese Governments cannot do likewise.
Repeat to Berlin as Department’s 49.
KELLOGG

pa

*) The same telegram was sent to Japan as No. 53.

[Document 35]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BERNE, May 2, 1928—midnight.
[Received May 4—9 a.m.]
47. In a conversation I had this morning with Sir Eric Drummond50 he
expressed the opinion that there was no inconsistency between our proposal
for the condemnation of war and the League of Nations Covenant. This
personal opinion he is impressing on all the statesmen with whom he comes
in contact, but so far he has failed to convince the French.
As Drummond sees it, the states members of the League are already under
the obligation not to make war on one another, and, after having agreed to
the proposal we have made, they would all be committed more definitely by
their obligations under the Covenant to observance of the Kellogg Pact.
Drummond stated further that states members of the League of Nations
would be under definite obligation, because of the League Covenant, to take
action against another member state which should violate the Kellogg Pact.
WILSON
50 Secretary General of the League of Nations.

[Document 36]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 1:45 p.m.]
commission of technical experts or a conference of Foreign Secretaries. If I
do, I shall endeavor to discourage their adoption.
HERRICK

[Document 37]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:05 p.m.]
hours with Chamberlain who expressed his great surprise that Chilton51
should have so misunderstood your attitude toward a meeting of Foreign
Secretaries for the consideration of differences of opinion. Proposed
meeting of jurists was in accord with Locarno procedure and he had favored
it; but in view of fact that you did not, and as without American
participation it would be useless, Chamberlain will do what he can to call it
off.
He then said that your Washington speech52 had been most helpful. We
went over each paragraph of it together and he seemed unable to find any
weak link in your statement. He brought up the Monroe Doctrine again and
asked what reply he could make if some member of the House of Commons
should ask him if the treaty would alter the Doctrine’s status in any way; he
referred to his own recent pronouncement to all the world in regard to
Egypt. Were both declarations left undisturbed by the signing of the treaty
or did it mean that enforcement of the Monroe Doctrine or of his
declaration on Egypt would be by the use of force if either were violated? I
replied that I could say no more than to repeat what I had said before. Were
he to put the question to me seriously and to ask for an answer, no doubt it
could be given. The position of the American Government relative to the
Monroe Doctrine, however, I thought had been made fully clear. One
question of this sort, I pointed out, brought on others, and soon we should
find ourselves traveling a long and difficult path directly away from the
goal which we both desired to reach. I was emphatic on the point that we

were not conducting an inquiry aimed to ascertain in advance how far each
of us could go without war being brought on; instead, by agreeing to
renounce war we were making possible thereafter the solution of actual
difficulties, as they arose, along peaceful lines. War was still possible. Any
nation knew how to bring war about, if it wanted war. We held the belief
that if we signed the treaty we meant to maintain it, not break it; that a fine-
spun investigation of all the ways by which it could or could not be broken
was not helpful or advisable.
To all this Chamberlain had no response to make except by manifesting an
evident sense of uncertainty. He again referred to the commission of jurists,
and said that by bringing them together he thought he was really forwarding
the acceptance of the treaty. I inquired what on earth there was for the
jurists to decide. The question was not juridical but political. No doubt each
nation would examine its treaty obligations to ascertain whether or not the
proposed treaty ran counter to them, just in the way Germany had done.
Unless he had some questions of interpretation, I said, besides those that the
French and Germans had raised, I frankly was unable to see what there was
left to discuss.
Chamberlain then said that he did not think that the German reply indicated
that Government’s unconditional acceptance of the proposal. He had sent a
cable to Stresemann asking him to hold back his answer until Chamberlain
could discuss it with him, but that Stresemann had answered that the
Government’s reply had been accepted by the German Cabinet and could
not be delayed. Chamberlain added that in this reply he had been relieved to
note that the position of the German Government was very much like that
of the British. He disagreed completely with the modifications proposed by
the French. He said that the whole situation had been cleared materially by
your Washington speech. I then asked him what he thought the net result of
your treaty, if it were accepted, would be in Europe. Would it turn out to be
an additional bulwark to the work that had been accomplished at Locarno as
well as to what the League of Nations had done in a more general way for
safe-guarding the peace, or would it damage in some way what had been
accomplished? Chamberlain unhesitatingly replied that of course it would
strengthen what had been accomplished. I said that if that were true, I could
not think of any nation with more to gain by coming out quickly and

accepting it than Great Britain, unless perhaps it were France. He replied
that if he signed the treaty he must be sure that no possibility existed that
difference on some action taken at a future date by Great Britain which the
British felt to be within the treaty and which the United States did not,
could not be resolved. That eventuality would open way to a very
dangerous dispute. I said that I thought that a much greater danger would be
suspicion among people of the United States that after Great Britain had
been offered an opportunity to preserve the peace, she had preferred, for
ulterior reasons, to maintain her right to break the peace. I urged him with
great seriousness not to be the last to accept your proposal; there was too
much at stake between us. Chamberlain thanked me and said that our
conversation had been of valuable assistance to him, and had cleared away
many of his difficulties. At the moment my impression is that Chamberlain
has not a leg left to stand on, and that the public statement which you made
last Saturday night has achieved its purpose fully.
When I rose to go, Chamberlain again referred to Mr. Chilton’s
misunderstanding of your views. I said that while of course I did not know
what was in your mind, it was possible that in order to give the treaty
greater emphasis, if it were accepted, but not to discuss it, you might have
thought that a meeting of the Foreign Ministers would be useful. He
responded warmly that undoubtedly it would, and that he hoped that if the
meeting were held, it would be in Washington, and that he himself would
like to be present.
Please let me know if I am cabling these interviews too fully. I am anxious
that Chamberlain’s thoughts be placed clearly before you, and that cannot
be done briefly.
Apropos of the foregoing, the French Ambassador told me last night after
dinner, when I had inquired regarding Briand’s health, that the Minister was
recovering, and that had he not been ill the most recent French note would
not have been sent. The Ambassador wishes to talk with me; and, unless
you see some good reason why I should refrain, I think I shall see him
within the next day or two. I think that to go over your Washington
statement with him might be very effective, for, as you know, he is a close
personal friend of Briand.

HOUGHTON
51 Henry G. Chilton, Acting Counselor of the British Embassy in
Washington.
52 Before the American Society of International Law, April 28. See

[Document 38]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
objection perceived to your talking with Fleuriau, who I am quite sure is
right about Briand. I desire you to cable fully regarding all interviews and
information that you may receive.
KELLOGG

[Document 39]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Embassy that French Ambassador called afternoon May 2nd and officially
requested Japanese Government to be represented on commission of legal
experts. French Ambassador added that he understood American
Government was favorable to the proposal. Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs informed French Ambassador that Japanese Government would be
willing to participate in such a conference provided all six powers—that is,
including the United States—were represented. This reply of Mr. Debuchi’s
was approved yesterday by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Upon contents of Department’s telegram number 53 being brought to the
attention of Vice Minister, the latter stated that Japanese Government would
of course reconsider its position as its reply to French Ambassador had been
made on understanding that the United States would participate. Mr.
Debuchi expressed personal opinion that the Japanese Government would
not be willing to join any such conference if the United States was not
willing to participate.
Embassy understood Japanese reply to French Ambassador was cabled to
Japanese Ambassador Paris May 2nd with instructions to repeat to Japanese
Embassy Washington, so presume [latter] is in position to confirm.
With respect to the meeting in Europe of Foreign Secretaries mentioned in
second paragraph of Department’s telegram, Mr. Debuchi stated that the
Japanese Chargé d’Affaires had telegraphed from London his understanding
that you had consented to participate in such a conference. Mr. Debuchi
said that the Italian Chargé d’Affaires here had first mentioned to him the
possibility of such a conference three days ago when Mr. Debuchi had

scoffed at the idea of Baron Tanaka[’s] being absent to attend, adding that
he supposed it was not meant to be taken literally; that the Foreign Minister
could designate a representative in which case Japan would probably
designate the Japanese Ambassador in Paris. Here again however he
emphasized his personal conviction that Japan would not participate in any
conference not attended by the United States adding that “you know we are
not interested in Locarno,” and intimated wisely that they were far from
Europe and League affairs.
MACVEAGH

[Document 40]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
Ambassador, M. Claudel was given clearly to understand that in our
opinion the idea of a conference of jurists was not best way of dealing with
the situation; that a conference of that sort was wholly unnecessary; that
instead of simplifying the problem, it would complicate it; and that proposal
of any such conference would have an unfortunate effect on American
public opinion. The Ambassador undertook to cable these views to French
Government.
In another conversation yesterday with the British Ambassador, Sir Esme
Howard stated that origin of the report that I would be willing to go to
Europe to negotiate the anti-war treaty was in a talk which I had with Mr.
Chilton some two weeks ago at a dinner party, and which Mr. Chilton
construed as indication on my part of willingness to go abroad to negotiate
the treaty, if necessary, but in any event to go to sign the treaty should one
be agreed upon. Sir Esme was told that Mr. Chilton must not have
understood what I said; for, while I might indeed have remarked that I
would go abroad, were it necessary, to sign the treaty, the thought of doing
so for the purpose of negotiation was altogether foreign to any intention I
had; that I had never even considered the possibility of taking such a step.
Howard is cabling British Government to correct erroneous impression
caused by earlier report from Embassy here.
Also in course of conversation yesterday with the German Ambassador,
latter was told frankly what our position was on French proposal regarding
a conference of jurists. He concurred in our views, and stated that from now

on the German Government meant to cooperate fully with the United
States.
The American Ambassador in Japan has just telegraphed as follows in reply
[Here follows text of first, second, and fourth paragraphs of telegram No.
is part of Doc. 39].]
I shall try to keep you fully advised of all significant developments. Please
do not hesitate to telegraph me, however, if there is any information you
need or any questions you desire answered.
KELLOGG

[Document 41]
The Ambassador in Cheat Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, May 7, 1928—noon.
99. Fleuriau came to see me late yesterday. He said that he was convinced
that some sort of meeting, whether of jurists or not, will be found to be
necessary before the treaty can be put in final form. He urged particularly
that matters be not hurried too much. French opinion which up to now has
taken proposal somewhat lightly is beginning to look at it more seriously
and time must be given for this opinion to crystallize. Fleuriau said that the
French amour propre had been somewhat disturbed by fact that you have
now assumed control of the negotiations, but he doubts that this feeling will
prove serious obstacle.
His most interesting statement was that France would not find it at all easy
to sign a treaty which Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia cannot also
sign. He had reason to think that Poland favored the treaty, but Yugoslavia’s
attitude was unknown to him. He felt that Czechoslovakia was somewhat
unfriendly, for when he had talked with Beneš54 about a week ago the latter
saw many difficulties in the way. Within the next few days he expects to see
Beneš again, and said he hoped that I, too, would take advantage of Beneš’
presence here at the present moment to go over the situation with him.
French acceptance will be made much easier if the three states mentioned
above agree.
As for himself, Fleuriau is in favor of the treaty, provided that your
interpretation of its meaning, substantially as given in your Washington
address, can be put into a more precise and authoritative form. He thought
that it might appear in preamble of the treaty. He wishes to talk with me

again a little later on, and hopes that by that time he will be in a position to
outline the French position more clearly. He repeated several times that
much would be accomplished if your point of view could be given to
Poincaré as frankly and directly as we had discussed them.
I shall not attempt to approach Beneš unless you think that, taking
everything into consideration, some useful purpose would be served by my
doing so, as I do not wish to interfere with any action that Einstein55 may be
taking. Please instruct by cable.
HOUGHTON
54 Eduard Beneš, the Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs.
55 Lewis Einstein, American Minister in Czechoslovakia.

[Document 42]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
informal talk with Beneš when you can see him would be a good plan. I do
not see that to do this would in any way interfere with Einstein, as at this
time I am not negotiating with Czechoslovakia, but only with the five
powers. I stated in my Washington speech, however, that I would be quite
willing to have any of the parties signatories to the Locarno treaties made
parties to the proposed treaty, either in first instance or later; and, as long as
Beneš understands that I am not at this moment presenting matter officially
to his Government, I think that it would be useful for you to have a talk
with him.
KELLOGG

[Document 43]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
ROME, May 5, 1928.
[Received May 23.]
No. 1682
to forward herewith a copy and translation of the reply of the Italian
Government regarding the proposed multilateral antiwar treaty.
I have [etc.]
HENRY P. FLETCHER
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mussolini) to the American Ambassador (Fletcher)
ROME, May 4, 1928.
Mr. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to refer to my note of April 23rd57 relative to
the proposal of the United States Government regarding a multilateral anti-
war treaty.
I hardly need to assure you that Italy, adhering to the policy which she is
constantly following, has welcomed with lively sympathy this initiative and
offers very willingly her cordial collaboration towards reaching an
agreement.
Your Excellency is aware of the fact that there is under consideration the
proposal for a preliminary meeting of the legal experts of the Powers whose
direct interest in the proposed treaty has been enlisted. The Royal

Government has adhered to this procedure, but has clearly pointed out that,
in its opinion, such a meeting can only be effective if the participation of a
legal expert of the Government of the United States is assured.
In accordance with this order of ideas, I beg Your Excellency to
communicate to Mr. Kellogg the lively desire of the Royal Government that
the participation of the United States in the preliminary meeting mentioned
above be not lacking.
I avail myself [etc.]
MUSSOLINI
56 Not printed.
57 Acknowledging receipt of the American note of April 13, and promising
an early reply; not printed.

[Document 44]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
127. Following reply from Italian Government in the matter of American
proposal for anti-war treaty will be published in Thursday morning
newspapers May 10:
[Here follows text of the Italian note of May 4, printed supra.]
Reference to proposed conference of jurists has no new significance at this
time, Italian Foreign Office stating in reply to inquiry that while such
reference may have been based on a misunderstanding, Italy desires that
note be published as Italian Government is anxious to show its friendly and
favorable disposition towards the American proposal and regards the
conference idea as secondary. Fletcher reports that Foreign Office states
that British proposal for jurists conference has been abandoned but that
Italy has received no indication that France has abandoned her position with
regard to the necessity for such a conference. Fletcher adds that in his
opinion Italy will not prove insistent in the conference matter. My views of
course remain unchanged and I hope no conference is called.
Repeat to Berlin as Department’s 51.
KELLOGG

[Document 45]
The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:15 p.m.]
Secretary this morning he said that there had been some question in the
minds of the Prime Minister and himself as to how much the note of the
United States to the British Government on the subject of the anti-war pact
was meant to apply to the Dominions, including Canada.
He expressed himself as uncertain whether the United States would expect
Canada to participate in the original treaty or whether Canada and other
Dominions would be invited subsequently to conclude a separate agreement
with the United States.
PHILLIPS
58 Not printed.

[Document 46]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, May 9, 1928—noon.
101. Last evening after the Court, Chamberlain took me aside to say that he
was preparing a note which he would base substantially upon the German
formula, the last paragraph being entirely recast.
Chamberlain said that he was highly gratified to be advised by Howard that
you do not wholly exclude a conference of jurists. My assumption had been
to the contrary. I have therefore emphasized in my conversations that the
question at issue was not juridical but political and was wholly for each
Government to decide for itself and that all thought of the jurists’
conference had been abandoned. If Howard’s statement is correct, however,
and you wish to leave door still open for conference, please advise me.
Concerted action of some sort will doubtless be necessary before the treaty
is ready for signature, but I had thought that this work could properly and
naturally be done by the Ambassadors in Washington, informally and
wholly under your direction. I know that the French Ambassador here had
some such notion in mind, and I think that Chamberlain had also.
I am to see Beneš today at noon.
HOUGHTON

[Document 47]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
discourage idea of a conference of jurists, pointing out that in my opinion
no such conference is at all either necessary or desirable, I have been
careful to refrain from stating flatly that this Government would decline to
be represented at such a conference. My feeling that a conference of jurists
is both unnecessary and undesirable is as strong as ever, and I earnestly
hope that no formal proposal looking to the convening of such a conference
will come from any quarter. I am very doubtful if the United States would
be willing to send a jurist to a preliminary conference of that nature. Of
course, each Government is now consulting its legal advisers but, as you
have said, the main question is not juridical but political and entirely for
each Government to decide for itself.
I am greatly pleased to learn that Chamberlain is preparing his reply; from
his description I gather that it will be favorable. Once more I wish to
congratulate you on the admirable manner in which you have conducted the
discussions with him.
KELLOGG

[Document 48]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Canada (Phillips)
subsequent “separate agreement with the United States”. This Government
has proposed a single multilateral treaty for signature in the first instance by
the six Powers named in the preamble of the draft submitted with the
identic notes of April 13. After the treaty comes into force it remains open
for subsequent accession by all the other Powers of the world. (See Article
III). The draft treaty describes the British Sovereign as “His Majesty the
King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas,
Emperor of India”, which is his imperial title. The question as to when and
how Canada should be bound by the treaty appears to me to be primarily
one of Empire policy, and in such cases the United States is careful to
negotiate through London, even when, as in the case of Ireland and Canada,
independent diplomatic representatives are stationed at Washington. I have,
of course, talked informally with Massey59 about the general subject, and I
see no reason why you should not informally acquaint the Foreign Office
with the fact that the United States would warmly welcome Canadian
participation in the treaty at any time and in any manner that may be agreed
upon by the Governments at London and Ottawa.
KELLOGG
59 Vincent Massey, Canadian Minister In the United States.

[Document 49]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
former meetings and said that he was pleased to have an opportunity for
discussion with me of the very important measures now under
consideration. He was in close touch with the sentiment in the French
Foreign Office as well as with that in the British, and he thought that his
relations with the powers of Central Europe made him fully cognizant of
their feeling also. Everybody, of course, wanted peace. In principle he could
agree with every effort in that direction, and he welcomed warmly the
approach that America was now making to Europe. He felt that it showed
American approbation toward what had been accomplished in the past few
years in Europe to maintain peace. He was ready to think that your proposal
would strengthen these efforts in the way of accomplishment and would
tend to maintain the status quo; but at the, same time he was a political
realist: He must know exactly what it was that he was asked to sign. As a
step in that direction he had read your notes, and had been especially
interested in your Washington speech, which had dissipated most of his
doubts.
He then raised the following four points: (1) self-defense; (2) the League
Covenant; (3) the Locarno pact; (4) the defensive treaties between
Czechoslovakia and France and between Czechoslovakia and the members
of the Little Entente.
We took up these points in order, after some general discussion, and I read
the appropriate paragraphs from your Washington speech. Beneš did not

seem wholly satisfied with the answer to his fourth question. I repeated that
if, as he said, his commitments were in fact defensive, they could begin to
operate only in the event of attack, and that my understanding of your
position was that in such an event he was left free toward the attacking
power. This statement seemingly satisfied him; at least, he said finally that
his fears had now been removed and asserted that he would favor the treaty
here in London and also in Paris, as well as at a meeting of the Little
Entente Powers which he intimated between ourselves might take place in
about a month. He thought that any difficulties between Washington and
Paris could now be easily removed.
I said that I had had no information on the attitude of Yugoslavia; and
Beneš replied that Yugoslavia had not yet taken any position. He added that
that country and Rumania would doubtless adopt the same attitude toward
the treaty that France would take. He remarked, incidentally, that King
Carol was now definitely out of Rumanian politics and would not hereafter
figure seriously therein.
As I started to take my leave, Beneš halted me to say that the arbitration
treaty between Czechoslovakia and the United States was now in his
possession;60 that in principle he saw nothing to occasion dispute, and that
on his return to Prague he would act on it favorably. These statements were
for your private information.
The net result of this interview is that I incline to the opinion that Beneš
really is in favor of the treaty. I also think that his influence, which is, of
course, great, will be exerted to bring the French Foreign Office to a more
favorable mood. At the same time, I doubt that he will take a position which
is antagonistic to Paris. He wished to extend to you through me his cordial
regards and good wishes.
HOUGHTON
60 See vol.  II, pp. 688 ff.

[Document 50]
The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4 p.m.]
the Foreign Office the sense of the last paragraph of the above.
The Under Secretary stated that he knew that the Prime Minister would be
much gratified by this cordial expression.
He further informed me that from Canada’s point of view her initial
inclusion in the treaty proposed to London would be desirable and that,
provided such a course could be agreed upon by the governments at London
and Ottawa, an inquiry might be necessary either through the British
Ambassador or the Canadian Minister at Washington or both as to whether
such a course would be acceptable to the United States.
Details by despatch.61
PHILLIPS
61 Not printed.

[Document 51]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:30 p.m.]
103. I greatly appreciate your kind message in your telegram No. 116, May
9, 4 p.m. If not too bold, I should like to submit the following views:
I am doubtful if you are aware how tremendously strong your position now
is. You can direct the course of the negotiations almost at will. All that is
necessary for you to do is to make your decisions known. As long as your
present attitude is maintained, of insisting that your proposal is simple and
straightforward and does not need elaborate explanations and reservations,
the treaty will gain support and will be accepted in the end. If for any
reasons, however appealing, you should take part in a conference of any
sort, I fear that you will be drawn directly and inevitably into discussion of
possibilities both hypocritical and wholly without foundation, which may
easily wreck the entire plan, and which of course the opponents of the treaty
would like to bring about, even though they dare not admit it openly.
Whatever consultations on phraseology are necessary can be carried on,
under your guidance, with the Ambassadors in Washington.
Opponents were utterly confounded by your Washington address.62 The
difficulty which now remains is to tie up your interpretation to the treaty. If
you are able now to secure the treaty by embodying therein, in the form of a
preamble, precisely those declarations which you set forth in your
Washington address and then submit the treaty completed in that form to all
concerned and then proceed promptly to make it public, I believe that its
acceptance will be substantially assured. The several powers will no doubt
suggest those changes in phraseology which you said were indifferent to

you. You are in a position where you can accept them or not, as you wish.
The only point which is vital is that you keep the initiative which is now
yours, and center the discussion around treaty as a whole. In his speech
yesterday in the House of Commons, Chamberlain stated that Great Britain
had no commitments which prevented acceptance of your proposal. This
declaration must be taken, however, in connection with the other statement
he made that Great Britain never uses war as an instrument of national
policy. You will recall that some weeks ago Chamberlain expressed his
belief that Great Britain’s relations with France are all-important for
European peace. Now that he has put Great Britain in the right, he would
like to be the mediating influence to bring in France. It appears to me,
though, that if a complete form of treaty were to be submitted to the several
powers for their comment, it would be necessary for the French to deal with
you directly. Even though thus circumvented, Chamberlain will not oppose
the treaty; his influence will in any event be directed to its support.
Beneš is being very active here. As far as I am able to learn, he is urging
acceptance of treaty. Today or tomorrow I shall see the French Ambassador.
The Polish Minister wishes to talk with me Monday. I think nothing of
importance can develop here after that until Poland’s position and that of
Little Entente has been determined in consultation with the French; that
means, apparently, a delay of some weeks. Pray do not think that I am
trying to take part in matters which are not my affair. Our pride in the great
progress you have made perhaps makes us too eager to offer suggestions.
HOUGHTON

[Document 52]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
119. For your information I quote below text of an Aide Memoire received
yesterday from the British Embassy:
“Sir
Austen
Chamberlain
has
instructed
His
Majesty’s
Ambassador to convey to the Secretary of State his thanks for the
latter’s friendly message and particularly for the expression of
willingness to reconsider the question of a conference of
Ministers if it should ultimately prove necessary in order to
secure agreement with the other Powers. Sir Austen Chamberlain
entirely agrees with the Secretary of State that in no case should
such a conference be held until the matter has been further
prepared, and agreement is practically within sight. It was for this
reason that, believing the Secretary of State to desire a meeting of
Ministers, Sir Austen Chamberlain tentatively suggested that it
should be preceded by a meeting of jurists including an American
jurist, for he thought that an informal and non-committal
discussion by them would, as in the case of the Locarno
discussions, do the necessary preliminary work and bring the
governments within sight of, if not actually to, an agreement of all
six powers, which it is the desire of His Majesty’s Government,
no less than the United States Government, to reach as rapidly as
possible.
On hearing, however, from the United States Ambassador that
Mr. Kellogg was not favourably disposed towards a conference
either of jurists or of Foreign Ministers, Sir Austen Chamberlain
at once withdrew his suggestion.”

The substance of the foregoing was communicated to me orally by Chilton
on Wednesday. In reply I thanked him warmly for Chamberlain’s message
and said that I was very much opposed to a Commission of Jurists; that this
was largely a great political issue between the Governments raised above
the mere legal opinion of jurists who, if they got together, would spend their
time trying to find out some reason why it could not be done, but that each
government would and undoubtedly had consulted its legal advisers. I
added that I had expressed my opinion in my speech and believed that a
preliminary meeting of this kind, which could decide nothing, would be an
obstacle rather than a help.
As to the meeting of ministers, I told him I had avoided stating that I would
not attend; that I did not care to assume the responsibility of refusing to
attend if the time should come when such a meeting was absolutely
necessary. I said I thought that the governments could get together on the
form of a treaty as it was a simple proposition and, if so, it would be much
better than having a general conference. As you know I have previously
said to the Ambassador that if the time came when it was deemed advisable
to impress the world with the importance of this matter, I would not oppose
meeting the foreign ministers for the purpose of signing, but as you also
know I am vigorously opposed to any preliminary conference of Foreign
Ministers and Chilton so understands. Wire me fully what you learn from
Fleuriau and the Polish Minister.
KELLOGG

[Document 53]
The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:44 p.m.]
29. With reference to the Kellogg plan for renunciation of war which has
been presented to the five great powers, I desire to submit to the
Department the Polish point of view which Tarnowski, chief of League of
Nations section of the Foreign Office, expressed unofficially and informally
to me on Saturday.
The Government of Poland regrets that it was not equally associated with
the five powers for the following reasons:
1. A proposal of a similar nature was made last year to the League
of Nations by Poland;
2. By reason of her geographical and political situation Poland
can contribute greatly to peace of Europe, and without her
cooperation any peace plan would fail;
3. A proposal such as the one named made to Germany and not to
Poland complicates the latter’s position by lessening her prestige;
4. Because of Poland’s alliance with France the proposal creates
an annoying juridical situation.
In regard to the first point, Mr. Tarnowski contends that Poland’s original
proposal made last September was almost identical with the Kellogg
proposal, but that before it reached the League of Nations it had been
greatly modified under French and British influence. Copy of this original

Polish plan has been promised me for this week, and upon receipt I shall
forward it to the Department.63
In regard to the fourth point, Poland contends that if the Kellogg plan is
accepted by the five powers Germany could then attack Poland, and France
would not be able to comply with the terms of her military alliance with
Poland.
Belief held by Polish Government is that if the Kellogg plan is to
accomplish the greatest possible amount of good, the United States should
include in the invitation not only the Governments which were allies during
the World War but also the Governments signatories of the Locarno pact; in
other words, Czechoslovakia and Poland should be included in the
invitation.
The foregoing statements were confirmed to a large extent this morning by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who added that the Government was more
partial to the plan put forth by the United States than to that put forward by
the French, and that it did not wish to criticize the United States for not
having invited Poland to participate.
Sometime during the present week the Minister for Foreign Affairs is
expected to give expose of Polish foreign policy before Committee of
Foreign Affairs in Diet at which time he will probably allude to the Kellogg
proposal along the lines indicated above.
STETSON

[Document 54]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Poland (Stetson)
[Paraphrase]
Minister for Foreign Affairs that I suggested that a treaty against war be
signed in the first instance by the Governments of the United States, Great
Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Japan and no others solely because I
felt that to enlarge field of formal negotiations at outset would cause real
difficulties to emerge and would lessen the likelihood of prompt agreement.
I am not by any means ignorant of the service that has been rendered by
Poland to the cause of peace, and I should be highly gratified, of course, if
Poland would indicate her approval of the form of treaty which this
Government has proposed.
I have already recognized that the countries signatories of the Locarno
treaties occupy a special position, and this Government is, naturally,
entirely willing that all the parties to the Locarno treaties should become
parties to the proposed anti-war treaty either by means of signature to it in
the first instance or by immediate accession to it as soon as it comes into
force as provided by article III of our proposed draft.
This Government has informed the Governments of Great Britain, France,
Germany, Italy, and Japan that the United States would not offer any
objection when and if such a suggestion as indicated in second paragraph
were made, and in the address which I delivered before the American
Society of International Law on April 28 I made the same statement. I wish
you so to inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs; and you will add that if
Government of Poland is disposed to accept the form of treaty which the
Government of the United States has proposed and will indicate this

disposition to me, I shall be quite happy to cooperate in any way I may to
the end that Poland may become one of the treaty’s original signatories.
Repeat your No. 29 and this reply to Embassy, London, for the
Ambassador’s information.
KELLOGG

[Document 55]
The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:23 p.m.]
telegram to Minister for Foreign Affairs, who received it most favorably.
He promised to consult with his colleagues, particularly Pilsudski,64 and
next week to give me a definite reply.
He also stated, and as not to be divulged, that the Germans wished to
modify article II to include in it arbitration and conciliation. Polish
Government would not consider statement more definite than that of the
American draft. The Minister added that the French Ambassador had
intimated that if Government of Poland accepted the American proposals,
the Government of the Republic would be inclined to modify certain
objections which it had raised during the negotiations in manner favorable
to position of the American Government.
STETSON
64 Marshal Joseph Pilsudski, Polish Prime Minister and Minister of War.

[Document 56]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
114. Following is text of British reply, dated May 19:
“Your Excellency: Your note of the 13th April containing the text
of a draft treaty for the renunciation of war, together with copies
of the correspondence between the United States and French
Governments on the subject of this treaty, has been receiving
sympathetic consideration at the hands of His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain. A note has also been received from
the French Government containing certain suggestions for
discussion in connection with the proposed treaty, and the
German Government were good enough to send me a copy of the
reply which has been made by them to the proposals of the United
States Government.
2. The suggestion for the conclusion of a treaty for the
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy
has evoked widespread interest in this country and His
Majesty’s Government will support the movement to
the utmost of their power,
3. After making a careful study of the text contained in
Your Excellency’s note and of the amended text
suggested
in
the
French
note,
His
Majesty’s
Government feel convinced that there is no serious
divergence between the effect of these two drafts. This
impression is confirmed by a study of the text of the
speech by the Secretary of State of the United States to

which Your Excellency drew my attention and which he
delivered before the American Society of International
Law on the 28th April. The aim of the United States
Government, as I understand it, is to embody in a treaty
a broad statement of principle, to proclaim without
restriction or qualification that war shall not be used as
an instrument of policy. With this aim His Majesty’s
Government are wholly in accord. The French
proposals, equally imbued with the same purpose, have
merely added an indication of certain exceptional
circumstances in which the violation of that principle
by one party may oblige the others to take action
seeming at first sight to be inconsistent with the terms
of the proposed pact. His Majesty’s Government
appreciate the scruples which have prompted these
suggestions by the French Government. The exact
fulfillment of treaty engagements is a matter which
affects the national honor; precision as to the scope of
such engagements is, therefore, of importance. Each of
the suggestions made by the French Government has
been carefully considered from this point of view.
4. After studying the wording of article 1 of the United
States draft. His Majesty’s Government do not think
that its terms exclude action which a state may be
forced to take in self-defense. Mr. Kellogg has made it
clear in the speech to which I have referred above that
he regards the right of self-defense as inalienable, and
His Majesty’s Government are disposed to think that on
this question no addition to the text is necessary.
5. As regards the text of article 2, no appreciable
difference is found between the American and the
French proposals. His Majesty’s Government are
therefore content to accept the former if, as they
understand to be the case, a dispute ‘among the high

contracting parties’ is a phrase wide enough to cover a
dispute between any two of them.
6. The French note suggests the addition of an article
providing that violation of the treaty by one of the
parties should release the remainder from their
obligations under the treaty towards that party. His
Majesty’s Government are not satisfied that, if the
treaty stood alone, the addition of some such provision
would not be necessary. Mr. Kellogg’s speech, however,
shows that he put forward for acceptance the text of the
proposed treaty upon the understanding that violation of
the undertaking by one party would free the remaining
parties from the obligation to observe its terms in
respect of the treaty-breaking state.
7. If it is agreed that this is the principle which will
apply in the case of this particular treaty, His Majesty’s
Government are satisfied and will not ask for the
insertion of any amendment. Means can no doubt be
found without difficulty of placing this understanding
on record in some appropriate manner so that it may
have equal value with the terms of the treaty itself.
8. The point is one of importance because of its bearing
on the treaty engagements by which His Majesty’s
Government are already bound. The preservation of
peace has been the chief concern of His Majesty’s
Government and the prime object of all their endeavors.
It is the reason why they have given ungrudging support
to the League of Nations and why they have undertaken
the burden of the guarantee embodied in the Locarno
treaty. The sole object of all these engagements is the
elimination of war as an instrument of national policy,
just as it is the purpose of the peace pact now proposed.
It is because the object of both is the same that there is
no real antagonism between the treaty engagements

which His Majesty’s Government have already
accepted and the pact which is now proposed. The
machinery of the Covenant and of the Treaty of
Locarno, however, go somewhat further than a
renunciation of war as a policy, in that they provide
certain sanctions for a breach of their obligations. A
clash might thus conceivably arise between the existing
treaties and the proposed pact unless it is understood
that the obligations of the new engagement will cease to
operate in respect of a party which breaks its pledges
and adopts hostile measures against one of its co-
contractants.
9. For the Government of this country respect for the
obligations arising out of the Covenant of the League of
Nations and out of the Locarno treaties is fundamental.
Our position in this regard is identical with that of the
German Government as indicated in their note of the
27th April. His Majesty’s Government could not agree
to any new treaty which would weaken or undermine
these engagements on which the peace of Europe rests.
Indeed, public interest in this country in the scrupulous
fulfillment of these engagements is so great that His
Majesty’s Government would for their part prefer to see
some such provision as article 4 of the French draft
embodied in the text of the treaty. To this we understand
there will be no objection. Mr. Kellogg has made it
clear in the speech to which I have drawn attention that
he had no intention by the terms of the new treaty of
preventing the parties to the Covenant of the League or
to the Locarno treaty from fulfilling their obligations.
10. The language of article 1, as to the renunciation of
war as an instrument of national policy, renders it
desirable that I should remind Your Excellency that
there are certain regions of the world the welfare and
integrity of which constitute the special and vital

interest for our peace and safety. His Majesty’s
Government have been at pains to make it clear in the
past that interference with these regions cannot be
suffered. Their protection against attack is to the British
Empire a measure of self-defense. It must be clearly
understood that His Majesty’s Government in Great
Britain accept the new treaty upon the distinct
understanding that it does not prejudice their freedom
of action in this respect. The Government of the United
States have comparable interests any disregard of which
by a foreign power they have declared that they would
regard as an unfriendly act. His Majesty’s Government
believe, therefore, that in defining their position they
are expressing the intention and meaning of the United
States Government.
11. As regards the measure of participation in the new
treaty before it would come into force. His Majesty’s
Government agree that it is not necessary to wait until
all the nations of the world have signified their
willingness to become parties. On the other hand, it
would be embarrassing if certain states in Europe with
whom the proposed participants are already in close
treaty relations were not included among the parties.
His Majesty’s Government see no reason, however, to
doubt that these states will gladly accept its terms.
Universality would, in any case, be difficult of
attainment, and might even be inconvenient, for there
are some states whose governments have not yet been
universally recognized, and some which are scarcely in
a position to ensure the maintenance of good order and
security within their territories. The conditions for the
inclusion of such states among the parties to the new
treaty is a question to which further attention may
perhaps be devoted with advantage. It is, however, a
minor question as compared with the attainment of the
more important purpose in view.

12. After this examination of the terms of the proposed
treaty and of the points to which it gives rise, Your
Excellency will realize that His Majesty’s Government
find nothing in their existing commitments which
prevents their hearty cooperation in this new movement
for strengthening the foundations of peace. They will
gladly cooperate in the conclusion of such a pact as is
proposed and are ready to engage with the interested
Governments in the negotiations which are necessary
for the purpose.
13. Your Excellency will observe that the detailed
arguments in the foregoing paragraphs are expressed on
behalf of His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain. It
will, however, be appreciated that the proposed treaty,
from its very nature, is not one which concerns His
Majesty’s Government in Great Britain alone, but is one
in which they could not undertake to participate
otherwise than jointly and simultaneously with His
Majesty’s Governments in the Dominions and the
Government of India. They have, therefore, been in
communication with those Governments, and I am
happy to be able to inform Your Excellency that, as a
result of the communications which have passed, it has
been ascertained that they are all in cordial agreement
with the general principle of the proposed treaty. I feel
confident, therefore, that, on receipt of an invitation to
participate in the conclusion of such a treaty, they, no
less than His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain,
will be prepared to accept the invitation.
I have the honor to be, with the highest consideration,
Your
Excellency’s
obedient
servant,
Austen
Chamberlain.”
HOUGHTON

65 Telegram In two sections.

[Document 57]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Ambassador handed me a copy of Chamberlain’s note of May 19, he
dictated the following extract from separate instructions which Chamberlain
had sent him regarding the participation in the treaty by the Dominions and
India:
“As regards the procedure respecting the Dominion Governments
and the Government of India, His Majesty’s Government wishes
to stress the obvious necessity for the whole empire signing the
treaty simultaneously. His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain
feels confident that the United States Government will approve
participation of the Dominions and India and will gladly extend to
them the necessary invitations. They would much prefer separate
invitations being sent to each of the Dominion Governments and
there would be no objection to the invitations to Canada and the
Irish Free State being extended through the United States
Legations in Ottawa and Dublin and the invitations to His
Majesty’s Governments in Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa and the Government of India through the United
States Ambassador in London.”
I am today telegraphing to our Legations at Ottawa and Dublin the text of a
note to be dated and delivered tomorrow inviting participation in the treaty
by Canada and the Irish Free State, respectively.67 In view of the procedure
suggested by Chamberlain through Howard, I desire to have a
corresponding invitation extended by you tomorrow to His Majesty’s
Governments in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa and to the
Government of India. According to information furnished by the British

Embassy, your note of invitation should be addressed to Chamberlain.
Unless a different procedure is requisite, particularly with reference to
whether there should be four separate notes, in which case make the
necessary changes, you should therefore date and deliver tomorrow to
Chamberlain the following note which mutatis mutandis is identical with
those to be delivered in Ottawa and Dublin:
“In the note which you addressed to me on May 19, 1928, you
were good enough to inform my Government that His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain had been in communication with His
Majesty’s Governments in the Dominions and with the
Government of India, and had ascertained that they were all in
cordial agreement with the general principle of the multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war which the Government of the
United States proposed on April 13, 1928. You added that you felt
confident, therefore, that His Majesty’s Governments in the
Dominions and the Government of India were prepared to accept
an invitation to participate in the conclusion of such a treaty as
that proposed by the Government of the United States.
I have been instructed to state to Your Excellency that my
Government has received this information with the keenest
satisfaction. My Government has hoped from the outset of the
present negotiations that the Governments of the Dominions and
the Government of India would feel disposed to become parties to
the suggested anti-war treaty. It is, moreover, most gratifying to
the Government of the United States to learn that His Majesty’s
Governments in the Dominions and the Government of India are
so favorably inclined towards the treaty for the renunciation of
war which my Government proposed on April 13, 1928, as to
wish to participate therein individually and as original signatories,
and my Government, for its part, is most happy to accede to the
suggestion contained in your note to me of May 19, 1928.
Accordingly I have been instructed to extend through you to His
Majesty’s Governments in Australia, New Zealand and South
Africa and to the Government of India a cordial invitation in the

name of the Government of the United States to become original
parties to the treaty for the renunciation of war which is now
under consideration. Pursuant to my instructions, I also have the
honor to inform you that the Government of the United States will
address through you to His Majesty’s Governments in Australia,
New Zealand and South Africa and to the Government of India at
the same time and in the same manner as to the other
Governments whose participation in the proposed treaty in the
first instance is contemplated, any further communications which
it may make on the subject of the treaty after it has been
acquainted with the views of all the Governments to which its
note of April 13, 1928, was addressed.”
Please inform the Foreign Office that the Government of the United States
proposes to release the text of its invitations to the Dominions and India for
publication simultaneously in the United States and abroad in Friday
morning’s newspapers, May 25. You should make appropriate arrangements
for publication in the local press.
Please telegraph as soon as you have delivered the foregoing note.
KELLOGG
66 Not printed.

[Document 58]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
127. The British reply on the Peace Pact has been relatively very pleasing to
French public opinion. The terms in which Chamberlain and Cushendun68
had voiced the approval of the British Government on our proposal had
already pleased certain elements here, but the apprehension had been
general that the British answer would approach an unconditional
acceptance. The initial reaction here, consequently, is one of relief, and the
British reply is taken as recognizing validity of France’s position and as
taking her reservations into consideration.
A great interest is being taken in the passage in the British reply on freedom
of action in regions the welfare and integrity of which are of special interest
to the British Empire; this is characterized as British “Monroe Doctrine.”
HERRICK
68 Lord Cushendun, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

[Document 59]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, May 25, 1928.
No. 2774
in which is reported the existence of confusion with respect to the two
Resolutions, approved at the Sixth International Conference of American
States, relative to the condemnation of war as an instrument of national
policy, and aggression. You request the Department’s instructions in the
premises definitely clearing up this confusion.
In reply you are informed for such informal use as may seem necessary that
the confusion to which you refer, and which is described in the clipping
from the Journal des Debats that accompanied your despatch under
acknowledgment, has arisen as a result of the action of the Cuban officials
in altering the text of one of those Resolutions after the Final Act of the
Conference in which it was contained had been signed.
The declarations that the American Republics desire to express that they
condemn war as an instrument of national policy in their mutual relations
and that they have the most fervent desire to contribute in every possible
manner to the development of international means for the pacific settlement
of conflicts between States, were contained in the two opening paragraphs
of one of the Resolutions referred to when the Final Act was signed. A copy
of the Final Act as signed was obtained at the time of signature by the
American Delegation, and the Resolution in question appears in this copy
with the two paragraphs included. The certified copies of the Final Act as
distributed by the Cuban Government, however, show that the Resolution
has been altered; and upon inquiry the Department has learned that the page
containing this Resolution was removed from the Final Act after it was
signed and a new page inserted containing a version wherein the two

paragraphs are omitted. In explanation of this substitution the Cuban
Government states that the two paragraphs mentioned are stylistically
inadmissible inasmuch as they properly should be regarded as a preamble
and not as a part of the Resolution itself.
This Government is unwilling to agree to this substitution, which was made
without its knowledge and presumably without the knowledge of any of the
signatory Governments, and is at present endeavoring to have the
paragraphs reinstated.
Copies of translations of the two Resolutions are enclosed herewith for your
information.69
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS

[Document 60]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2:45 p.m.]
122. Last night Chamberlain dined alone with me at his suggestion; we
spent a long evening together. He desired especially that I should
understand his policy toward France, contrasting the difficulties which had
existed between the two countries as long as Great Britain had maintained a
distant attitude with the good results which had followed directly upon
putting his policy of friendship into effect. Chamberlain went into this in
detail and with evident sincerity. He then spoke of his recent note to you,
saying that he was heartily in favor of your proposal, as were the
Government and people of Great Britain. He added that he felt he could do
much to bring the French to accept your point of view, considering his
especial relations of friendship with France. He had informed the French
that he could not possibly endorse their note and that he could not accept all
their reservations. He agreed that it was necessary to find some way of
tying up the interpretations which you gave in your Washington address to
the treaty itself. He would accept the treaty as it stands if the matter were
solely between you and him, but as so many nations were involved it was
obvious that some basis of interpretation satisfactory to you must be found.
He had given thought several times to the question whether an informal
discussion between Olds70 and [Henry?]71 would not forward the matter,
but of course he had not made any such suggestion to anyone. He said that
he was speaking thus frankly to me because we were talking intimately and
not as Foreign Secretary to Ambassador. I thanked him and said that I was
certain of his good will toward the treaty and was confident that he would
do all in his power to bring France into line with your proposal. I added,

however, that what he said left me with the impression that in a couple of
ways his note was not wholly satisfactory:
In the first place, I was uncertain that he had even now grasped your
meaning precisely. I was merely your agent and had no authority to read
into the treaty any more than it said, but that in my personal belief the
proposal boiled down to three elements: (1) A general acceptance of the
status quo; (2) renunciation by each signatory of right to wage private war
to break that status; (3) violation of the treaty by any nation automatically
released other signatories as toward the offending nation. That is to say, a
nation making war for its own private purposes would become an offender
against all the others. Each nation was left entirely free, of course, to take
such action as was suitable to the situation in whatever manner it saw fit or
to remain quiescent, but that the offending nation would necessarily occupy
a position somewhat analogous to that of a lawbreaker in any community.
Chamberlain seemingly found in this analysis a new point of view; he
seized upon it and said that he agreed with it wholly. He thought that France
would also agree when the proposal was understood, but that at present
France undoubtedly was fearful that the treaty in some way would prove
inimical to the League Covenant and the Locarno agreement and the
existing treaties. I replied that I thought that you had cleared all this ground
satisfactorily, and he said that he had thought so too, but that the French
must be given sufficient time to accommodate themselves to what, after all,
was a new conception of international relations. He added that the French
Ambassador (Fleuriau) had told him that as your recent note had not been
addressed to France there was no assurance that France would reply to it. I
replied that I was not informed.
I then remarked, as my second point, that my feeling was that his reference
to a British “Monroe Doctrine” was unfortunate, as it opened a veritable
Pandora’s box of difficulties. Were Great Britain now to set up a Monroe
Doctrine would France and Italy and Japan also find expedient the
development of Monroe Doctrines of their own? If they did, a serious
situation must result. This comment seemed greatly to trouble Chamberlain,
who expressed the hope that his statement would be followed by no such
result, as he had made it only to reassure Parliament over Egypt. As for
Japan, he had heard that an unconditional acceptance would be forwarded. I

said that I hoped, likewise, that no untoward results would follow, but I
emphasized strongly my opinion that efforts to surround the treaty with
reservations seemed most unfortunate.
Chamberlain then said that certain American comments on his statement
had greatly puzzled him, as he had understood that there was no objection
to the fourth point of the French reply. This statement had been based, he
said, upon a memorandum from Sir Esme Howard in which you were
quoted to this effect. He Avent on to say that he perceived many objections
to a reported formula in which the phrase “involved in war” was used. He
pointed out that this made possible the attack of either party, the guilty with
the innocent alike, by the other signatories.
His final statement, which he made with a good deal of earnestness, was
that at any time he might be brought before an international court where his
treaty obligations would be interpreted technically and in a purely legal
way; that I must realize, therefore, that for his protection a correct
phraseology was an absolute necessity. There could be nothing taken for
granted.
Chamberlain will leave for Geneva tomorrow and will not return until the
end of June. He plans to go away again for a vacation of six or eight weeks
about September 1.
HOUGHTON
70 Robert B. Olds, Under Secretary of State.
71 Jules Henry, First Secretary of the French Embassy.

[Document 61]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
handed to me at 10:30 this morning the following reply of the Japanese
Government:
“Monsieur l’Ambassadeur: I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of Your Excellency’s note number 336 of April 13th,
last,73 transmitting to me, under instructions from the
Government of the United States, the preliminary draft of a
proposed multilateral treaty representing in a general way a form
of treaty which the Government of the United States is prepared
to sign with the French, British, German, Italian and Japanese
Governments and any other governments similarly disposed, with
the object of securing the renunciation of war. At the same time
Your Excellency enclosed a copy of the correspondence recently
exchanged between the Governments of the United States and the
French Republic commencing with a proposal put forward by
Monsieur Briand in June, 1927; and you intimated that the
Government of the United States desired to be informed whether
the Japanese Government were in a position to give favorable
consideration to the conclusion of such a treaty as that of which
you enclosed a draft—and if not, what specific modification in
the text would make it acceptable.
I beg to inform Your Excellency that the Government of Japan
sympathize warmly with the high and beneficent aims of the
proposal now made by the United States, which they take to
imply the entire abolition of the institution of war, and that they

will be glad to render their most cordial cooperation towards the
attainment of that end.
The proposal of the United States is understood to contain
nothing that would refuse to independent states the right of self-
defense, and nothing which is incompatible with the obligations
of agreements guaranteeing the public peace, such as are
embodied in the Covenant of the League of Nations and the
treaties of Locarno. Accordingly, the Imperial Government firmly
believe that unanimous agreement on a mutually acceptable text
for such a treaty as is contemplated is well capable of realization
by discussion between the six powers referred to, and they would
be happy to collaborate with cordial good will in the discussions
with the purpose of securing what they are persuaded is the
common desire of all the peoples of the world—namely, the
cessation of wars and the definite establishment among the
nations of an era of permanent and universal peace.
I avail myself of this occasion to renew to Your Excellency,
Monsieur
l’Ambassadeur
the
assurance
of
my
highest
consideration. Baron Giichi Tanaka, Minister.”
I asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the words “the proposal of
the United States is understood” meant that it is the understanding of Japan
and after comparing the original with the translation he replied, “Yes, this is
the meaning of the language used in the Japanese original.”
The note will be given out to the press here today at 5 p.m. Tokyo time,
MACVEAGH
72 Not printed.

[Document 62]
The Minister in the Irish Free State (Sterling) to the Secretary of
State
follows. They propose to release it to the press here for Friday morning’s
papers. Please telegraph immediately if this is agreeable.
“Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your
Excellency’s note of 22nd May referring to the draft treaty for the
renunciation of war and extending an invitation from your
Government to the Government of the Irish Free State to become
one of the original parties to the proposed treaty.
The Government of the Irish Free State warmly welcome the
action of the United States Government in initiating this further
advance towards the maintenance of general peace. They are in
cordial agreement with the general principle of the draft treaty
which they confidently hope will ensure the peaceful settlement
of future international disputes.
Sharing the view expressed by the Secretary of State of the
United States in his speech before the American Society of
International Law that nothing in the draft treaty is inconsistent
with the Covenant of the League of Nations, the Government of
the Irish Free State accept unreservedly the invitation of the
United States Government to become a party to the treaty jointly
with the other states similarly invited.
The Government of the Irish Free State will be glad therefore to
participate in, and to further by every possible means, the

negotiations which may be necessary for the conclusion of the
pact.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurance of my highest
consideration. P. McGilligan
30th May 1928.”
STERLING

[Document 63]
The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
OTTAWA, May 30, 1928.
[Received June 1.]
No. 437
informing the Department that I am today in receipt of a reply from His
Majesty’s Government in Canada to the invitation to become one of the
original parties to the treaty for the renunciation of war, I have the honor to
enclose herewith copies in duplicate of the note in question.
Speaking for the whole Canadian people, the Government of Canada
welcomes the outcome of the discussion initiated almost a year ago between
the Governments of France and of the United States. It is pleased to find
that in this attitude it is in entire accord with all His Majesty’s other
governments. The proposals of the United States Government, by their
directness and simplicity, afford to the peoples of the world a new and
notable opportunity of ensuring lasting peace.
I have [etc.]
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
[Enclosure]
The Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs (Mackenzie King) to the American Minister (Phillips)
OTTAWA, 30 May, 1928.
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge your note of May 22nd, extending to
His Majesty’s Government in Canada, in the name of the Government of

the United States, an invitation to become one of the original parties to the
treaty for the renunciation of war now under consideration.
The Government of Canada is certain that it speaks for the whole Canadian
people in welcoming the outcome, in the proposed multilateral pact, of the
discussion initiated almost a year ago between the Governments of France
and of the United States. It is pleased to find that in this attitude it is in
accord with all His Majesty’s other governments. The proposals of the
United States Government, by their directness and simplicity, afford to the
peoples of the world a new and notable opportunity of ensuring lasting
peace.
The Dominion of Canada, fortunate in its ties of kinship and allegiance as
well as in its historic and neighbourly friendships, and with half a continent
as its heritage, is less exposed to the danger of attack or the temptation to
aggression than many other lands. Yet the Great War, with its burdens of
suffering and of loss, brought home the danger which all countries share,
and led Canada to turn with hope to the efforts to build up effective barriers
against war which took shape in the League of Nations; it will welcome the
present proposals as a manifestation of the same striving for peace.
The question whether the obligations of the Covenant of the League would
conflict in any way with the obligations of the proposed pact has been given
careful consideration. His Majesty’s Government in Canada regards the
League, with all its limitations, as an indispensable and continuing agency
of international understanding, and would not desire to enter upon any
course which would prejudice its effectiveness. It is, however, convinced
that there is no conflict either in the letter or in the spirit between the
Covenant and the multilateral pact, or between the obligations assumed
under each.
The pre-eminent value of the League lies in its positive and preventive
action. In bringing together periodically the representatives of fifty states, it
builds up barriers against war by developing a spirit of conciliation, an
acceptance of publicity in international affairs, a habit of co-operation in
common ends, and a permanently available machinery for the adjustment of
differences. It is true that the Covenant also contemplates the application of
sanctions in the event of a member state going to war, if in so doing it has

broken the pledges of the Covenant to seek a peaceful solution of disputes.
Canada has always opposed any interpretation of the Covenant which
would involve the application of these sanctions automatically or by the
decision of other states. It was on the initiative of Canada that the Fourth
Assembly, with a single negative vote, accepted the interpretative resolution
to which the Secretary of State of the United States recently referred,
indicating that it is for the constitutional authorities of each state to
determine in what degree it is bound to assure the execution of the
obligations of this Article by employment of its military forces. The
question of sanctions has received further consideration by later
Assemblies. It is plain that the full realization of the ideal of joint economic
or military pressure upon an outlaw power, upon which some of the
founders of the League set great store, will require either an approach to the
universality of the League contemplated when the Covenant was being
drawn, or an adjustment of the old rules of neutrality to meet the new
conditions of co-operative defence.
In any event, if, as would seem to be the case, the proposed multilateral
treaty does not impose any obligation upon a signatory in relation to a state
which has not signed the treaty or has broken it, any decision taken to apply
sanctions against a member of the League which has made war in violation
of its Covenant pledges would not appear to conflict with the obligations of
the treaty.
His Majesty’s Government in Canada will have pleasure in cooperating in
any future negotiations with a view to becoming a signatory to a treaty such
as is proposed by the Government of the United States in the invitation
which it has extended, and to recommending its acceptance to the Canadian
Parliament.
Accept [etc.]
W. L. MACKENZIE KING
75 Not printed.

[Document 64]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, 3 June, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: During our conversation of yesterday you asked me to let
you have privately a short statement of the objections of His Majesty’s
Government to a provision being incorporated in the Multilateral Treaty
renouncing War by which provision any contracting Parties should be
liberated from their obligations towards one of their number that might
become “involved in war”.
His Majesty’s Government inform me that they would not consider this
formula acceptable because it is too wide.
It does not seem logical that the obligations of the other Parties towards one
of them should be terminated unless that one has broken the Treaty and a
State may well become “involved in war” without having broken the Treaty.
His Majesty’s Government feel that if the suggested provision were adopted
the Treaty might easily be destroyed, for instance in the case of a
Contractant being attacked by a non-Signatory State. It would not greatly
advance the cause of peace or disarmament if the Contracting Powers are to
be informed that in case of attack by one of their co-contractants they would
also be liable to attack by the others. This would appear however to be the
logical sequence of the adoption of the provision relating to signatories who
become “involved in war”.
I remain [etc.]
ESME HOWARD

[Document 65]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received June 6—2 p.m.]
147. I saw Briand this morning when he unexpectedly returned from the
country for two days. The substance of his remarks on the peace treaty
negotiations is as follows:
The negotiations have reached a point where it is difficult to see how they
can fail. When the idea of a bilateral treaty (France and the United States)
was expanded into a multilateral form of treaty, France felt it imperative
that reservations and explanations covering both her general and special
situation be formulated. These have been taken into account by the other
powers and have been shown to have been justified by their replies. Your
speech of April 28,76 moreover, gave all the desired “appeasement” not
only to France but also to those other countries which, although they were
not invited to be original signatories to the proposed treaty, are deeply
concerned in outcome of the negotiations and share France’s point of view
with regard thereto. It should be a comparatively easy matter, seemingly, to
cast this general harmony of views into concrete form either by way of a
protocol accompanying the treaty, or through a more matured preamble or
by some other method.
Not only did the Foreign Minister speak words of optimism but they
appeared genuinely to reflect his state of mind. When I saw him he showed
few signs of his recent severe illness.
Copies of the foregoing have been mailed to Embassies in Berlin, London,
Rome, and Brussels.

HERRICK
76 Before the American Society of International Law. See telegram No. 104,
portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27].

[Document 66]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
WASHINGTON, June 9, 1928.
No. 1452
SIR: The British Ambassador called at the Department on May 24, 1928 and
asked if I had anything to say to him about the multilateral treaty before he
departed for London, and I told him that I did not at that time but that I
would try to talk with him about it prior to his departure. On May 29 I had a
long interview with him on the subject.
Sir Esme said in substance that it seemed to him that the proposed treaty
was not exactly a treaty so much as a declaration of principle by the various
countries. I said that, of course, this appears to be so from the statements
contained in the first article but that, so far as the United States is
concerned, it is a treaty which must be submitted to the Senate. The
Ambassador said that, since I had stated my understanding as to the
meaning of the treaty, he did not see any reason why the other countries
could not state their understanding of its meaning which would be made a
part of the treaty. I replied that the trouble about that was if each country
began tacking on to this treaty understandings which would be in the form
of reservations or provisos or stipulations as to what it means, each country
might have a different construction and different reservations and provisos
and that in the end there might be so many that the treaty would be a joke. I
said that I was not prepared to do it and that I could not agree to any such
proceeding; that if my construction of the treaty was correct, the other
countries could say that that was their understanding outside of the treaty
entirely.
Sir Esme then said that he had received a letter from Sir Austen
Chamberlain in which Sir Austen said that he was not sure that we on this
side fully understood his attitude. Sir Austen stated that he was willing to

sign the treaty in the form I had presented; that, however, what Great
Britain wanted was to get France into the treaty as they feared that if France
did not come in, it would probably prevent any treaty being made. I replied
that I understood this but that I had not yet had any suggestions from France
other than their draft treaty with all their reservations and the provisions
about war as an instrument of individual, spontaneous and independent
policy. That draft, I said to him, could not be understood to mean much of
anything. I said that the entire European press was in favor of the anti-war
treaty idea, except the press in France, but that even in France there was
some support of it. I added that Mr. Herrick had said to me that he did not
believe that all the press reports in France represented the opinion of the
Government. Sir Esme said that he was surprised that the French press was
so hostile and I said that I was too. I gave the Ambassador clearly to
understand that I did not propose to enter into a treaty with so many
reservations as to destroy its efficacy.
The Ambassador then said that Sir Austen would like to have the Foreign
Ministers meet in Washington to sign the treaty. I said that I should be
delighted to have them do so but that I did not know whether they would
care to come here; that so far as signing the treaty was concerned, as I had
said before, I was willing to sign it anywhere the Foreign Ministers would
meet and make a sort of ceremony of signing the treaty. In connection with
this, Sir Esme wanted to know if we would invite all the world, should it be
decided to sign the treaty at Washington. I replied in the negative, pointing
out that there would be no use of inviting the States which have not been
asked to participate in the treaty to come to the United States or to any other
place as we would never accomplish anything that way. I said that only
those which had accepted would sign it in the first instance and that
undoubtedly they might want to meet and sign it together. That was a
matter, I said, which I would consider but that I could not consider inviting
all the world to come here and enter into a treaty which had not even been
presented to many of the countries.
Sir Esme said that he would like, if possible, for me to give him some more
specific message to Sir Austen as to what we would do. I replied that, while
of course we will sign the present form of treaty, I was not prepared to say
yet whether any acceptable modifications can be made, particularly since I

have no assurance that any modifications would be acceptable to France.
He talked quite awhile on this subject and emphasized the fact that Sir
Austen was willing to sign the treaty in its present form.
The Ambassador then said that the New York World had made a suggestion
in which he thought there was considerable merit. Suppose, he said, some
country should wish to lease a naval station near the United States and
Egypt should wish to lease Alexandria to Italy. I replied that if we were
going to undertake to meet every possible contingency which might arise in
the world, we might as well abandon the treaty; that so far as the United
States is concerned, we have no fear that any country is going to lease a
naval station near the United States; that if it did, we would have the right
to protect ourselves on the ground of self-defense. I added that Great Britain
has the same right to protect whatever Dominions or interests it has which
are national in their character just the same as it would have the right to
protect the British Isles. He said that he thought that was so. I said that so
far as Egypt is concerned, he knew that it was as unlikely that Egypt would
grant its territory to any foreign country as it was that any of the South
American countries would grant their territory and, on the other hand, no
country could take any South American or Central American territory
without going to war since no country in this hemisphere would grant it;
that time, I pointed out, has passed. I said that the chance is so remote that it
is not worth while trying specifically to guard against it in a treaty because
if we should, Japan would want to protect its Manchurian, Korean and
Chinese interests as everyone knows and France would want to do the
same, and we did not know where it would end. I added that it would
certainly destroy the efficacy of any treaty. I told the Ambassador that he
would understand that the position of the New York World is dictated
largely by politics. I said that so far as the United States is concerned, it is
willing to take its chances about other countries leasing naval stations near
the Panama Canal or near the United States. I certainly gave him to
understand that I was not going to enter into any treaty covered over with
all sorts of reservations and understandings and exchanges of notes that
would be made a part of the treaty.
I then brought up a question which the Ambassador had raised in one of our
discussions recently in connection with the treaty as to whether the other

countries could come to Belgium’s rescue if Germany should make war on
Belgium. I said that if the parties are released as to the treaty-breaking state,
as they are, I did not see why Belgium could not be protected. I said that, of
course, a clause could be put into the treaty to the effect that if any of the
participating nations became involved in war, the others would be
automatically released, but that I understood that Great Britain would not
want this as it would be putting the innocent and the guilty together. He said
yes or something like that.
I told Sir Esme that I would see him before he went abroad and if I had
anything concrete that I could give him I would do so, but that I understood
that Sir Austen would be out of the country. Sir Esme was very much
surprised and I read him that part of Mr. Houghton’s telegram which states
that Sir Austen was leaving on the 26th of May for Geneva and would be
absent until the last part of June, and that he planned to leave on his
vacation the first week in September. The Ambassador was very much
surprised and said that he did not know of any business which Sir Austen
had in Geneva now.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 67]
The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
WARSAW, June 11, 1928.
[Received July 3.]
No. 1776
relative to Secretary Kellogg’s pact for the renunciation of war, I now have
the honor to transmit herewith the original text, in French, of the Aide
Memoire handed me by Count Joseph Potocki on behalf of Foreign Minister
Zaleski on May 30.
A translation of the above-mentioned Aide Memoire identical to that
paragraphs, which I did not deem it necessary to include, is likewise
enclosed.
to the exact nature of the text transmitted.
I have [etc.]
JOHN B. STETSON, Jr.
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zaleski) to the American Minister (Stetson)
The initiative undertaken by the Government of the United States, having
for its object the assuring of the maintenance of pacific relations between
States through the condemnation of war and its renunciation as an

instrument of national policy, has been received by the Polish Government
with the keenest sympathy.
This initiative fully corresponds to the efforts that the Polish Government
has not ceased to follow in its foreign policy, a policy which tends to
strengthen the development of the general security.
It is in this spirit that the Polish Government is ready to accept the text of
the anti-war pact proposed by the United States with the interpretation
given by Mr. Kellogg in his speech of April 28 last, to wit:
that the pact prejudices in no way the obligations under the covenant of the
League of Nations nor the rights and obligations under which the
contracting parties are bound by international agreements entered into prior
to this pact;
that all signatories of this pact shall preserve full rights to freedom of action
as regards any powers which might break the terms of this pact;
that such an interpretation given in an appropriate text would be in accord
with the obligations assumed by Poland under her international agreements;
that under these circumstances the Polish Government hopes that the
Secretary of State of the United States will invite Poland to become one of
the original signers of the pact;
however, it is understood that while accepting the pact as proposed by Mr.
Kellogg with the above-mentioned interpretations given in his speech of
April 28, Poland could not accept changes in the pact without further
previous discussions. Poland feels for that reason her cooperation during the
negotiations preceding the conclusion of the pact should not fail to be
recognized.
77 Not printed.
77 Not printed.

[Document 68]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds) of a
Conversation With the Japanese Chargé (Sawada), June 12, 1928
June 12, 1928
Mr. Sawada made an appointment at his own suggestion yesterday. He
opened by saying that after his conversation with the Secretary last Friday
he had talked again with Mr. Castle,78 who had told him that if Japan
desired to suggest any modifications in the text of the proposed multilateral
treaty, we should be notified of such modifications as soon as possible. He
had accordingly wired his Government and had a reply, the substance of
which he wished to state. For the present there were two modifications
which his Government would like to put forward, it being understood that
further suggestions might be made later on after the whole matter had been
considered by the Cabinet in Japan.
1. The word “office” appearing in the opening paragraph of the
Preamble does not seem to be an appropriate term to designate the
Emperor who, under the Japanese Constitution, has the full
authority to make treaties. Office may mean an administrative
organ or bureau. I said this did not seem to me a very serious
objection. If there was any ambiguity, I had no doubt it could be
straightened out by a slight change of wording, or by substituting
some other word. At any rate we would take the suggestion into
consideration. Mr. Sawada went on to express his own idea of
what might be done. He said that the whole phrase, including the
word office, might be eliminated so that this part of the Preamble
should read “deeply sensible that it is our solemn duty, etc”.
2. They would like to strike out the words “in the case [names] of
their respective peoples” where they appear in Article I of the
treaty. Here again he said the objection was on constitutional
grounds. In Japan, the entire power is in the Emperor and not in

the people. I said this seemed to be rather a technical point. The
phrase had no constitutional or legal meaning for us and I did not
see how any such signification could really be attributed to it. He
replied that the Privy Council of Japan, which had been
considering the treaty, comprised a good many lawyers, and that
they were probably viewing the situation in a technical light. I
told him that in our consideration of this treaty we would not be
disposed to listen very much to jurists. This was not that kind of
treaty. On the whole, I thought we should like to keep the phrase
in question, and expressed the hope that on reflection Japan
would agree with us that it was good material. However, I said we
would also take into consideration this second suggestion.
The Chargé again reserved the right to make further suggestions in case the
Cabinet of his Government desired to make them. Pie thought it improbable
that any further suggestions would be made.
Mr. Sawada concluded by referring to the arbitration and conciliation
treaties.79 He said that his Government was inclined to suspend action on
them until some conclusion was reached on the multilateral treaty. I
expressed some surprise at this, and said that we had not thought there was
any such connection between the two operations as to make one at all
contingent upon the other. We were quite ready to go ahead with the
arbitration and conciliation treaties and were doing so with all other
Governments. We saw no reason why this should not be done. He said he
would be glad to convey that view to his Government. He agreed that it
would he desirable to complete the arbitration treaty before next August
when the existing treaty expires. He wanted to know if I thought the
multilateral treaty would be signed soon. I said I could not make any
forecast on that, but that we were hopeful of an early termination of the
negotiations.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]
78 William R. Castle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State.
79 See vol.  III, pp. 135 ff.

[Document 69]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
The French Ambassador in London has informed Sir Austen Chamberlain
of the conversations which the French Ambassador in Washington had
recently had with the United States Secretary of State in regard to the
French reservations to the treaty for the renunciation of war. These
reservations were:—
1. Maintenance of existing treaties.
2. Freedom of action for all signatory powers against a power
guilty of breaking the treaty.
It appears that the French Government would have preferred that these two
reservations should be embodied in the treaty itself but that the Secretary of
State had objected and had assured M. Claudel that they would be covered
by the wording of the preamble.
If it were impossible to include the reservations in the body of the treaty the
French Government would prefer that they should be contained in a
protocol of equal value with the treaty.
Mr. Kellogg had replied that if this were done it might well happen that the
Senate would accept the treaty but reject the protocol and this would cause
an exceedingly embarrassing position.
The French Ambassador stated to Sir Austen Chamberlain that the French
Government now fully realised this and had instructed M. Claudel to allow
these reservations to be covered by the wording of the preamble, but that he
should ask for the following words to be added to Article 2 for the sake of
greater clarity: “in conformity with the principles enunciated in the
preamble.”

M. de Fleuriau had asked that His Majesty’s Representative in Washington
might be instructed to support this proposal. Mr. Chilton was instructed to
inform the Secretary of State verbally that as His Majesty’s Government
understand the preamble is to be redrafted so as to take account of the views
expressed by the different powers. It would be a help if some phrase were
added to the treaty itself making it clear that its provisions are based on the
principles set forth in the body of the instrument.
His Majesty’s Government, however, do not venture at this juncture to
suggest any particular wording for this proposed addition to the text.
WASHINGTON , 18 June, 1928.

[Document 70]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, June 19, 1928.
[Received July 2.]
No. 2853
SIR: With reference to the Department’s telegraphic Instruction No. 130
dated May 21, 4 p.m., which requested the Embassy to extend through the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to His Majesty’s Governments in
Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, and to the Government of India,
a cordial invitation in the name of the Government of the United States to
become original parties to the treaty for the renunciation of war, which is
now under consideration, I have the honor to forward herewith copies of the
several replies, which were transmitted to the Department in the Embassy’s
I have [etc.]
RAY ATHERTON
[Enclosure 1]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Government of New Zealand, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
LONDON, 30 May, 1928.
SIR: In the note which Mr. Houghton was so good as to address to me on
May 22nd he extended on behalf of the Government of the United States an
invitation to His Majesty’s Governments in the Commonwealth of
Australia, New Zealand and in the Union of South Africa, as well as to the

Government of India, to participate individually and as original signatories
in the treaty for the renunciation of war which is now under consideration.
2. I now have the honor to inform you that His Majesty’s Government in
New Zealand have received with warm appreciation the invitation
addressed to New Zealand to become an original party to the treaty
proposed by the Government of the United States for the renunciation of
war. His Majesty’s Government in New Zealand welcome the opportunity,
in cooperation with His Majesty’s Governments in other parts of the British
Empire, of associating themselves with the Government of the United
States in this movement to add greater security to the peace of the world
and they will be happy to share in any negotiations leading to the
conclusion of the proposed treaty.
I have [etc.]
(For the Secretary of State)
R. L. CRAIGIE
[Enclosure 2]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
LONDON, 2 June, 1928.
SIR: In the note which Mr. Houghton was so good as to address to me on
May 22nd last, he extended on behalf of the Government of the United
States an invitation to His Majesty’s Government in the Commonwealth of
Australia to participate individually and as an original signatory in the
treaty for the renunciation of war which is now under consideration.
2. I now have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s Government in
the Commonwealth of Australia have received with appreciation the
invitation to participate as an original party in the treaty for the renunciation
of war which has been proposed by the Government of the United States of
America. His Majesty’s Government in the Commonwealth of Australia
have carefully and sympathetically examined the draft treaty submitted to

them together with the correspondence that has so far been exchanged
between the interested governments. They believe that a treaty such as that
proposed would be a further material safeguard to the peace of the world
and they will be happy to co-operate to the fullest extent in its successful
conclusion.
I have [etc.]
(For the Secretary of State)
R. L. CRAIGIE
[Enclosure 3]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Government of India, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
LONDON, 11 June, 1928.
SIR: In the note which Mr. Houghton was so good as to address to me on the
22nd ultimo, he extended, on behalf of the Government of the United
States, an invitation to the Government of India to participate individually
and as an original signatory in the treaty for the renunciation of war which
is now under consideration.
2. I now have the honour to inform you that the Government of India have
requested that an expression of their warm thanks may be conveyed to the
United States Government for this invitation which they are happy to
accept. I have the honour to add that the Government of India desire to
associate themselves with the note which I had the honour to address to Mr.
Houghton on the 19th ultimo.
I have [etc.]
(For the Secretary of State)
R. L. CRAIGIE
[Enclosure 4]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Union of South Africa, to the American Chargé (Atherton)

LONDON, June 15, 1928.
SIR: With reference to the note which Mr. Houghton was so good as to
address to me on the 22nd May conveying an invitation to His Majesty’s
Government in the Union of South Africa to become an original party to the
proposed treaty for the renunciation of war, I have the honour to inform you
that the following message has been received by telegraph from General
Hertzog, Minister of External Affairs of the Union of South Africa, for
communication to you:—
“Through the good offices of His Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom the contents of the note addressed by Your
Excellency to His Excellency the British Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs on the 22nd May were duly conveyed to me. On
behalf of His Majesty’s Government in the Union of South Africa
I beg to state that the cordial invitation of the Government of the
United States extended to His Majesty’s Government in the Union
of South Africa to participate individually and as an original
signatory in the treaty for the renunciation of war which the
United States Government proposed to various governments on
the 13th April last, is highly appreciated and that His Majesty’s
Government in the Union of South Africa will gladly take part
therein, as invited, together with the other Governments whose
participation in the proposed treaty was invited in the first
instance.
“In expressing their willingness to be a party to the proposed
treaty His Majesty’s Government in the Union of South Africa
take it for granted—
“(a) that it is not intended to deprive any party to the
proposed treaty of any of its natural right of legitimate
self-defence;
“(b) that a violation of any one of the parties of any of
the provisions of the proposed treaty will free the other

parties from obligation to observe its terms in respect of
the party committing such violation; and
“(c) that provision will be made for rendering it quite
clear that it is not intended that the Union of South
Africa, by becoming a party to the proposed treaty,
would be precluded from fulfilling, as a member of the
League of Nations, its obligations towards the other
members thereof under the provisions of the Covenant
of the League.”
I have [etc.]
(For the Secretary of State)
R. L. CRAIGIE
80 Telegrams not printed.

[Document 71]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)81
draft treaty immediately to London as Department’s 156, Brussels as
Dublin as Department’s 10, Rome as Department’s 70, Warsaw as
Department’s 40.
Note begins:
“Excellency: It will be recalled that, pursuant to the
understanding reached between the Government of France and
the Government of the United States, the American Ambassadors
at London, Berlin, Rome and Tokyo transmitted on April 13,
1928, to the Governments to which they were respectively
accredited the text of M. Briand’s original proposal of June 20,
1927, together with copies of the notes subsequently exchanged
by France and the United States on the subject of a multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war. At the same time the
Government of the United States also submitted for consideration
a preliminary draft of a treaty representing in a general way the
form of treaty which it was prepared to sign, and inquired
whether the Governments thus addressed were in a position to
give favorable consideration thereto. The text of the identic notes
of April 13, 1928, and a copy of the draft treaty transmitted
therewith, were also brought to the attention of the Government
of France by the American Ambassador at Paris.83
It will likewise be recalled that on April 20, 1928, the
Government of the French Republic circulated among the other
interested Governments, including the Government of the United

States, an alternative draft treaty, and that in an address which he
delivered on April 28, 1928, before the American Society of
International Law, the Secretary of State of the United States
explained fully the construction placed by my Government upon
the treaty proposed by it, referring as follows to the six major
considerations emphasized by France in its alternative draft treaty
and prior diplomatic correspondence with my Government:
[For the text of the paragraphs here omitted, see the six points as
to the Ambassador in France, printed on page 34 [Pg. 34 includes
The British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments have
now replied to my Government’s notes of April 13, 1928, and the
Governments of the British Dominions and of India have likewise
replied to the invitations addressed to them on May 22, 1928, by
my Government pursuant to the suggestion conveyed in the note
of May 19, 1928, from His Majesty’s Government in Great
Britain. None of these Governments has expressed any dissent
from the above-quoted construction, and none has voiced the least
disapproval of the principle underlying the proposal of the United
States for the promotion of world peace. Neither has any of the
replies received by the Government of the United States
suggested any specific modification of the text of the draft treaty
proposed by it on April 13, 1928, and my Government, for its
part, remains convinced that no modification of the text of its
proposal for a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war is
necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of any nation. It
believes that the right of self-defense is inherent in every
sovereign state and implicit in every treaty. No specific reference
to that inalienable attribute of sovereignty is therefore necessary
or desirable. It is no less evident that resort to war in violation of
the proposed treaty by one of the parties thereto would release the
other parties from their obligations under the treaty towards the
belligerent state. This principle is well recognized. So far as the
Locarno treaties are concerned, my Government has felt from the

very first that participation in the anti-war treaty by the powers
which signed the Locarno agreements, either through signature in
the first instance or thereafter, would meet every practical
requirement of the situation, since in such event no state could
resort to war in violation of the Locarno treaties without
simultaneously violating the anti-war treaty, thus leaving the other
parties thereto free, so far as the treaty-breaking state is
concerned. As Your Excellency knows, the Government of the
United States has welcomed the idea that all parties to the
Treaties of Locarno should be among the original signatories of
the proposed treaty for the renunciation of war and provision
therefor has been made in the draft treaty which I have the honor
to transmit herewith. The same procedure would cover the treaties
guaranteeing neutrality to which the Government of France has
referred. Adherence to the proposed treaty by all parties to these
other treaties would completely safeguard their rights since
subsequent resort to war by any of them or by any party to the
anti-war treaty would violate the latter treaty as well as the
neutrality treaty, and thus leave the other parties to the anti-war
treaty free, so far as the treaty-breaking state is concerned. My
Government would be entirely willing, however, to agree that the
parties to such neutrality treaties should be original signatories of
the multilateral anti-war treaty, and it has no reason to believe that
such an arrangement would meet with any objection on the part of
the other Governments now concerned in the present negotiations.
While my Government is satisfied that the draft treaty proposed
by it on April 13, 1928, could be properly accepted by the Powers
of the world without change except for including among the
original signatories the British Dominions, India, all parties to the
treaties of Locarno and, it may be, all parties to the neutrality
treaties mentioned by the Government of France, it has no desire
to delay or complicate the present negotiations by rigidly
adhering to the precise phraseology of that draft particularly since
it appears that by modifying the draft in form though not in
substance, the points raised by other Governments can be
satisfactorily met and general agreement upon the text of the

treaty to be signed be promptly reached. The Government of the
United States has therefore decided to submit to the fourteen
other Governments now concerned in these negotiations a revised
draft of a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war. The text
of this revised draft is identical with that of the draft proposed by
the United States on April 13, 1928, except that the Preamble now
provides that the British Dominions, India and all parties to the
Treaties of Locarno are to be included among the Powers called
upon to sign the treaty in the first instance, and except that the
first three paragraphs of the Preamble have been changed to read
as follows:
‘Deeply sensible of their solemn duty to promote the
welfare of mankind;
Persuaded that the time has come when a frank
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy
should be made to the end that the peaceful and friendly
relations now existing between their peoples may be
perpetuated;
Convinced that all changes in their relations with one
another should be sought only by pacific means and be
the result of a peaceful and orderly process, and that
any signatory Power which shall hereafter seek to
promote its national interests by resort to war should be
denied the benefits furnished by this treaty;’
The revised Preamble thus gives express recognition to the
principle that if a state resorts to war in violation of the treaty, the
other contracting parties are released from their obligations under
the treaty to that state; it also provides for participation in the
treaty by all parties to the treaties of Locarno, thus making it
certain that resort to war in violation of the Locarno treaties
would also violate the present treaty and release not only the other
signatories of the Locarno treaties but also the other signatories to
the anti-war treaty from their obligations to the treaty-breaking
state. Moreover, as stated above, my Government would be

willing to have included among the original signatories the parties
to the neutrality treaties referred to by the Government of the
French Republic, although it believes that the interests of those
states would be adequately safeguarded if, instead of signing in
the first instance, they should choose to adhere to the treaty.
In these circumstances I have the honor to transmit herewith for
the consideration of Your Excellency’s Government a draft of a
multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war containing the
changes outlined above. I have been instructed to state in this
connection that the Government of the United States is ready to
sign at once a treaty in the form herein proposed, and to express
the fervent hope that the Government of (insert name of
Government addressed) will be able promptly to indicate its
readiness to accept, without qualification or reservation, the form
of treaty now suggested by the United States. If the Governments
of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France,
Germany, Great Britain, India, the Irish Free State, Italy, Japan,
New Zealand, Poland, South Africa and the United States can
now agree to conclude this anti-war treaty among themselves, my
Government is confident that the other nations of the world will,
as soon as the treaty comes into force, gladly adhere thereto, and
that this simple procedure will bring mankind’s agelong
aspirations for universal peace nearer to practical fulfillment than
ever before in the history of the world.
I have the honor to state in conclusion that the Government of the
United States would be pleased to be informed at as early a date
as may be convenient whether Your Excellency’s Government is
willing to join with the United States and other similarly disposed
Governments in signing a definitive treaty for the renunciation of
war in the form transmitted herewith.
Accept, Excellency, etc.” Note ends.
Text of draft treaty to be transmitted with above note. Treaty begins:
“The President of the United States of America

The President of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of the Belgians
The President of the Czechoslovak Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India,
The President of the German Reich
His Majesty the King of Italy
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan
The President of the Republic of Poland
Deeply sensible of their solemn duty to promote the welfare of
mankind;
Persuaded that the time has come when a frank renunciation of
war as an instrument of national policy should be made to the end
that the peaceful and friendly relations now existing between their
peoples may be perpetuated.
Convinced that all changes in their relations with one another
should be sought only by pacific means and be the result of a
peaceful and orderly process, and that any signatory Power which
shall hereafter seek to promote its national interests by resort to
war should be denied the benefits furnished by this treaty;
Hopeful that, encouraged by their example, all the other nations
of the world will join in this humane endeavor and by adhering to
the present treaty as soon as it comes into force bring their
peoples within the scope of its beneficient provisions, thus uniting
the civilized nations of the world in a common renunciation of
war as an instrument of their national policy;

Have decided to conclude a treaty and for that purpose have
appointed as their respective Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America
The President of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of the Belgians
The President of the Czechoslovak Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the
British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India
For Great Britain and Northern Ireland and all
parts of the British Empire which are not
separate members of the League of Nations
For the Dominion of Canada
For the Commonwealth of Australia
For the Dominion of New Zealand
For the Union of South Africa
For the Irish Free State

For India
The President of the German Reich
His Majesty the King of Italy
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan
The President of the Republic of Poland
who, having communicated to one another their full powers found
in good and due form have agreed upon the following articles:
ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties solemnly declare in the names of
their respective peoples that they condemn recourse to war for the
solution of international controversies, and renounce it as an
instrument of national policy in their relations with one another.
ARTICLE II
The High Contracting Parties agree that the settlement or solution
of all disputes or conflicts of whatever nature or of whatever
origin they may be, which may arise among them, shall never be
sought except by pacific means.
ARTICLE III
The present treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting
Parties named in the Preamble in accordance with their respective
constitutional requirements, and shall take effect as between them
as soon as all their several instruments of ratification shall have
been deposited at . . . . . . .

This treaty shall, when it has come into effect as prescribed in the
preceding paragraph, remain open as long as may be necessary
for adherence by all the other Powers of the world. Every
instrument evidencing the adherence of a Power shall be
deposited at . . . . . . . and the treaty shall immediately upon such
deposit become effective as between the Power thus adhering and
the other Powers parties hereto.
It shall be the duty of the Government of . . . . . . . to furnish each
Government named in the Preamble and every Government
subsequently adhering to this treaty with a certified copy of the
treaty and of every instrument of ratification or adherence. It shall
also be the duty of the Government of . . . . . . . telegraphically to
notify such Governments immediately upon the deposit with it of
each instrument of ratification or adherence.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this
treaty in the French and English languages both texts having
equal force, and hereunto affix their seals.
Done at . . . . . . . the . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . in the year of our
Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty . . . . . . .”. Treaty
ends.
KELLOGG
81 See first paragraph for instructions to repeat to Great Britain (No. 156),
treaty also telegraphed to Japan (No. 68).
note contained in this telegram was dated June 23, and was delivered with
the text of the draft treaty to the respective Foreign Offices on that day.
82 Not printed.

[Document 72]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
is received you should prepare one communication for His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain and in addition one or more as may be
customary for His Majesty’s Governments in Australia, New Zealand and
South Africa and the Government of India. It is important that each
Dominion Government and India receive the individual attention to which it
is entitled, and if separate notes should be addressed to each please act
accordingly.
KELLOGG

[Document 73]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Marriner)
[WASHINGTON,] June 23, 1928.
The Japanese Chargé d’Affaires ad interim, Mr. Sawada, called by
appointment at 12:15, and the Secretary handed him a copy of the identic
note and draft multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war delivered to the
various foreign offices today. The Secretary informed the Chargé d’Affaires
that the change requested by the Japanese Government in the preamble with
respect to the term “high offices” had been made and that phrase omitted.
He read the Chargé d’Affaires the first paragraph of the new preamble
“Deeply sensible of their solemn duty to promote the welfare of
mankind;”
and Mr. Sawada said that this would be satisfactory to his Government. The
Secretary then said that although it was of course not of first importance to
Japan, nevertheless, in accordance with the views of European Powers, the
three Locarno Powers had been included in the draft treaty. He pointed out
that since the treaty of Locarno contained an agreement among its
signatories not to go to war, the present treaty would merely reinforce that
provision and the violation of one treaty would result in the violation of the
other with consequent liberty of action. With respect to the release of the
parties to the treaty in case of violation by one of them, the Secretary stated
that he had desired to include in the preamble an interpretative statement
merely setting forth the law on that subject and he read to the Chargé
d’Affaires the clause.
“Persuaded that the time has come when a frank renunciation of
war as an instrument of national policy should be made to the end
that the peaceful and friendly relations now existing between their
peoples may be perpetuated;

“Convinced that all changes in their relations with one another
should be sought only by pacific means and be the result of a
peaceful and orderly process, and that any signatory Power which
shall hereafter seek to promote its national interests by resort to
war should be denied the benefits furnished by this treaty;”.
The Chargé d’Affaires asked about the question of self-defense, and the
Secretary said that it had been agreed upon and that France had agreed that
as this was an inalienable attribute of sovereignty, there was no necessity
for its specific mention. The Chargé d’Affaires then inquired as to a point in
the phraseology in Article 1 of the treaty, “in the names of their respective
peoples”, and stated that this was not in accordance with Japanese
constitutional procedure, since it was only the Emperor who could conclude
a treaty. The Secretary said that since this treaty was in due and regular
form with the Emperor named at the beginning of the preamble as one
among the parties to the conclusion of the treaty, there could be no legal
question raised on this point and that as this was a part of the phraseology
of the original Briand proposal, he did not feel at liberty to make any
change and that he hoped the Japanese Government would see its way to
signing the treaty in its present form.
The Chargé d’Affaires inquired as to whether an agreement had been
reached on these points with England and France, and the Secretary said
that he could not go as far as to say that, but that he had high hopes it would
come about. The Secretary said that he told the French Ambassador that the
Japanese desired to be informed in time of any arrangements for signature
and that although no such arrangements were contemplated as yet, there
could be no doubt that they would receive sufficient notice. He told the
Chargé d’Affaires that the note would be confidential until its release in the
press of Monday, June 25, 1928.
J. T. M[ARRESTER]

[Document 74]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Olds)
[WASHINGTON,] June 23, 1928.
The French Ambassador called at our suggestion and was received by the
Secretary and the Undersecretary. The Secretary told him that he did not
think it necessary for him to go over again fully the situation which had
already been discussed between the Ambassador and the Undersecretary
yesterday.84 He did, however, take up the clauses in the preamble and
explained to the Ambassador that they virtually provided that the status quo
could not be changed by any signatory of this treaty by resort to war
without forfeiting the benefits of this treaty so far as the violator thereof
was concerned. The Secretary also stated to the Ambassador confidentially
that when the time came for signing the treaty, he was prepared to suggest
to the other Powers that the signing take place in Paris. The Ambassador
expressed his appreciation of this statement with obvious emotion. He
inquired when the Secretary thought the treaty might be signed and the
Secretary said he hoped they could reach that point in August or September.
The Secretary further stated that he had been sincerely anxious to meet all
of France’s views and thought he had done so. He said he had gone as far as
he could go and reminded the Ambassador again that we had our Senate to
consider in this matter. In response to an inquiry by the Ambassador, the
Secretary said he felt confident as a result of his conversations with
Members of the Foreign Relations Committee and others that the treaty in
the form now submitted would be ratified here.
The Secretary explained again, as he had done in previous conversations,
just how signature by all of the parties to Locarno and other treaties of
guaranty would take care of the second point insisted upon by France.
Going to war in violation of the other treaties would automatically violate
this treaty and the fact that there were sanctions in the other treaties which

might be applied in that event was an entirely extraneous circumstance so
far as the anti-war treaty is concerned.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]
84 Memorandum of conversation not printed.

[Document 75]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
27. An article has appeared in the local press inquiring the reason why
Brazil has not been included in your invitation to participate as an original
signatory to the proposed Treaty for the Renunciation of War, inasmuch as
such countries as Czechoslovakia and Poland have been included. As the
Foreign Office might be embarrassed should a similar question be asked in
the Brazilian Congress or should a discussion thereon arise, would you wish
to give me a statement on the matter which I might informally and
unofficially furnish the Foreign Minister in the event that it seemed
desirable.
MORGAN

[Document 76]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
not included in this Government’s original invitation is as follows:
The French Government originally proposed that France and the United
States enter into a treaty in the same language that I have proposed for a
multilateral treaty. After giving very careful thought to the subject, I was
convinced that the United States could not enter into a treaty with France
that it would not be equally willing to enter into with all the other powers,
and I made a counterproposal that in the first instance the Governments of
the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, and Japan enter into a
multilateral treaty which should be open to adherence to any other power in
the world. The object of this restriction at the beginning to a few powers
was to narrow the field of negotiation and to expedite conclusion of a
treaty; if we undertook negotiations with all the world powers, result would
be indefinite delay. The present fear of war, moreover, is principally in
Europe, and it was deemed most important to get the leading European
powers to sign the treaty and set forth this principle. Great Britain did not
wish to sign for the Dominions and India and requested that they be invited
as a part of the British Empire, so the proposal was extended to them. It was
also afterward extended to Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Poland, as they
are the only powers parties to the Locarno treaties of guarantee in addition
to the powers originally invited. Question was raised by France of whether
her signature to this treaty renouncing war would conflict with the
obligations of the Locarno treaties and other similar guaranty treaties in
Europe which France asserted required her to come to the defense of any
nation a party to these treaties if it is attacked by any other party. In order to
obviate question raised by France I acquiesced in the suggestion that the

Locarno countries be made parties to this treaty so that there could not be
any conflict between proposed treaty and the treaties of Locarno. If the
latter should be broken by one of the parties it would likewise break the
multilateral treaty; the other parties would be released and could go to the
rescue of the party attacked.
From the start, the United States has been insisting on a formula which
would include Brazil as well as other states. Never has there been any
intention of restricting it to the original signatories alone. The plan has been
to submit the treaty when it has been signed to every country together with
an invitation to become a party to it.
I am sending you by mail complete copies of all correspondence on the
treaty from the beginning down to the present. If it is finally agreed to and
signed by the above-mentioned powers, an invitation will undoubtedly be
sent to Brazil.
KELLOGG

[Document 77]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 29, 1928—noon.
49. Replying to inquiry presented by American Ambassador in Brazil, I sent
him message which I am quoting herein for your information. Same
considerations will apply naturally to country to which you are accredited
should question be raised.
the Ambassador in Brazil, printed supra.]
Please repeat to Embassy in Chile as Department’s No. 41, noon, and to
Embassy in Argentina as Department’s No. 27, noon.
KELLOGG

[Document 78]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
193. At my request, the French Ambassador called at the Department this
morning. I showed him a press despatch published in one of the daily
papers to effect that French Government would sign the anti-war treaty as
soon as it was presented for signature, as well as another despatch also
saying in effect that France would accept proposed multilateral treaty but
that Briand had repeated wish of French Government that substance of my
communication should be included in full in some part of the proposed
treaty or its preamble, or in a supplementary protocol.
I explained to Claudel that I must decline to put these interpretations of the
treaty either into a preamble or into an exchange of notes as a part of the
treaty, as they would have to be sent to the Senate for consent and advice; I
had written these notes merely to show what the understanding of the
United States was of the effect of the treaty, and that these public
declarations of interpretation should be sufficient; that I could not go any
farther than I have gone already in the proposed treaty. Claudel said that he
thought the press report under discussion was only newspaper talk and that
he had already informed the French Government that I had gone as far as I
possibly could. He also said that he understood that his Government was
consulting with that of Great Britain on the subject. I replied, naturally, that
I had no objection.
I also informed the British Chargé of the same thing. Telegraph if you know
what action French Cabinet has taken. I have merely wished you to
understand the situation.
KELLOGG

[Document 79]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
Esme Howard are preparing British reply to the latest American proposal
and that Hurst87 and Fromageot88 are studying legal aspect at Geneva. In
this connection I learn that special consideration is being given (1) to article
Treaty of Versailles; (3) to a thesis which has been reported advanced by the
French for elaboration of a special protocol of interpretation that is to be
treated as an annex to the mutilateral pact and is to be signed by the powers
signatories to the Locarno treaties as well as by the states adhering to the
so-called French neutrality treaties.
I have been reliably informed that Sir Austen Chamberlain has expressed
his regret that our latest proposal was presented to him in a final form, for
either acceptance or refusal, as possibility was thereby precluded of an
informal discussion on a phraseology to reconcile divergent points of view.
Have repeated to Embassies in Paris and Berlin.
ATHERTON
85 Not printed.
86 Sir William G. Tyrrell, British Permanent Under Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs.
87 Sir Cecil James Harrington Hurst, Legal Adviser of the British Foreign
Office.

88 M. Henri Fromageot, French juridical expert and adviser to the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs on questions of international law.

[Document 80]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
made the following statements:
Press despatches which you mentioned in your telegram were wholly
inaccurate. Briand read your note of June 2388a to Council of Ministers at
its meeting last Thursday. The note was received with satisfaction, and on
Briand’s suggestion the Government gave its approval in principle to the
draft treaty attached thereto. No exhaustive discussion of the peace pact was
undertaken as several of the Ministers were absent and as the Cabinet were
preoccupied with the parliamentary situation. Briand told his colleagues
that he would continue examination of situation with France’s cosignatories
to the Locarno treaties, by which statement presumably he meant, although
he did not say so, those other than Germany, and also that the powers bound
to France by treaties of neutrality must verify these conversations; that
when they had reached a harmony of views he would bring the question
before the Cabinet again.
These conversations, Briand made it clear, are dealing inter alia with
feasibility of having powers mentioned above sign a protocol at same time
the treaty is signed specifying that the obligations of existing treaties are
contravened by nothing in the anti-war treaty. Briand said that he quite
understood that, as you stated in your telegram No. 193, you cannot go any
further in this respect than you have already gone.
He stated frankly that preoccupation of France was possibility that
Germany would contend that the peace pact constitutes a novation of the

treaties of Versailles and of Locarno, particularly of articles 42 and 43 of
the Versailles treaty which are also incorporated in Locarno treaty.
Although he did not think that Germany was intending to take this position,
the French Government felt obliged to eliminate all possibility of it.
Briand said in conclusion that he will see that the conversations in question
do not lag, by which I assume he means that he will have more time to
devote to them now that Parliament is quieter and adjournment near; he
feels that, as he phrased it himself, a successful solution cannot be many
days distant.
Copies by mail to Belgrade, Berlin, Brussels, Bucharest, London, Prague,
and Warsaw for information.
HERRICK
includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71].

[Document 81]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)89
200. Yesterday Chilton, British Chargé d’Affaires, called to raise the
question of what status under the Kellogg treaties the “act of war”, defined
in Article 16 of the Covenant, would have with respect to members of the
League likewise signatories to the Kellogg pact, the presumption of the
British being that a violation of the Kellogg treaties would consist in an act
of war and that among acts of war the one contained in Article 16 of the
Covenant will have to be considered. Article 16 reads:
“Should any member of the League resort to war in disregard of
its Covenant … it shall ipso facto be deemed to have committed
an act of war against all other members of the League”.
In reply I informed him that as there is no obligation on members of the
League to take war-like measures against Covenant-breaking States, there
can be no inconsistency between the proposed treaty and the Covenant of
the League, and as a practical matter this Government believes that the
members of the League will promptly become parties to the proposed
treaty. Moreover I said that it is sincerely hoped that legalistic efforts to
justify in advance the violation of the proposed renunciation of war treaty
will not be permitted to obscure the issue or delay the conclusion of this
treaty in which the peoples of the world have manifested their wholehearted
approval.
KELLOGG
89 Repeated to Great Britain as Department’s No. 167.

[Document 82]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[Received July 6—9 a.m.]
82. In conversation today the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs told me that
the Foreign Office had issued instructions to the Japanese Chargé
d’Affaires, Washington, to take up with the Department the question of a
possible alteration of the phraseology in article 1 of the proposed anti-war
treaty which reads, “declare in the names of their respective peoples”; that
the Cabinet had approved the treaty and were completely satisfied with the
substance of it but the Japanese Government would find some difficulty in
promulgating a treaty with that phraseology; that Japanese laws and treaties
are promulgated in the name of the Emperor, and the government had good
reason to believe that the phrase “names of their respective peoples” would
meet with very considerable objection in the Privy Council. The phrase as
translated into Japanese seems to bear out this contention. He intimated that
almost any other word other than “name” would be acceptable. Apparently
the Japanese Government would have no difficulty in declaring “on behalf
of their people”, or, “for the welfare of their people”, but for domestic
political reasons “in the name of their respective peoples” is not entirely
compatible with the form used in laws and treaties promulgated by the
Emperor.
The Vice Minister said that the measure seems popular in Japan and
represents a movement which appeals strongly to the Japanese but referred
to the note from the Foreign Office dated May 26th, 1928 (a copy of which
inviting attention to the statement therein in regard to a mutually acceptable
text for such a treaty. He informed me that the Japanese Government had
had the question of phraseology in mind at the time of writing the note but
did not wish to make a point of it in the preliminary stages assuming that
there would be a meeting of some kind to settle on final draft of the treaty.

While I do not believe that the Japanese Government would refuse to
adhere to the treaty if the clause referred to cannot be altered, I feel that it
represents a real conviction on the part of many influential people in the
Government and that the Cabinet might have difficulty in obtaining the
Privy Council’s consent to ratification. The domestic political situation is so
uncertain and the last two Cabinets have had so much difficulty with the
Privy Council in obtaining its assent to Government projects that the Prime
Minister I think is extremely reluctant to place before it any measure which
can be construed as shifting emphasis of governmental measures from the
Throne.
NEVILLE

[Document 83]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)
Japanese Chargé d’Affaires this afternoon:
The Japanese Chargé d’Affaires called at the Secretary’s request
and the Secretary gave him Mr. Neville’s telegram from Tokyo,
dated July 6, 1928, to read. He then explained that the use of the
language “declare in the names of their respective peoples” has
not the meaning or the significance attributed to it by the Japanese
Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs. The official text of the treaty
will be in French and English and in the English the words “in the
name of” are synonymous with the words “on behalf of” to
which, I take it, the Japanese Government would certainly not
object. Murray’s New English Dictionary, Volume VI, Letter N,
page 14, which carries more authority than any other English
dictionary, defines “in the name of” as follows: “That the action is
done on account of, or on behalf of some other person or
persons”, so that the translation into the Japanese would be
perfectly accurate if the Japanese Government translated the
treaty “on behalf of” their people.
The first treaty submitted by M. Briand contains the phrase “au
nom du Peuple irancais et du Peuple des Etats-Unis d’Amérique”.
The Dictionnaire de L’Academic Francaise, 6th Edition, Volume
II, page 271, the most authoritative French dictionary, gives as a
definition of the phrase, “au nom de”, the phrase “de la part de”,
which, translated in English, means “on behalf of”, so that either
the French or English text would justify a translation into
Japanese of “on behalf of”.

The Secretary explained that this was the language originally
proposed by France, that it has now been submitted to fourteen
Governments, and to change the wording would probably lead to
many suggestions of other changes which would inevitably cause
delay and embarrassment. He said he was very sure that under the
circumstances the Japanese Government would see that the
language had no such significance as is attributed to it.
KELLOGG

[Document 84]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
WASHINGTON, July 6, 1928.
No. 423
SIR: On June 14, 1928, the Spanish Ambassador called upon me to say that
he had seen something in the press that we had invited Belgium, Poland and
Czechoslovakia to become parties to the multilateral treaty. I told him that
was incorrect; that we had not communicated any invitations to those
governments or any other governments except the five Powers. I said that
the notes exchanged between France and the United States indicated that
France desired other countries to be parties and that I had said we would be
perfectly willing to have all the parties to the Locarno treaties parties to this
treaty. I said that in my speech but that I had not communicated with these
governments directly. I had understood that they were perfectly willing to
sign and that I thought quite likely the European Powers would desire all of
the parties to the Locarno treaty made parties to this treaty as original
signatories and possibly also some of the other European states. He wanted
to know if we wished Spain and I said we would be very glad to have Spain
sign at any time that she desired to do so. I gave him a copy of all the
correspondence.
On June 28 the Ambassador called again and asked if I would give him a
copy of my last note and the form of treaty. I gave him two copies.
He said that his country would rather come in as an original party and not
under the general omnibus clause that it might be adhered to by any country
after it became effective. He asked to whom the communication had been
sent and I called his attention to the list of countries at the head of the note
and explained to him that these nations had been asked because they were
parties to the Locarno treaties. I said if Spain wants to sign this treaty as it is
without further negotiation for him to find out confidentially and let me

know and I had no doubt the other countries would be glad to have Spain
sign. Certainly the United States would, but I would like to know in
advance whether his country would sign or whether it simply opened up
another country for negotiations. He said he would find out but he intimated
that his Government would sign.
[For the Secretary of State:]
FRANCIS WHITE

[Document 85]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
BERLIN, July 11, 1928.
[Received July 23.]
No. 3706
transmit herewith, in copy and translation, text of the reply of the German
Government, received under even date, to the note of June 23, 1928,
transmitting the revised draft of the proposed antiwar treaty.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
[Enclosure—Translation]
The State Secretary of the German Foreign Office (Schubert) to the American Ambassador (Schurman)
BERLIN, July 11, 1928.
V M 3323
MR. AMBASSADOR: I acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of June
23, 1928, regarding the conclusion of an international pact for the
renunciation of war, and have the honor to reply thereto as follows on
behalf of the German Government.
The German Government has examined with the greatest care the contents
of the note and the revised draft of the pact which was enclosed. The
Government is pleased to state that the standpoint of the Government of the
United States of America as set forth in the note corresponds with the

fundamental German conception as it was communicated in the note of
Preamble of the draft of the pact. It is therefore pleased to be able to state
that it takes cognizance of the statements made by the Government of the
United States of America contained in Your Excellency’s note of June 23,
that it agrees to the interpretation which is given therein to the provisions of
the proposed pact, and that it is accordingly ready to sign this pact in the
form now proposed.
Accept [etc.]
SCHUBERT
91 Not printed.

[Document 86]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
193. Following is translation of note received at 4 o’clock from the Foreign
Office:
“Mr. Ambassador: By your letter of June 23 last Your Excellency
was good enough to transmit to me a revised text of the draft
treaty for the renunciation of war accompanied by the
interpretations given to it by the United States.
I beg you to convey to the Government of the United States the
interest with which the Government of the Republic has taken
cognizance of this new communication, which is suited to
facilitate the signature of the treaty whose successful conclusion
is equally close to the hearts of the French and American nations.
First of all it follows from the new preamble that the proposed
treaty indeed aims at the perpetuation of the pacific and friendly
relations under the contractual conditions in which they are today
established between the interested nations; that it is essentially a
question for the signatory powers of renouncing war ‘as an
instrument of their national policy;’ and also that the signatory
power which hereafter might seek by itself resorting to war to
promote its own national interests, should be denied the benefits
of the treaty.
The Government of the Republic is happy to declare that it is in
accord with these new stipulations.

The Government of the Republic is happy moreover to take note
of the interpretations which the Government of the United States
gives to the new treaty with a view to satisfying the various
observations which had been formulated from the French point of
view.
These interpretations may be resumed as follows:
Nothing in the new treaty restrains or compromises in any manner
whatsoever the right of self-defense. Each nation in this respect
will always remain free to defend its territory against attack or
invasion; it alone is competent to decide whether circumstances
require recourse to war in self-defense.
Secondly, none of the provisions of the new treaty is in opposition
to the provisions of the Covenant of the League of Nations nor
with those of the Locarno treaties or the treaties of neutrality.
Moreover, any violation of the new treaty by one of the
contracting parties would automatically release the other
contracting powers from their obligations to the treaty-breaking
state.
Finally, the signature which the Government of the United States
has now offered to all the signatory powers of the treaties
concluded at Locarno and which it is disposed to offer to all
powers parties to treaties of neutrality, as well as the adherence
made possible to other powers, is of a nature to give the new
treaty, in as full measure as can practically be desired, the
character of generality which accords with the views of the
Government of the Republic.
Thanks to the clarifications given by the new preamble and
thanks moreover to the interpretations given to the treaty, the
Government of the Republic congratulates itself that the new
convention is compatible with the obligations of existing treaties
to which France is otherwise a contracting party, and the integral

respect of which is necessarily imperatively imposed upon her by
good faith and loyalty.
In this situation and under these circumstances, the Government
of the Republic is happy to be able to declare to the Government
of the United States that it is now entirely disposed to sign the
treaty as proposed by the letter of Your Excellency of June 23,
1928.
At the moment of thus assuring its contribution to the realization
of a long-matured project, all the moral significance of which it
had gauged from the beginning, the Government of the Republic
desires to render homage to the generous spirit in which the
Government of the United States has conceived this new
manifestation of human fraternity, which eminently conforms to
the profound aspirations of the French people as well as of the
American people and responds to the sentiment, more and more
widely shared among peoples, of international solidarity.
Please accept, etc., (signed) Aristide Briand, Paris, July 14,
1928.”
HERRICK
93 Telegram in four sections.

[Document 87]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
72. I quote in translation the text of the reply, dated today, of the Italian
Government to my note of June 23 regarding the anti-war treaty:
“Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the letter which, under
instructions of your Government, Your Excellency addressed to
me under date of the 23rd of June last and to ask Your Excellency
to inform your Government as follows:
The Royal Government, which has attentively examined the last
draft of a treaty for the elimination of war proposed by the United
States, takes note of and agrees with the interpretation of the said
treaty which the Government of the United States sets forth in the
above-mentioned note of June 23rd last and on this premise
declares that it is disposed to proceed to the signature thereof.
I am happy to take this occasion to renew to Your Excellency the
assurances of my highest consideration. (Signed) Mussolini.”
FLETCHER

[Document 88]
The Minister in the Irish Free State (Sterling) to the Secretary of
State
[14.] I have received the following note from the Minister for External
Affairs. Unless you advise to the contrary he proposes to publish it in local
papers Tuesday morning:
“14 July, 1928.
Excellency: Your Excellency’s note of the 23rd June enclosing a
revised draft of proposed treaty for the renunciation of war has
been carefully studied by the Government of the Irish Free State.
As I informed you in my note of the 30th May, the Government
of the Irish Free State were prepared to accept unreservedly the
draft treaty proposed by your Government on the 13th April,
holding, as they did, that neither their right of self-defense nor
their commitments under the Covenant of the League of Nations
were in any way prejudiced by its terms.
The draft treaty as revised is equally acceptable to the
Government of the Irish Free State, and I have the honor to
inform you that they are prepared to sign it in conjunction with
such other governments as may be so disposed. As the
effectiveness of the proposed treaty as an instrument for the
suppression of war depends to a great extent upon its universal
application, the Government of the Irish Free State-hope that the
treaty may meet with the approbation of the other governments to
whom it has been sent and that it may subsequently be accepted
by all the other powers of the world.

Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurance of my highest
consideration. P. McGilligan.”
STERLING

[Document 89]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
218. Press reports yesterday stated that this Government had invited Spain
to become an original signatory to the anti-war treaty. This report is
incorrect. I should not invite anyone without first consulting the other
powers, France especially. The Spanish Ambassador requested us to send
his Government a copy of my last note, and said that Spain would like to be
invited to sign the treaty as an original party. I told Señor Padilla that I
could not extend such an invitation, but that after the other five powers had
agreed on the form of a treaty we would bring the subject before them for
consideration.
Ambassador in Spain to present to the Minister for Foreign Affairs a copy
of our latest note, so that the Spanish Government may have a complete
copy of all correspondence up to present time.
Repeat to Madrid for information of Ambassador.
KELLOGG
94 Not printed.

[Document 90]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
221. This morning the French Ambassador came in and read me portions of
a telegram in which his Government had instructed him to ask whether it
would be satisfactory to have the signature of the treaty renouncing war
take place approximately August 25. I said I was grateful for the
expressions of good will of M. Briand and I would be exceedingly happy to
mark the significance of the occasion by signing the treaty in Paris at about
that time; but I said I did not wish to do this unless all the European Foreign
Ministers concerned should also be present to sign at the same time. I told
him naturally I was not sure that the Japanese Foreign Minister could get
there, but this was not absolutely essential. The Ambassador said he thought
that the Foreign Ministers of all countries would be indeed glad to have an
opportunity of proclaiming their allegiance to the idea of the treaty and that
the necessary steps to sound out the Foreign Ministers would be undertaken
by the French Government. As I previously explained to him, I should
naturally be glad to invite all of them to sign in Washington if they so
wished.
KELLOGG

[Document 91]
The Chargé in Canada (Baldwin) to the Secretary of State
OTTAWA, July 17, 1928.
[Received July 19.]
No. 529
a copy of a note received from W. L. Mackenzie King, Secretary of State
for External Affairs, stating that His Majesty’s Government in Canada
cordially accepts the Treaty as revised and is prepared to participate in its
signature.
Since the Canadian Government does not desire that its reply be published
before that of the British Government, it has been agreed that the Canadian
reply will be released for publication in the morning newspapers of
Thursday, July 19.
I have [etc.]
LA VERNE BALDWIN
[Enclosure]
The Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs (Mackenzie King) to the American Minister (Phillips)
OTTAWA, 16 July, 1928.
SIR: I desire to acknowledge your note of June 23rd and the revised draft
which it contained of the Treaty for the Renunciation of War, and to state
that His Majesty’s Government in Canada cordially accepts the Treaty as
revised and is prepared to participate in its signature.
Accept [etc.]

W. L. Mckexon Kune
2 Nei ther Printed.

[Document 92]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:11 p.m.]
168. This morning Chamberlain handed me the British reply to our note,
together with the replies of Governments of Australia, India, New Zealand,
and South Africa.
Chamberlain stated that he was fully in sympathy with this movement
initiated by France, and that his careful study of the pact and his “methods”
leading up to its acceptance were for purpose of insuring whole-hearted
cooperation with the United States. He said that the British Government
was delighted to join with that of the United States in this movement
especially as he felt that it marked the definite participation by the United
States in the question of world peace. Furthermore he felt that the
potentialities of the pact were very great.
I replied that I thought that the conclusion of the pact would mark a new
era. Chamberlain said that his feeling was that force of the pact lay in
attitude of the United States towards any nation breaking it; if, he said, the
utterances of our leading statesmen, writers, and the American press should
indicate that any nation which violated the pact would be condemned as
merely “naughty” and the United States should continue at the same time to
export material to the country breaking the pact, its effect would be slight.
On the other hand, if the American attitude were to be indicated by the
statesmen, the press, and the people of the United States as condemning to
the last utterance a nation which broke the pact, then the potentialities of its
force were very great.

My reply was that this was an election year in the United States, as he was
aware; that both the Republican and Democratic parties had included a
plank on outlawry of war in their platforms, and that many different
prominent men and organizations had already enthusiastically endorsed
attitude of President Coolidge and the Secretary of State.
I have been informed that Foreign Office has already notified British
Embassy at Washington to inform you that the British reply will be laid
before Parliament on July 19 at 10 p.m., and will be published in British
press the next day.
ATHERTON

[Document 93]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, July 18, 1928.
[Received July 27.]
No. 2900
giving the text of the note transmitted to the Foreign Office, dated June 23,
1928,97 relating to the pact for the outlawry of war, and in this connection to
enclose copies, in quintuplicate, of the replies handed me today by Sir
Austen Chamberlain from His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and His Majesty’s Governments in the Commonwealth of
Australia, New Zealand and the Union of South Africa, as well as from the
and my subsequent telegrams of today’s date.98
I have [etc.]
RAY ATHERTON
[Enclosure 1]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) to the American Chargé (Atherton)
[LONDON,] July 18, 1928.
SIR: I am happy to be able to inform you that after carefully studying the
note which you left with me on the 23rd June, transmitting the revised text
of the draft of the proposed treaty for the renunciation of war, His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain accept the proposed treaty in the form
transmitted by you and will be glad to sign it at such time and place as may
be indicated for the purpose by the Government of the United States.

My Government have read with interest the explanations contained in your
note as to the meaning of the draft treaty, and also the comments which it
contains upon the considerations advanced by other Powers in the previous
diplomatic correspondence.
You will remember that in my previous communication of the 19th May I
explained how important it was to my Government that the principle should
be recognised that if one of the parties to this proposed treaty resorted to
war in violation of its terms, the other parties should be released
automatically from their obligations towards that party under the treaty. I
also pointed out that respect for the obligations arising out of the Covenant
of the League of Nations and of the Locarno treaties was the foundation of
the policy of the Government of this country, and that they could not agree
to any new treaty which would weaken or undermine these engagements.
The stipulation now inserted in the preamble under which any signatory
Power hereafter seeking to promote its national interests by resort to war
against another signatory is to be denied the benefits furnished by the treaty
is satisfactory to my Government, and is sufficient to meet the first point
mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain do not consider, after mature
reflection, that the fulfilment of the obligations which they have undertaken
in the Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Treaty of Locarno is
precluded by their acceptance of the proposed treaty. They concur in the
view enunciated by the German Government in their note of the 27th April
that those obligations do not contain anything which could conflict with the
treaty proposed by the United States Government.
My Government have noted with peculiar satisfaction that all the parties to
the Locarno Treaty are now invited to become original signatories of the
new treaty, and that it is clearly the wish of the United States Government
that all members of the League should become parties either by signature or
accession. In order that as many States as possible may participate in the
new movement, I trust that a general invitation will be extended to them to
do so.

As regards the passage in my note of the 19th May relating to certain
regions of which the welfare and integrity constitute a special and vital
interest for our peace and safety, I need only repeat that His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain accept the new treaty upon the understanding
that it does not prejudice their freedom of action in this respect.
I am entirely in accord with the views expressed by Mr. Kellogg in his
speech of the 28th April that the proposed treaty does not restrict or impair
in any way the right of self-defence, as also with his opinion that each State
alone is competent to decide when circumstances necessitate recourse to
war for that purpose.
In the light of the foregoing explanations, His Majesty’s Government in
Great Britain are glad to join with the United States and with all other
Governments similarly disposed in signing a definitive treaty for the
renunciation of war in the form transmitted in your note of the 23rd June.
They rejoice to be associated with the Government of the United States of
America and the other parties to the proposed treaty in a further and signal
advance in the outlawry of war.
I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
[Enclosure 2]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
[LONDON,] 18 July, 1928.
SIR: In the note which you were so good as to address to me on June 23rd
last you stated that the Government of the United States would be glad to be
informed whether His Majesty’s Government in the Commonwealth of
Australia were willing to join with the United States and other similarly
disposed Governments in signing a definitive treaty for the renunciation of
war in the form of the draft treaty enclosed in your note.

2. I now beg leave to inform you that His Majesty’s Government
in the Commonwealth of Australia have given the most careful
consideration to your note above-mentioned and to the revised
draft treaty which accompanied it, and that they accept the
assurance given by the United States Secretary of State that the
right of self-defence of a signatory State will not be impaired in
any way by acceptance of the proposed treaty.
3. The Commonwealth Government have further observed that it
is stated in your note of June 23rd that the preamble to the revised
treaty accords express recognition to the principle that if one
signatory State resorts to war in violation of the treaty, the other
signatory States will be released from their obligations under the
treaty to that State. They accept this declaration that the preamble
in this respect is to be taken as a part of the substantive provisions
of the treaty itself.
4. They have also particularly examined the draft treaty from the
point of view of its relationship to the Covenant of the League of
Nations, and in this connexion have come to the conclusion that it
is not inconsistent with the latter instrument.
5. His Majesty’s Government in the Commonwealth of Australia
add that the foregoing are the only questions to which the
proposed treaty gives rise in which they are especially interested.
As the text of the treaty which has now been submitted is
completely satisfactory to them so far as these specific points are
concerned, they will be quite agreeable to signing it in its present
form.
I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
[Enclosure 3]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Government of New Zealand, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
[LONDON,] 18 July, 1928.

SIR: In the note which you were so good as to address to me on June 23rd
last you stated that the Government of the United States would be glad to be
informed whether His Majesty’s Government in New Zealand were willing
to join with the United States and other similarly disposed Governments in
signing a definitive treaty for the renunciation of war in the form of the
draft treaty enclosed in your note.
2. I now beg leave to inform you that His Majesty’s Government in New
Zealand desire to associate themselves with the terms of the note which I
have had the honour to address to you to-day notifying you of the
willingness of His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain to sign a multi-
lateral treaty for the renunciation of war as proposed by the Government of
the United States. His Majesty’s Government in New Zealand desire me to
add that they will have the utmost satisfaction, in co-operation with His
Majesty’s Governments in other parts of the British Empire, in joining with
the Government of the United States and with all other Governments
similarly disposed in signing a treaty in the form proposed.
I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
[Enclosure 4]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Union of South Africa, to the American Chargé (Atherton)
[LONDON,] 18 July, 1928.
SIR: In the note which you were so good as to address to me on June 23rd
last you stated that the Government of the United States would be glad to be
informed whether His Majesty’s Government in the Union of South Africa
were willing to join with the United States and other similarly disposed
Governments in signing a definitive treaty for the renunciation of war in the
form of the draft treaty enclosed in your note.

2. I now beg leave to inform you that the following message has been
received by telegraph from General Hertzog, Minister of External Affairs of
the Union of South Africa, for communication to you:—
“On behalf of His Majesty’s Government in the Union of South
Africa I have the honour to inform you that my Government have
given their most serious consideration to the new draft treaty for
the renunciation of war, submitted in your note of 23rd June, and
to the observations accompanying it.
“My Government note with great satisfaction (a) that it is
common cause that the right of legitimate self-defence is not
affected by the terms of the new draft; (b) that, according to the
preamble, any signatory who shall seek to promote its national
interests by resort to war shall forfeit the benefits of the treaty;
and (c) that the treaty is open to accession by all powers of the
world.
“My Government have further examined the question whether the
provisions of the present draft are inconsistent with the terms of
the Covenant of the League of Nations by which they are bound,
and have come to the conclusion that this is not the case, and that
the objects which the League of Nations was constituted to serve
can but be promoted by members of the League of Nations
participating in the proposed treaty.
“His Majesty’s Government in the Union of South Africa have
therefore very great pleasure in expressing their willingness to
sign, together with all other Powers which might be similarly
inclined, the treaty in the form proposed in your note under
reference.”
I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
[Enclosure 5]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain), on Behalf of the Government of India, to the American Chargé (Atherton)

[London,] 18 July, 1928.
SIR: In the note which you were so good as to address to me on June 23rd
last you stated that the Government of the United States would be glad to be
informed whether the Government of India were willing to join with the
United States and other similarly disposed Governments in signing a
definitive treaty for the renunciation of war in the form of the draft treaty
enclosed in your note.
2. I now beg leave to inform you that the Government of India associate
themselves wholeheartedly and most gladly with the terms of the note
which I have had the honour to address to you today notifying you of the
willingness of His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain to sign a multi-
lateral treaty for the denunciation of war as proposed by the Government of
the United States. I have [etc.]
AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
96 Not printed.
98 With the exception of telegram No. 168, supra, none printed.

[Document 94]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
that the question of wording is still causing some difficulty in the
Government. He said that this is the only reason for Japanese Parliament’s
delay in answering, but he hoped to be able to reply favorably in a few
days.
NEVILLE
99 Not printed.

[Document 95]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, July 18, 1928.
[Received July 28.]
No. 288
honor to transmit herewith a copy, with English translation, of the note by
which the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me of the Belgian
Government’s willingness to sign the proposed multilateral treaty providing
for the renunciation of war.
Although published textually in all of last evening’s and this morning’s
newspapers, the note has elicited no editorial comment from the Belgian
press.
I have [etc.]
HUGH GIBSON
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Hymans) to the American Ambassador (Gibson)
BRUSSELS, July 17, 1928.
Direction P.
MR. AMBASSADOR: The Government of the King has examined with lively
sympathy the letter of June 23 in which, acting under instructions from your
Government, you have been good enough to invite Belgium to conclude a

multilateral treaty providing that the signatory States bind themselves to
renounce war as an instrument of national policy.
Belgium is deeply attached to peace. She has always worked actively for
the realization of movements tending to consolidate peace. She is therefore
happy to pay her tribute to the idea inspiring the draft treaty.
The text prepared by the Government of Washington commands the full
approbation of the Royal Government. This Government notes with
satisfaction the explanations and interpretations contained in Your
Excellency’s letter. It is pleased to note that the proposed pact will maintain
unimpaired the rights and obligations arising from the Covenant of the
League of Nations and from the Locarno agreements which constitute for
Belgium fundamental guarantees of security.
The Belgian Government highly appreciates the action of the American
Government which permits it to join in the great work destined to develop
the spirit of peace throughout the world and to diminish in future the risks
of new catastrophes.
The Royal Government would be grateful if the Government of the United
States would inform it as to the date and place which it may choose for the
signature of the treaty.
I avail myself [etc.]
HYMANS
99 Not printed.

[Document 96]
The Minister in Poland (Stetson) to the Secretary of State
WARSAW, July 18, 1928.
[Received August 2.]
No. 1843
p.m.,2 I have the honor to transmit, herewith, a copy of the original text, in
French, of the note from the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, signifying
Poland’s acceptance of Secretary Kellogg’s pact for the renunciation of war.
A translation of the above mentioned note, as transmitted in my telegram
referred to, is also enclosed.
For the information of the Department, I may say that the note in question
was handed to Mr. Werlich, Third Secretary of this Legation, by Count
Joseph Potocki, Chief of the Anglo-American Section of the Polish Foreign
I have [etc.]
For the Minister:
J. WEBB BENTON
Secretary of Legation
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Polish Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs (Wysocki) to the American Minister (Stetson)
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note No.
1175, of June 23, last, which you were good enough to send me, to which

was attached the draft of a multilateral pact against war, as proposed by His
Excellency, Mr. Kellogg.
The principles which Mr. Kellogg has emphasized in the draft above-
mentioned being entirely conformable with the objectives that Poland never
ceases pursuing in its foreign policy, I have the honor to communicate to
you the fact that the Polish Government accepts the text of the above stated
pact and declares itself ready to affix its signature thereto.
As regards the interpretation of the pact in question which you have been
good enough to give in your note of the 23rd of June and which confirms
the fact that the pact is destined to insure the consolidation of peaceful
relations between States on the basis of the existing international
obligations, the Polish Government takes note of the following statements:
(1) That the pact does not affect in any way the right of legitimate
defense inherent in each State;
(2) That each State signatory to the pact who may endeavor to
realize its national interests by means of war shall be deprived of
the benefits of the said pact;
(3) That no incompatibility exists between the stipulations of the
pact against war and the obligations derived from the Covenant of
the League of Nations for States which are members of the latter.
This statement results from the very fact that the pact proposed by
Mr. Kellogg stipulates the renunciation of war as an instrument of
national policy.
These precisions as well as the opportunity given to all States to adhere to
the pact are of a nature to assure to Poland the possibility of satisfying her
international obligations.
The Polish Government permits itself to express the hope of seeing the
realization in the nearest future of this great common work of peace and
stabilization destined to assure its benefits to all mankind.
Please accept [etc.]

Arrep Wysocxs
“ Not printed.

[Document 97]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Marriner)
[WASHINGTON,] July 19, 1928.
The Spanish Ambassador called to inform the Secretary that his
Government had perfectly understood the situation with respect to the notes
communicated to it for its information and that the Prime Minister was very
sorry indeed that incorrect reports had appeared in the Spanish press and
had emanated from Madrid on this point. He brought with him the text of a
communiqué which his Government desired to issue on the subject which
stated that the Spanish Government, having been invited to express its
willingness to sign the treaty after examining the notes sent to it for its
information, was willing so to do and expected an invitation shortly. The
Secretary would not agree to this, but said that he was quite willing that
Spain should say that, after examining the notes submitted to it for its
information, it was willing to sign as an original party without reservations
if invited so to do, and asked that the following alternative draft be
considered by the Spanish Government for an informal statement:
“The Spanish Government having examined with the greatest
care the provisions and contents of the note of the Secretary of
State of the United States of America addressed to the principal
Powers together with the explanation given to the provisions of
the proposed pact for the renunciation of war, which note was
communicated to the Spanish Government for its information by
the American Ambassador at Madrid, is prepared to express its
indorsement of the high purposes of the treaty which accord with
the pacific attitude of the Spanish nation and will be happy to sign
as an original party without reservations if invited so to do.”
The Secretary told the Ambassador that when he had received all the
answers he would raise the question with the other Governments and that it

was absolutely necessary that he do this as he could not take the initiative or
the sole action of inviting other Powers since the inclusion of any Power not
at present in the scope of the negotiations would certainly cause application
to be made by many others. He told the Ambassador that there had been
some delay in the Japanese reply due to some questions of phraseology, but
that he would take the question up, as soon as he received a favorable reply
from Japan, with the other Powers.
Subsequently Mr. Marriner told the Ambassador that the question had
become somewhat complicated by the leak in the Spanish press since other
Powers had begun making similar inquiries and the question of where to
draw the line might be of great difficulty. The Ambassador pointed out that
one difficulty would not arise if Spain were included among the original
signatories and that would be any difficulty as to ratifications, since as there
was no Parliament in Spain, the signature of the Government required no
ratification. The Ambassador expressed his real disturbance that the leak in
the Spanish press had further complicated the question, and said he hoped
that the Secretary understood that this was not the fault of the Spanish
Government.
J. T[HEODORE] M[ARRINER]

[Document 98]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 9 p.m.]
Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“Mr. Minister: I have had the honor of receiving Your
Excellency’s letter of June 23rd by which the Government of the
United States invites the Government of the Czechoslovak
Republic to sign the proposed treaty for the renunciation of war.
The same invitation was transmitted to our representative in
Washington. The letter contains in addition to the integral text of
the proposed treaty a commentary on the text which explains the
remarks of the French Government and indicates in detail the
meaning and the significance which the Government of the
United States attaches to the multilateral treaty in the event of the
treaty’s signature, ratification, and enactment.
I have the honor to transmit to Your Excellency by this note the
reply of the Czechoslovak [Government].
1. First I would very respectfully thank the Government
of the United States for having addressed its invitation
to us. From the beginning we have followed the
negotiations between the French and American
Governments on the subject of the pact for the
renunciation of war with the greatest sympathy and
attention, and were ready at any moment to associate
ourselves with this noble undertaking, which marks a
memorable date in the history of the world after the

war. In our negotiations which I have had the honor,
during the last few months, to carry on with the
representatives of the United States, France and Great
Britain, I have several times emphasized the importance
of this act and the political necessity of associating
thereto also the other powers and especially those who
have assumed obligations by their negotiations at
Locarno in 1925. The Government of the United States,
agreeing fully in this with the other powers, has been
good enough to recognize the justice of this point of
view and addressed to us its invitation. The
Czechoslovak
Government
attributes
thereto
a
considerable political importance and warmly thanks
the Washington Government.
2. In accordance with the negotiations prior to the
signing of the treaty, as well as by the changes made in
the preamble from the original text, and from the
explanations contained in Your Excellency’s letter of
June 23, 1928, it is clear that there is nothing in this
treaty in opposition either to the provisions of the
Covenant of the League of Nations, nor with those of
the Locarno treaties, or the neutrality treaties, nor, in
general, with the obligations contained in existing
treaties which the Czechoslovak Republic has hitherto
made.
3. From the explanations given in Your Excellency’s
letter it is further brought out that any violation of the
multilateral treaty by one of the contracting parties
would free entirely the other signatory powers from
their obligations towards the power which might have
violated the stipulations of this treaty; it is furthermore
apparent that the right of self-defense is in no way
weakened nor restricted by the obligations of the new
treaty and that each power is entirely free to defend

itself according to its will and its necessities against
attack and foreign invasion.
4. As thus defined both in the text of the preamble and
in the statements of Your Excellency’s letter, the goal of
the new treaty, according to the opinion of the
Czechoslovak Republic, is to consolidate and maintain
peaceful
relations
and
peaceful
and
friendly
collaboration under the contractual terms in which these
have today been established between the interested
nations. By their signature, the contracting parties will
renounce war as an instrument of their national policy
aimed to satisfy their selfish interests. This would be an
immense benefit for humanity; and the Government of
the Czechoslovak Republic rejoices to see that the
American Government is ready to offer participation in
this treaty, on the one hand to the powers who are
parties to the neutrality treaties and on the other to all
other powers in order to invest it with as universal a
character as possible.
5. The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic,
having noted everything contained in Your Excellency’s
note, expresses its point of view on this subject as
shown
in
the
foregoing,
thus
confirming
the
explanations of your note of June 23, 1928. It is very
happy to be able to reply in the affirmative to the
invitation of the Washington Government and, thanking
it again and most particularly for its generous efforts
toward consolidating and maintaining world peace,
declares that it is now ready to sign the text of the
multilateral treaty in accordance with the proposition of
His Excellency, Mr. Kellogg, as set forth in Your
Excellency’s letter of June 23, 1928.
I venture to add that the Government of the Czechoslovak
Republic gladly associates itself with all those who have rendered

warm homage to the noble manifestation for world peace made
by the Government of the United States and that the foreign
policy of our country sees therein the realization of the ends
which it has pursued for ten years.
Pray accept, Mr. Minister, the expressions of my highest
consideration. (Signed) Eduard Beneš.”
EINSTEIN
3 Not printed.

[Document 99]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
Japanese reply to the note which I delivered on June 23rd. He said that the
Japanese Government would like the text kept confidential until noon on
Saturday, Tokyo time, corresponding to 10 p.m., Friday, Washington time.
In handing me the note Baron Tanaka stated that he had received a telegram
from the Japanese Chargé d’Affaires, Washington, referring to the
conversation the latter had had with the Secretary of State in which the
Secretary suggested the possibility of his going to Paris for the purpose of
signing the treaty there. He said he appreciated the sentiments of the
Secretary and while he would be unable because of the pressure of his
duties in Tokyo to go to Paris himself he wished me to convey his personal
congratulations to the Secretary on the success of the negotiations and his
regret at not being able to meet him.
I took occasion to tell him I was sure my Government would be deeply
gratified by the adherence of Japan to the treaty, particularly in view of the
difficulty presented in this country by the wording of the document. I think
perhaps some official acknowledgment on this point would be appreciated.
The note reads as follows:
“Monsieur le Chargé d’Affaires, I have the honor to acknowledge
the receipt of your note of the 23rd ultimo in which you recall to
my attention your Government’s identic note of the 13th of April
of this year, enclosing, together with certain correspondence, the
preliminary draft of a treaty, and inquiring whether this
Government were in a position to give favorable consideration to

the latter. Your note under reply further recalls that on the 20th of
April the Government of the French Republic circulated among
the interested Governments an alternative draft treaty, and that on
the 28th of April the Secretary of State of the United States of
America explained fully the construction placed by that
Government on their own draft, in view of the matter emphasized
in the French alternative.
You now further inform me that the British, German, and Italian
Governments have replied to your Government’s notes of the 13th
April last, and that the Governments of the British self-governing
Dominions and of India have likewise replied to invitations
addressed to them on the suggestion of His Britannic Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain; and you observe that none of these
Governments has expressed any dissent from the construction
above referred to, or any disapproval of the principle underlying
the proposals; nor have they suggested any specific modifications
of the text of the draft; and you proceed to reenforce in detail the
explanations made by the Secretary of State in his speech of the
28th April.
You then transmit for the consideration of this Government the
revised draft of a multilateral treaty, which takes in the British
self-governing dominions, India and all parties to the Locarno
treaty, as original parties, and in the preamble of which is
included a statement which is directed to recognizing the
principle that if a state goes to war in violation of the treaty, the
other contracting powers are released from their obligations under
the treaty to that state.
Such a multilateral treaty as so revised, you are instructed to state
your Government are ready to sign at once, and you express the
fervent hope that this Government will be able promptly to
indicate their readiness to accept it in this form without
qualification or reservation. You conclude by expressing the
desire of the Government of the United States to know whether
my Government are prepared to join with the United States and

other similarly disposed governments in signing a definitive
treaty in the form so transmitted.
In reply, I have the honor to inform you that the Japanese
Government are happy to be able to give their full concurrence to
the alterations now proposed, their understanding of the original
draft submitted to them in April last being, as I intimated in my
note to His Excellency, Mr. MacVeagh dated the 26th of May,
1928, substantially the same as that entertained by the
Government of the United States. They are therefore ready to
have produced instructions for the signature, on that footing, of
the treaty in the form in which it is now proposed.
I cannot conclude without congratulating your Government most
warmly upon the rapid and general acceptance which their
proposals have met with. The Imperial Government are proud to
be among the first to be associated with a movement so plainly in
unison with the hopes everywhere entertained, and confidently
concur with the high probability of the acceptance of this simple
and magnanimous treaty by the whole civilized world.
I beg you, Monsieur le Chargé d’Affaires, to accept the renewed
assurance of my high consideration. (Signed) Baron Giichi
Tanaka, Minister for Foreign Affairs.”
NEVILLE

[Document 100]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)5
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 23, 1928—noon.
226. Through its Ambassador at Washington the Spanish Government has
made reiterated representations for inclusion as an original signatory to the
treaty for the renunciation of war. I have stated to the Ambassador many
times that this Government did not object to Spain’s becoming a party to
treaty, but that question of the inclusion of further powers at time of affixing
signatures was not one which I could decide alone but one on which I
should have to consult the other signatory Governments. While treaty was
being negotiated it was manifestly inadvisable to invite in more countries
for negotiation. The British Dominions were invited, of course, at the
request of the British Government, as they form an integral part of the
British Empire; and Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Poland were invited at
instance of France as they were original signatories to the Locarno Treaties.
Were we now to extend the original signatories to take in Spain, the
question will arise how many more powers will wish to come in, and
whether with every additional party the risk of obtaining ratification would
not be increased. Ever since unfounded statement appeared in Madrid
papers that I had invited Spain to be an original party, many suggestions
with regard to other countries have been carried by the press, of which the
most embarrassing was suggestion in Germany with regard to Russia.
On the basis of the foregoing I should like you to consult privately with the
Foreign Minister and ascertain his opinion on this subject. Telegraph result.
KELLOGG

> The same telegram was sent to Great Britain (No. 173), Germany (No.
81), and Italy (No. 86).

[Document 101]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
[Received 4:28 p.m.]
Schubert. He declared emphatically that Germany would not oppose
inclusion of any specific power in addition to those powers which have
negotiated the treaty, but he is convinced that to extend choice of
signatories beyond present total would lead to other extensions, would give
the pact a political cachet, and would arouse discussion and criticism;
finally, the risk of obtaining ratification would be greatly increased.
Schubert is for the pact, earnestly and enthusiastically, and says that he is
thinking of it and not of German interests. He says that it is logical as it is,
and that no one can say anything against it. Any alteration, he fears, would
make the treaty the sport of European politics, and he prefers that it should
stay as it is, that everybody should join, and that nobody should be
offended. He mentioned Russia and repeated a previous statment that no
one had asked him to speak for Russia and that he will not appear as an
intermediary. He was speaking, he said, only as one who deals with and
understands high politics.
Schubert’s own view is that it would be a good thing one day to have Russia
in the pact; that she is now free and that if she comes into the pact she, too,
is bound. …

He did not know whether Russia would join or not, but he thought she
should, and that it should not be made impossible for her to join.
SCHURMAN

[Document 102]
The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: Shortly before his departure on leave Monsieur Claudel
told Your Excellency of the great satisfaction it would give the French
Government if you should be willing personally to represent the Federal
Government at the ceremonies connected with the signature of the anti-war
treaty.
Your Excellency agreed in principle to this request, indicating the date of
August 27th as being more convenient for you, but reserving at the same
time your definitive answer until such time as you should have received the
assurance that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the principal powers
signatory of the treaty were able to go themselves to Paris on the 21st
[27th?] of August.
Following the desire thus expressed by Your Excellency, M. Briand has
now been assured that Sir Austen Chamberlain, M. Stresemann, M.
Hymans, M. Beneš and very probably M. Zalewski will go personally to
Paris on the 27th of August. Mr. Mussolini and Baron Tanaka, who were
also invited, have expressed their regret that they are unable to go to Paris
in person.
In view of these several acceptances, my Government has instructed me to
reiterate to Your Excellency the invitation of Monsieur Claudel and to tell
you how happy it will be if you will be good enough definitely to agree to
go to Paris on the 27th of August.
In the hope of a favorable response, I am [etc.]
SARTIGES

[Document 103]
The Ambassador in Frame (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, July 26, 1928—noon.
[Received 4:40 p.m.]
Briand, whose opinions are as follows:
As a general thing, the French Government feels that the more original
signatories there are to the pact the better, but it realizes that this
generalization has certain limits. To be more specific, it thinks that
inclusion of Spain as one of the original signatories would be a good thing,
and Briand said in passing that the same opinion had already been
expressed to him by others, notably by Sir Austen Chamberlain. Although
the foregoing represents the French Government’s own particular point of
view, it feels, however, that in view of the course the negotiations have
taken and in view of the fact that you have issued the invitation to sign the
pact, the question of who shall be included as original signatories to it is
one for you to decide. The French Government does not wish to do
anything which might either inconvenience or embarrass you or which
would complicate matters in the least; it fully recognizes that you are the
best judge of what can and what cannot be done in this direction with
regard to ratification of the pact by the Senate.
Briand also said that instructions had been sent to Claudel to talk with you
in the sense of the foregoing.
In regard to Russia, Briand expressed as his personal opinion that if Russia
desired to adhere to the pact at some future time he did not see how that
could be prevented. As things are now (one factor being the violent
campaign of the Russian press against the pact) Russia’s signature at this

time would not be [advisable?]. Among other reasons which militate against
issuance of invitation to her is likelihood that opportunity would be seized
to return an intemperate answer.
Briand stated that he had every reason to believe that, with the exception of
Mussolini, every Foreign Minister in Europe would come to Paris to sign
the pact. Briand seemed to take for granted that under those conditions the
French Government would have the pleasure of receiving you here at end of
August; indeed, he said unqualifiedly that you had told Claudel that you
would come, under conditions set forth, and that you had spoken of August
25 as date when you would arrive and had suggested August 27 as date for
signature of the treaty. It would appear from this that Briand interprets your
conversation with Claudel (your telegram No. 221, July 17) as signifying
that, as it is impossible ever to get Mussolini out of Italy, his peculiar case
does not enter into conditions which you attached to your consent to come
to Paris to sign, as those conditions have been met satisfactorily otherwise.
HERRICK

[Document 104]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2:28 p.m.]
Lindsay8 sent for me and gave me Chamberlain’s reply in full to inquiry
contained in your telegram under reference which I had discussed
immediately upon its receipt.
Chamberlain’s feeling is that question involved is one primarily for decision
between you and Briand, although he himself would welcome inclusion of
Spain as one of the original signatories; he does not feel that to include
Spain in this way would mean a general extension to other countries.
In my previous discussion at the Foreign Office, the subject of Russia was
brought into the conversation. On that Chamberlain feels that as Great
Britain has no treaty obligations with Russia he has no opinion either one
way or the other in regard to that country’s inclusion as subscriber to the
pact, but that he would not make the slightest effort to obtain its signature.
If any intimation is received in regard to extending invitation to Russia, he
felt that decision lies between you and Briand.
ATHERTON
8 Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 105]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ROME, July 27, 1928—noon.
[Received 1:47 p.m.]
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I discussed subject referred to in your telegram
with Under Secretary Grandi. The Under Secretary stated that if we asked
whether Spain in particular should be invited to become an original
signatory, their reply, in view of the friendly relations between Italy and
Spain, would be in the affirmative; but that if we asked generally whether
the treaty should be opened to inclusion of number of other nations, Italy
would doubt expediency of the plan. Grandi said further that if Spain and
other nations were included, Italy would very much like to have Hungary
one of them.
I have the impression that Government of Italy will be quite satisfied if you
carry out your original intention.
I was told yesterday by French Ambassador that he had extended an
invitation to Mussolini to come to Paris to sign treaty, but that latter had
told him that, as you had already been informed through me, it would be
impossible. Grandi told me this morning that he had conveyed to Mussolini
my suggestion that Grandi might sign for Italy, but that he had not had time
to discuss matter fully with Mussolini before latter’s departure from Rome.
On Mussolini’s return to Rome next week, Grandi will take up subject with
him again.
FLETCHER

[Document 106]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
233. I have sent the following note today to the French Chargé d’Affaires:
“In your letter of July 28th [26th], you referred to the
conversation which I had with the Ambassador, M. Claudel,
shortly before his departure, when he conveyed to me the desire
of his Government that I should come to Paris for the signature of
the Treaty for the Renunciation of War, a journey which, in view
of the great part which France has played in these negotiations, I
am most happy to undertake and where, in accordance with your
assurances, I shall have the pleasure of signing the treaty with the
Foreign Ministers of the countries who have collaborated in this
work. As I stated to M. Claudel, I should have been most happy
to invite the interested Governments to sign the treaty here in
Washington, but I have been glad to yield the place of host to
France, both as a tribute to its initiative and out of consideration
for the greater convenience it affords to the larger number of
signatory states. It gives me great pleasure to assure you that the
date of August 27th is altogether agreeable to me and that I shall
sail on the 18th of August in order to reach Paris in ample time.”
I am sailing on the Ile de France on the 18th. Shall be most happy to be
your guest in Paris at the time of the signature of the treaty. Mrs. Kellogg
will be with me. I do not expect to stay in Paris longer than a day or two
after the signing of the treaty. I then expect to go to England and probably
to Ireland for one day, sailing on the Leviathan September 4th. Mr. Marriner
will sail on the Aquitania August 1st; will go to London for a few days and
then to Paris where he will be available in connection with arrangements for
the signature and program. My Secretary (Beck) will stay with him in Paris.

Ketoce

[Document 107]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)10
following sense, leaving no written memorandum of any kind:
“Many Governments not parties to the original negotiations
having manifested a most friendly interest in and sympathy for
the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war proposed by the
Government of the United States and accepted by the
Governments of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia,
France, Germany, Great Britain, India, the Irish Free State, Italy,
Japan, New Zealand, Poland and South Africa, careful
consideration has been given to the procedure which should be
followed in causing the Treaty to be signed and extending its
application to Powers not called upon to sign in the first instance.
As is well known, the original suggestion of the United States
was that the proposed anti-war treaty be concluded in the first
instance by the United States and the British, French, German,
Italian and Japanese Governments and it was to those
Governments only that the United States submitted its draft treaty
of April 13, 1928. The reason for thus limiting the scope of the
negotiations has already been explained as, for example, in the
paragraph entitled ‘Universality’ in the note which the United
States addressed to the interested Governments on June 23, 1928.
During the negotiations with the British, French, German, Italian
and Japanese Governments it appeared desirable for legal reasons
to provide for the signature of the treaty in the first instance by
certain powers not individually mentioned in the previous
correspondence. The British Government pointed out in its note

of May 19, 1928, for example, that the proposed treaty from its
very nature was not one which concerned His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain alone, but was one in which that
Government could not undertake to participate otherwise than
jointly and simultaneously with the Governments in the
Dominions and the Government of India. Provision has, therefore,
quite naturally been made for the signature of the treaty by each
constituent part of the British Empire individually. The only other
Governments for whose signature in the first instance provision
has been made are the Governments of Belgium, Czechoslovakia
and Poland. These Governments were invited to become original
signatories because the question had been raised as to whether the
proposed multilateral anti-war treaty was in any way inconsistent
with the prior obligations of Great Britain, France, Germany and
Italy as parties to the Locarno treaties. The United States
suggested that if any inconsistency between these treaties were
found to exist the matter could be adjusted by including all
signatories of the Locarno treaties among the original signatories
of the anti-war treaty, since in such event no State could resort to
war in violation of the Locarno treaties without simultaneously
violating the anti-war treaty thus freeing the other parties to the
latter treaty from their obligations thereunder to the treaty-
breaking state.
The United States has from the beginning insisted upon a form of
treaty which would permit participation therein by all the
countries of the world. The restriction of the number of original
signatories is purely a matter of procedure calculated to expedite
the consummation of the treaty and its coming into force.
Governments adhering to the treaty are on exactly the same
footing as Governments signing in the first instance. If the treaty
is to attain its maximum usefulness it is essential that the world
powers not involved in the original negotiations take steps
promptly to adhere to the treaty pursuant to its terms and the
United States and the other Governments who have agreed upon
the present instrument deeply appreciate the sympathetic interest
in their efforts which has been shown by so many other powers.

In the general interest, however, it seems wiser to follow the
procedure already agreed upon and to make no amendment in the
text of the treaty so as to provide for signature in the first instance
by any Government not heretofore concerned in the negotiations.
The Secretary of State is explaining therefore the situation to the
Spanish Ambassador at Washington and informing him orally that
it is not feasible to arrange to have Spain included among the
original signatories of the Treaty.”
KELLOGG
10 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Great Britain (No. 176),
Italy (No. 90), and Germany (No. 82).

[Document 108]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
51. [Paraphrase.] What follows is for your information, but if some question
regarding the subject is raised with you by Spanish Government you may
make discreet use of facts set forth below.
On July 23 I telegraphed to our Embassies in France, Germany, Great
Britain and Italy as follows: [End paraphrase.]
[Here follows text of Department’s telegram No. 226, July 23, noon, to the
Ambassador in France, printed in paraphrase on page 124 [Pg. 124 includes
portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100].]
After consideration of the replies to my inquiry I yesterday sent the
following telegram to the four Embassies mentioned:
[Here follows text of the Department’s telegram No. 237 printed supra.]
I also sent yesterday for the Spanish Ambassador and had the entire
situation carefully explained to him. Mr. Castle’s memorandum of the
conversation is as follows:
“I told the Spanish Ambassador that following the Secretary’s
conversation with him on July 19, 1928, regarding the desire of
Spain to be included among the original signatories of the
multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war which is to be
signed next month, he had informally inquired of the other
Governments primarily interested in the negotiation of the treaty
whether it would be advisable in their opinion to enlarge the
number of original signatories by extending an appropriate
invitation to Spain. The Secretary confidentially informed them at
the same time that he understood Spain would accept such an

invitation if tendered. I told him further the Department has now
received replies from all the Governments thus approached and
that in no quarter was any objection raised to the suggestion that
Spain participate in the treaty at the earliest possible moment. I
said the replies indicated, however, that if a special invitation
were extended to Spain at the request of the United States some
of the Powers heretofore concerned in the negotiation of the
treaty would feel disposed formally to request the inclusion of
certain other Governments among the original signatories; that
furthermore the leak in the Spanish press had led various
governments to inquire why it was, if Spain was included, they
should not be also. A considerable increase in the number of
original signatories, I pointed out, would seriously complicate
matters and might even delay unduly the coming into force of the
treaty since the treaty by its terms cannot become effective until
ratified by all the Powers signing it in the first instance. I said that
the Ambassador’s assurances as to the position of Spain with
respect to the question of ratification were of course sufficient to
remove any misgivings on that score so far as Spain was
concerned, but that unfortunately there were no comparable
assurances with respect to the States whose participation would
necessarily follow were Spain to be invited to sign the treaty in
the first instance.
I told him that in these circumstances, and particularly since it
does not seem possible to find any convincing ground upon which
to distinguish the case of Spain from that of other important world
powers not called upon to become original signatories of the
treaty, we had been regretfully forced to the conclusion that it was
not feasible to arrange to have Spain included among the original
parties to the treaty. The Spanish Government, I said, might rest
assured, however, that no other Government would be given a
preferred position over Spain in the matter and that the treaty
would be signed in the first instance only by the fifteen Powers
now named in the preamble thereof.

I explained to him again the stipulations of the treaty as to the
procedure pursuant to which governments other than those
signing in the first instance could become parties thereto and told
him that the United States hopes that Spain will take the earliest
possible advantage of the provisions of that article and adhere to
the treaty without delay as soon as it has come into force, that it
would welcome association with Spain in this new movement for
the promotion of world peace.
[Paraphrase]
Mr. Padilla, who was very angry, again went over the old ground,
but without adding anything new to what he has already said. The
effect that the episode will have on him personally is evidently his
primary worry. He said that he would cable his Government that
other governments had objected to having Spain sign the treaty. I
said that he must not do this, as it would not be true. The
Secretary of State then joined the conference and answered the
Ambassador very clearly along same lines that I had taken, stating
that nothing more could be done as the treaty could not be kept
waiting by changing all the plans at the last instant, and adding
that, as he had already said many times, it had become clear that
were Spain to become an original signatory of the treaty, without
reason, it would be necessary to ask the world.
I explained once more, in detail, why the fifteen nations and no
others were to sign the treaty, and I am convinced that the
Ambassador understands even though he gives the appearance of
not doing so. He still insists that the Secretary did invite Spain to
sign; but, as I pointed out, the records on which he relies for that
statement do not ear him out.”
Should you find it necessary to discuss this matter with the Spanish Foreign
Office, you will please make it perfectly clear that none of the Governments
consulted in the present negotiations has objected in any way to Spain’s
participation as an original signatory and that the difficulty lies in fact that
if this Government should have Spain invited to sign in the first instance
other Governments would insist upon adding other powers; the result would

be, in all probability, the necessity of issuing a general invitation to the
entire world and, in consequence, the postponement of the ceremony of
signature and inevitable delay in the treaty’s coming into force. This is
entirely out of the question, of course, and I had no choice, therefore, but to
conclude that the general interest demanded strict observance of present
program. If the addition of Spain to the fifteen powers now named in the
preamble were the only question involved, the situation would be different;
but that is not the case. Only two days ago, for example, the Chargé of the
Government of the Netherlands called at the Department to state that his
Government had seen rumors that Spain was to be invited to be an original
signatory of the treaty, and that if that were so his Government hoped that,
as it had for so long been one of the prime movers in all peaceful efforts, it
might also be included.
KELLOGG

[Document 109]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
241. Sartiges suggested to Castle a few days ago that it might be possible to
have a protocol of adhesion ready for signature by other nations at the time
the multilateral treaty is signed by the fifteen nations. Castle explained that
I doubted the advisability of this since there might appear an invidious
distinction between those signing the treaty and the rest. Sartiges came in
again today to say that the French Government recognized the possible
difficulties which might arise, and had therefore given up the idea and was
preparing simply for the signature of the treaty by the original fifteen.
Sartiges also said that Chamberlain had told the French it would be
embarrassing for him to meet the Russians. There would have been of
course, the same embarrassment for me and I am very glad of the decision
made.
The above is for your information.
KELLOGG

[Document 110]
The Minister in Portugal (Dearing) to the Secretary of State
31. The Minister for Foreign Affairs called at the Legation this afternoon
and expressed the keenest interest in having Portugal invited to sign the
peace pact in Paris the last of this month. He showed me a notice to the
effect that Primo de Rivera is expected to go and sign on behalf of Spain
and said it would cause a very painful impression in Portugal if Spain were
invited to sign while Portugal, an ally, a signatory of all the Paris treaties,
the third colonial power of the world, and a country with which we have
never had a war but have always been friendly and at peace should merely
be left to adhere. He pointed out the extent and important location of the
colonies, the constantly growing market our country is finding in
Portuguese dominions and the potential advantage to us of the various
colonial possessions, the fact that Portugal is a better market than
Czechoslovakia, which is to sign, and so forth. He indicated that the
Portuguese Minister at Washington had been instructed to approach the
Department of State but said he wished me to know what great importance
Portugal attached to the treaty on account of its character and significance
and to being associated in the signing of it instead of merely being lending
adherence. He declared it would vastly benefit our relations with Portugal,
that he felt sure the French would welcome their presence at the signing and
that it would give general satisfaction. He said he could think of no quarter
in which an invitation to Portugal could cause any hard feeling, referred
again to Spain and said he could not see why Spain should be invited to
sign in view of her war record while Portugal was left merely to adhere. He
also mentioned Rumania’s efforts to be included in the signing and said he
thought Portugal had the better right.
I told the Minister I was in sympathy with his desire to share in signing the
pact to outlaw war and that I would at once report what he had said and

recommend that Portugal be included among the nations to sign, although I
did not know what criterion the Secretary had adopted in the matter and
could not commit the Department in any way.
The record as given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs is true. Moreover,
this country is making at present most commendable efforts to reform its
administration and provide good government. It has just balanced its
budget. An invitation to be present at Paris would be of material assistance
and enhance its prestige at home and abroad. With its colonies Portugal is
of constantly increasing importance for our trade and of great potential
importance for our communications and defense. I think Portugal should be,
and I so recommend, included among the nations invited to sign the peace
pact and I feel sure such an invitation will greatly aid negotiations for the
treaty of conciliation and arbitration and the treaty of friendship and
commerce now under discussion (Department’s instructions 890 and 898 of
If invited Portugal will send to sign for her Dr. Bettencourt Rodrigues, her
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Please instruct me by telegraph.
DEARING

[Document 111]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
179. Sir Ronald Lindsay in conversation today referred to the oral message
opinion this definitely closed the door to Spain’s being included among the
original signatories to the pact. I said I had no further information than your
telegram above referred to. Whereupon he pointed out that there had
appeared in the London Times a statement from Madrid alleging that Primo
de Rivera was proceeding to Paris to sign the Kellogg pact as an original
signatory and Lindsay felt for his own part that Spanish pride would be very
hurt if this turned out to be untrue coupled with the fact that Spain was
basing her reentry into the League of Nations upon certain conditions which
he thought would be refused. He added that the Spanish Ambassador had
been urging the Foreign Office to take any action possible that Spain might
be included as an original signatory. Sir Ronald said he had explained in
reply that this matter lay entirely between Paris and Washington. Sir Ronald
personally welcome Spain’s inclusion as an original signatory and that he
had reason to believe Briand was of this same frame of mind.
ATHERTON

[Document 112]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
247. Before I leave I plan to send a telegram, substantially in form which
will be quoted below, to all of our diplomatic missions with the exception
of those in the countries signing the anti-war treaty in the first instance. All
the correspondence to July 20 has already been mailed in pamphlet form to
all missions with the exceptions stated and should be available to most, if
not all, of them by time note is delivered. Please mail five copies of
pamphlet to Legation at Teheran from supply sent you last week.
Wish you and Marriner to consult French Government confidentially on this
program for requesting all countries to adhere to treaty; at same time
inquire whether French Government would be disposed to notify Russia of
signature of treaty and invite her adherence to it. Let me know immediately
whether France has any suggestions or objections in regard to this
procedure.
Text of proposed telegram reads as follows:13
“According to present plans the multilateral anti-war treaty
negotiated by the United States will be signed in Paris on August
27, 1928. I will telegraph you through the American Embassy at
Paris as soon as the treaty is signed and immediately upon receipt
of that telegram you should deliver the following note to the
Foreign Office dating it the date of the day of the signature of the
treaty. In the meantime you will seek an interview with the
Foreign Minister and informally acquaint him with the contents of
the note.

“‘I have the honor to inform you that the Governments
of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France,
Germany, Great Britain, India, the Irish Free State,
Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland, South Africa and the
United States of America have this day signed in Paris a
treaty binding them to renounce war as an instrument of
national policy in their relations with one another and to
seek only by pacific means the settlement or solution of
all disputes which may arise among them.
“‘This treaty, as Your Excellency is aware, is the
outcome of negotiations which commenced on June 20,
1927, when M. Briand, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the French Republic submitted to my Government a
draft of a pact of perpetual friendship between France
and the United States. In the course of the subsequent
negotiations this idea was extended so as to include as
original signatories of the anti-war treaty not only
France and the United States but also Japan, the British
Empire and all the Governments which participated
with France and Great Britain in the Locarno
agreements,
namely
Belgium,
Czechoslovakia,
Germany, Italy and Poland. This procedure met the
point raised by the British Government in its note of
May 19, 1928, where it stated that the treaty from its
very nature was not one which concerned that
Government alone, but was one in which that
Government could not undertake to participate
otherwise than jointly and simultaneously with the
Governments in the Dominions and the Government of
India; it also settled satisfactorily the question whether
there was any inconsistency between the new treaty and
the treaties of Locarno.
“‘The decision to limit the original signatories to the
powers named above, that is, to the United States,
Japan, the parties to the Locarno treaties, the British

Dominions and India, was based entirely upon practical
considerations. It was the desire of the United States
that the negotiations be successfully concluded at the
earliest possible moment and that the treaty become
operative without the delay that would inevitably result
were prior universal acceptance made a condition
precedent to its coming into force. My Government felt,
moreover, that if these powers could agree upon a
simple renunciation of war as an instrument of national
policy there could be no doubt that most, if not all, of
the other powers of the world would find the formula
equally acceptable and would hasten to lend their
unqualified support to so impressive a movement for
the perpetuation of peace. The United States has,
however, been anxious from the beginning that no State
should feel deprived of an opportunity to participate
promptly in the new treaty and thus not only align itself
formally and solemnly with this new manifestation of
the popular demand for world peace but also avail itself
of the identical benefits enjoyed by the original
signatories. Accordingly in the draft treaty proposed by
it the United States made specific provision for
participation in the treaty by any and every power
desiring to identify itself therewith, and this same
provision is found in the definitive instrument signed
today in Paris. It will also be observed that the powers
signing the treaty have recorded in the preamble their
hope that every nation of the world will participate in
the treaty and in that connection I am happy to be able
to say that my Government has already received from
several Governments informal indications that they are
prepared to do so at the earliest possible moment. This
convincing evidence of the world-wide interest and
sympathy which the new treaty has evoked is most
gratifying to all the Governments concerned.

“‘In these circumstances I have the honor formally to
communicate to Your Excellency for your consideration
and for the approval of your Government, if it concurs
therein, the text of the above-mentioned treaty as signed
today in Paris, omitting only that part of the preamble
which names the several plenipotentiaries. The text is as
follows:
(Here follows the text of the treaty).
“‘The provisions regarding ratification and adherence
are, as Your Excellency will observe, found in the third
and last article. That article provides that the treaty shall
take effect as soon as the ratifications of all the powers
named in the preamble shall have been deposited in
Washington, and that it shall be open to adherence by
all the other powers of the world. Any power desiring to
participate in the treaty may thus avail itself of its
benefits just as soon as it comes into force since the
treaty expressly stipulates that when it has come into
force as between the original signatories it shall take
effect as between them and an adhering power
immediately upon the deposit in Washington of the
latter’s instrument of adherence. In this manner it is
hoped the beneficent influence of the new treaty may
rapidly spread throughout the world.
“‘I shall shortly transmit for Your Excellency’s
convenient reference a printed pamphlet containing the
text in translation of M. Briand’s original proposal to
my Government of June 20, 1927, and the complete
record of the subsequent diplomatic correspondence on
the subject of a multilateral treaty for the renunciation
of war. I shall also transmit, as soon as received from
my Government, a certified copy of the signed treaty.
“‘In view of the fact that the treaty provides that
instruments evidencing adherence are to be deposited at

Washington, I have been instructed to state in
conclusion that the Government of the United States
would appreciate receiving Your Excellency’s assurance
that the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war
signed today in Paris is acceptable to your Government,
and that an appropriate instrument of adherence thereto
will in due course be deposited in Washington.’
“When delivering the foregoing note please state that an identic
note, mutatis mutandis, is being delivered simultaneously in the
other world capitals and that pursuant to the procedure which has
been followed throughout the present negotiations the text thereof
is being promptly released for publication. It will be given out in
Washington for publication in the morning papers of Wednesday,
August 29, and you should arrange for publication in the local
press at the corresponding time.
“If when you deliver this note you have already received a supply
of the pamphlet containing the Briand proposal and the
correspondence ending with the Japanese note of July 20, 1928,
please make a copy immediately available to the Foreign Office.
Otherwise transmit a copy as soon as received from the
Department.”
KELLOGG
13 Text not paraphrased.

[Document 113]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Dearing)
you advance for the inclusion of Portugal as an original signatory to the
treaty for the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy and I
have given this matter deep and sympathetic consideration.
[For the text of the four paragraphs here omitted, see the first four
paragraphs of the memorandum quoted in the Department’s telegram No.
You can readily understand in view of the foregoing and in view of the fact
that it would be out of the question to invite Portugal to be an original
signatory without inviting a large number of other powers at the same time,
thus delaying signature, ratification and coming into force of the treaty for a
long period, that in spite of my anxiety to associate Portugal with the
United States in this pact as soon as possible, I am not able to accede to the
suggestion contained in your telegram.
Please take this matter up orally with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
explain these circumstances.
KELLOGG

[Document 114]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
will not be here until Saturday I took the matter up with the Foreign Office
at once. I am told that, upon first consideration of the question, Briand,
desirous of meeting our wishes, is disposed in principle to notify Russia of
signature of the treaty and to invite her adherence to it. This point must be
examined most carefully, however, in order to eliminate any possibility that
such invitation will be met either by a refusal or an objectionable answer.
Foreign Office has not yet offered any suggestions or objections with
reference to remainder of the program.
Briand will go into whole question more thoroughly this afternoon, and
tomorrow morning I expect to receive a more definite reply.14 Some
uncertainty was evinced this morning at the Foreign Office over the exact
machinery whereby the immediate adherence of other powers besides the
original signatories may be effected. A possible legalistic view might be
that a power cannot take the necessary legal action which constitutes
adherence until after there is a pact in force—as there would be after the
deposit of ratifications by all the original signatories—susceptible of being
adhered to.
On other hand it seems that a Government might take legal action which
constitutes adherence conditionally, this condition being fulfilled the
moment the treaty comes into force. For instance, after the signature of the
treaty but without waiting for it to come into force a Government might ask
from its Parliament and obtain consent to enactment of an instrument of
adherence which could be deposited in Washington the day that the treaty

comes into force. Latter conception would better serve, it seems, the
underlying idea of spreading rapidly the beneficent influence of the treaty
throughout the world, and I gather that it would fit in with views of French
Government. The raising of any difficulty on this point was in no way
implied by the discussion; there was only the desire to have an identity of
understanding.
HERRICK
14 On August 11 the Ambassador informed the Department that the Foreign
Office would study the question over the week end (file No. 711.0012 Anti-

[Document 115]
The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
76. I saw Primo de Rivera on August 9 and explained discreetly point of
conclusion of the interview the Minister said that he “was resigned but not
convinced”, and that he would give me a memorandum the next day
(August 10) which would place Spain’s position in the matter on record.
Translation of memorandum follows:15
“Mr. Ambassador: I am anxious to make a brief and precise reply
to Your Excellency’s conversation last night which was in the
nature of a reply from Mr. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the
United States, to the negotiations undertaken with a view to
including Spain among the signatories of the proposed pact to
outlaw war. I must nevertheless preface my reply with the
expression of my sincerest gratitude for the high proof of
consideration for Spain and of affection for me which is
manifested by your having undertaken a journey of more than one
thousand kilometers, leaving Mrs. Hammond ill at San Sebastian,
in order to give me a personal account of the negotiations
regarding this matter.
A knowledge of the truth of the situation and the decorum of the
country which I govern prevent me from insisting in my request
which would not have arisen except for the error or
misunderstanding of our Ambassador in Washington that the
Government of the United States would look with favor upon and
therefore initiated this distinction for Spain which would thus be

admitted to the concert of the great powers as is only fitting on
account of its glorious past and its present position of cultural
prestige and peaceful intentions.
I must immediately report that I have desisted in my request to
the Governments at Paris and London which, faithful to the
friendship which binds them to the Madrid Government, had
supported this aspiration of ours.
But permit me, Mr. Ambassador, without in any way insisting in
the matter, to point out to you that neither the indiscretion
attributed to the use of [the] press, which merely published an
incidental and episodic report regarding a matter upon which the
whole world was commenting, nor that of the resulting attempt on
the part of other countries to be included with the great powers as
an original signatory in case Spain were, have any foundation
since Spain’s situation is unique in the world and it is a great and
notorious injustice which in no way profits the concert of the
great powers to exclude Spain, forgetting its services to humanity,
its verbal [sic] and spiritual fertility to which so many and so
great peoples owe their civilization and culture and which they
consider and love as a mother.
Whether it is this or another occasion, and none better could have
been seized than the present, Spain’s place among the nations will
one day have to be determined, for it cannot be alone in its group
and it is much more unjust to attempt to classify it as a second-
class power than to include it among the great powers. For even
the happy circumstance of its neutrality during the last war
reserves to it a role among them which no other nation can play.
No nation could better take the initiative in this matter than the
United States, which, for the very reason that they were our last
adversaries and appreciated our bravery and loyalty in the war on
land and sea, worthy of their own and of the nobility with which,
forgetful of bitterness, we rapidly reestablished political and
commercial relations which are today of such great cordiality and
importance, should be the nation to propose to the powers of its

own rank and prestige that Spain in this advance towards peace
represented by Mr. Kellogg’s proposal and in every act that
signifies collective and international action among themselves, be
considered as one of the group of great nations, with the
assurance that Spain will be able to discharge the obligations laid
upon it and be, as always, worthy of its glorious name.”
HAMMOND
15 Quotation not paraphrased.

[Document 116]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7 p.m.]
230. [Paraphrase.] As Briand was absent today I saw his Chef de Cabinet,
who said that there would be no difficulty in notification of Russia by
French Government of signature of the treaty and in stating, in effect, that,
as the Government of the United States was the depositary of the
instruments of ratification of adherence and for that reason is inviting the
nations of the world to adhere to this treaty but is unable to do so in the case
of Russia because of the absence of diplomatic relations, the Government of
France is extending this invitation to Russia.
I remarked that this statement went beyond the precise proposal contained
my understanding the remainder of your program might depend upon the
ability of French Government to carry out your suggestion without
modification. I told the Chef de Cabinet that I would report his statement to
my Government, asking him at the same time to put into exact terms the
formula which Government of France proposes to adopt in approaching
Soviet Government. [End paraphrase.]
I emphasized that your early departure necessitated a definite answer upon
the whole question of adherence procedure at the earliest possible moment
and as Wednesday, August 15, is one of the principal religious holidays
which usually carries over at least two days, I urged that the Chef de
Cabinet obtain this answer tomorrow. This he engaged to endeavor to do.
HERRICK

[Document 117]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
French Government’s notification to Russia that treaty has been signed and
that Soviet regime may adhere to it, as that is a matter which should be left
to the Foreign Office’s wise discretion and does not in the least concern this
Government. Please inform Foreign Office that I am happy to learn that
France will approach Russia in this matter and that I am very glad to entrust
the form and substance of the communication to their good judgment.
The question of notifying Russia has no connection with the procedure I
desire to follow with respect to all other countries (refer to my telegram No.
entirely agreeable to France, but I should be glad to have an explicit
assurance on that point immediately so that the circular telegram to the
proper diplomatic missions may be despatched without any more delay.
Questions continue to arise about participation by other powers, and if our
missions could all be informed promptly of situation, they would be able to
deal with matter and not have to telegraph individual inquiries to the
Department. I deem it very important that the other countries of the world
should know that as soon as the treaty is signed they will have presented to
them a formal communication asking them if they desire to participate in
the treaty by adherence.
KELLOGG

[Document 118]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
proper and desirable for Governments to adhere to the treaty even before it
comes into force through ratification by the original signatories. In order to
clear up any question on this point I have revised as follows the draft note
The paragraph immediately following the treaty text has been rewritten to
read:
“The provisions regarding ratification and adherence are, as Your
Excellency will observe, found in the third and last article. That
article provides that the treaty shall take effect as soon as the
ratifications of all the powers named in the preamble shall have
been deposited in Washington, and that it shall be open to
adherence by all the other powers of the world, instruments
evidencing such adherence to be deposited in Washington also.
Any power desiring to participate in the treaty may thus exercise
the right to adhere thereto and my Government will be happy to
receive at any time appropriate notices of adherence from those
Governments wishing to contribute to the success of this new
movement for world peace by bringing their peoples within its
beneficent scope. It will be noted in this connection that the treaty
expressly provides that when it has once come into force it shall
take effect immediately between an adhering power and the other
parties thereto, and it is therefore clear that any Government
adhering promptly will fully share in the benefits of the treaty at
the very moment it comes into effect.”
The next paragraph is unchanged.

The last paragraph of the draft note is omitted entirely.16
KELLOGG
16 On August 16 the Ambassador informed the Department that the
alteration in the draft note was acceptable to the French Government (file

[Document 119]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received August 14—6 p.m.]
[Paraphrase.] 1. French Foreign Office has just handed me draft of proposed
instructions to French Ambassador at Moscow, which in substance is as
follows: [End paraphrase.]
After summarizing the telegram which you proposed to send to all our
diplomatic missions except those in the countries of original signatories, as
according to the terms of the treaty the Government of the United States is
the depositary of instruments of ratification and adherence, its
representatives have been instructed to communicate on this day to the
Governments to which they are accredited an identic note the purport of
which has just been summarized. The draft instruction then concludes as
follows:
“It being impossible to make this communication at Moscow
through the same medium by reason of the nonexistence of
diplomatic relations between the Government of the United States
and the Government of the Soviets, the Government of the
Republic has agreed to insure its transmission through the good
offices of its Ambassador in Russia. Will you, therefore, in
informing the Government of the Soviets of the contents of this
telegram, communicate to it the text of the treaty signed today in
Paris and ask it to notify you if it is disposed to adhere thereto.”
[Paraphrase.] As we wished to run no chance of embarrassment by an
attempt of the Soviet Government to send its instrument of adherence direct

to our Government, we made suggestion that last sentence quoted above be
modified as follows [End paraphrase.]:
“Will you, therefore, in informing the Government of the Soviets
of the contents of this telegram communicating to it the text of the
treaty signed today in Paris, ask it to notify you if it is disposed to
adhere thereto and in that case inform it that you are authorized to
receive its instrument of adherence in order to transmit it to
Washington.”
Although Briand is still out of town his Chief of Cabinet said that he felt
entirely justified in acceding to our suggested amendment and was
confident that Briand would endorse his action.
The above instruction is to be acted upon on the day [of the] signature of
the pact.
[Paraphrase.] 2. In course of discussion the fact that we are also without
diplomatic representatives in Afghanistan, whereas there is a French
Minister there, was brought up. I gained impression that, were we to make
request, the French would be entirely willing to perform same service with
regard to Afghanistan as with Russia, and that they might indeed be
inclined to regard such procedure with favor as tending to remove Russia’s
case from realm of isolation.
We should like to know if there are any other countries where similar
procedure might be given consideration. [End paraphrase.]
3. With respect to your proposed telegram to our diplomatic missions as set
following clause to the sentence ending “it also settles satisfactorily the
question whether there was any inconsistency between the new treaty and
the treaties of Locarno”; for the period after “Locarno” substitute a comma
and continue as follows: “thus responding to the general observations of the
French Government as to the necessity of extending the number of original
signatories sufficiently to ensure the reconciliation of their new oaths with
the international undertakings previously concluded by them.”

Herrick

[Document 120]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
requested French addition transmitted in my telegram.
telephoned M. Corbin, the only responsible official on duty at the Foreign
Office on this holiday. The first reaction apparently was that it is not clear
in what manner “notices of adherence” prior to the coming into force of the
pact could be transferred into legally valid instruments of adherence on the
day the pact comes into effect. In other words although M. Corbin was
informed that in your opinion “it would be entirely proper and desirable for
governments to adhere to the treaty even before it comes into force” he still
does not see how such adherence can be effected other than in a conditional
manner by means of an instrument containing a specific provision for the
M. Corbin said that this matter was of great importance and one on which
the French would have to act with the utmost prudence (I gather he meant
in answering the inquiries of continental powers as to exactly what they can
and could do) and that it was therefore essential to know exactly what our
Government had in mind with respect to the type of instrument by which
this adherence could be effected. He was leaving his office for the day
within a few minutes, and requested that the changes of text in your
proposed telegram be shown to him tomorrow morning.
Since the French Government had not objected to the wording as originally
clarification between our two Governments, it might be more expeditious to

send your telegram with the desired French addition to various missions in
the form originally proposed, meanwhile continuing the efforts at
clarification here on the point mentioned above.
HERRICK
17 Telegram in two sections.

[Document 121]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
adhere any time to the treaty and that such adherence would come into
effect with the treaty. I had supposed that this was also the opinion of the
this procedure is to expedite as much as possible the adherence by other
powers and it seems clear that such adherence would be more likely to
occur at a time when all the world is talking about the treaty. Obviously the
instrument of adherence can provide that it become effective as soon as the
treaty itself comes into effect.
KELLOGG

[Document 122]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
Grandi finds it will be impossible for him to go to Paris August 27th.
Italian Ambassador at Paris will sign.
FLETCHER
18 Not printed.

[Document 123]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[Paraphrase]
astonishes and disappoints me, and will make most unfortunate impression
here. On an occasion when all other European countries are sending their
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, when the Prime Minister of Canada is going,
when Japan is sending a special ambassador and the President of the Irish
Free State is going to Paris, the fact that the Italian Ambassador in Paris
will be Italy’s only representative will certainly be regarded as intended to
minimize importance of treaty. You will, I hope, make this clear to Foreign
Office, and I also hope that Grandi’s presence may still be possible.
KELLOGG

[Document 124]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hammond)
[Paraphrase]
memorandum replying to your oral explanations of reasons why signatures
to treaty are limited to the original powers. You will please communicate to
the Prime Minister very sincere regret I feel that any misunderstanding has
occurred.
Either in writing or orally you may state, further, that never has there been
the slightest implication that Spain occupies an inferior rank among the
powers. There is not the least intent on my part to intimate that Spain is not
wholeheartedly for world peace or to minimize her influence in world
councils. The negotiations were limited to a few powers, as you
undoubtedly explained, in order to have signed within a reasonable time a
treaty which could be the basis of a treaty between all nations of the world.
To enter into negotiations with all the countries of the world with any hope
of obtaining within a reasonable time a basis for a multilateral treaty
renouncing war would be an impossibility. I did suggest, in the first
instance, it is true, the six original powers. The only others added were the
constituent parts of the British Empire and the additional powers signatories
of the Locarno treaties. The explanation for those inclusions has already
been given. I could not enlarge the number of original signatories except in
consultation with the other powers; it soon developed that, although they
had no objection whatever to Spain’s becoming an original signatory, there
would have to follow a very general extension to other powers and, as a
result, the renewal of negotiations with practically every power in the
world. The signature of the treaty would thereby have been indefinitely
postponed. I could not insist, therefore, to the other signatories that the
program be changed at this late date and an invitation be extended to all the

other powers of the world. I am conscious of the abiding sentiment of the
Government of Spain and of the Spanish people in favor of peace and of
their desire to further any movement which aims at peace. I am also most
anxious to express the sentiments of sympathy and of deep regard which
both the American Government and the people of this country have for the
Spanish Government and the Spanish people. I hope that Spain will be one
of the first countries to adhere to the treaty, in this way obtaining for that
great nation the same rights, and placing her in same position as any other
signatory.
KELLOGG

[Document 125]
The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Representatives19
According to present plans the multilateral anti-war treaty negotiated by the
United States will be signed in Paris on August 27, 1928. I will telegraph
you through the American Embassy at Paris as soon as the treaty is signed
and immediately upon receipt of that telegram you should deliver the
following note to the Foreign Office dating it the date of the day of the
signature of the treaty. In the meantime you will seek an interview with the
Foreign Minister and informally acquaint him with the contents of the note.
[The first four paragraphs of the note and the text of treaty which
it contains have been omitted. For the text of the omitted
paragraphs, see the first four paragraphs of the note quoted in the
Ambassador in France, printed on page 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of
Doc. 111 and Doc. 112].]
“The provisions regarding ratification and adherence are, as Your
Excellency will observe, found in the third and last article. That
article provides that the treaty shall take effect as soon as the
ratifications of all the powers named in the preamble shall have
been deposited in Washington, and that it shall be open to
adherence by all the other powers of the world, instruments
evidencing such adherence to be deposited in Washington also.
Any power desiring to participate in the treaty may thus exercise
the right to adhere thereto and my Government will be happy to
receive at any time appropriate notices of adherence from those
Governments wishing to contribute to the success of this new
movement for world peace by bringing their peoples within its
beneficent scope. It will be noted in this connection that the treaty
expressly provides that when it has once come into force it shall

take effect immediately between an adhering power and the other
parties thereto, and it is therefore clear that any Government
adhering promptly will fully share in the benefits of the treaty at
the very moment it comes into effect.
“I shall shortly transmit for Your Excellency’s convenient
reference a printed pamphlet containing the text in translation of
M. Briand’s original proposal to my Government of June 20,
1927, and the complete record of the subsequent diplomatic
correspondence on the subject of a multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war. I shall also transmit, as soon as received from
my Government, a certified copy of the signed treaty.”
When delivering the foregoing note please state that an identic note, mutatis
mutandis, is being delivered simultaneously in the other world capitals and
that pursuant to the procedure which has been followed throughout the
present negotiations the text thereof is being promptly released for
publication. It will be given out in Washington for publication in the
morning papers of Wednesday, August 29, and you should arrange for
publication in the local press at the corresponding time.
If when you deliver this note you have already received a supply of the
pamphlet containing the Briand proposal and the correspondence ending
with the Japanese note of July 20, 1928, please make a copy immediately
available to the Foreign Office. Otherwise transmit a copy as soon as
received from the Department.
KELLOGG
19 In Albania, Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark (including the Government of
Iceland), Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Lithuania,
Luxemburg, Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Persia, Peru, Poland (to invite the adherence of the Free City of Danzig),
Portugal, Rumania, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

[Document 126]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, August 16, 1928—midnight.
August 16, 11 p.m.
Please arrange with the Minister of Afghanistan at Paris to deliver to him on
the day of original signature for transmission to his Government the note
contained in my circular telegram August 16, 11 p.m. You may inform him
of its contents informally before that date. You may intimate orally to the
French that while we are following this procedure rather than the one they
suggested in view of the fact that we have recognized Afghanistan, we
would perceive no objection if they were to instruct their Minister at Kabul
to inform the Government of Afghanistan of the action you are taking in
this matter and of the substance of the note.
[Paraphrase.] I believe that it would be desirable to have the French take
that step in order to make sure that the Government of Afghanistan will
understand that it is being invited to adhere at the same time and in the
same way as are other countries. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 127]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
Before you transmit note and instructions to the American Diplomatic
Agent at Tangier, with respect to Morocco, I wish that as a matter of
courtesy, you would advise informally French Foreign Office of this
Government’s intention to invite Morocco to adhere.
Department feels strongly that Shereefian Government should be included
in invitations to adhere to treaty for following reasons: (1) Terms of treaty
roused expectation that treaty will be worldwide; (3) our own direct
relations with Morocco, so that not to extend invitation would appear to
single out Shereefian Government for discrimination. The failure to invite
Morocco, furthermore, might create an undesirable precedent.
CASTLE

[Document 128]
The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:02 p.m.]
Corunna on August 14, General Primo de Rivera gave the following
communication to the press with regard to Spain’s position relative to the
anti-war pact:
“The Kellogg pact has been communicated to Spain and its
signature or collaboration has been requested. Spain will give its
approval or will communicate such reservations as it may deem
expedient but it is a significant proof of the consideration in
which Spain is held. The Ambassador of the United States
himself, making a journey of 900 kilometers from San Sebastian
to Mondariz, came to see me to inform me of the negotiations of
this international matter and to give an account of the details
thereof. This fact is a proof of consideration for Spain and I have
personally expressed my gratitude to Mr. Hammond for his
coming to Mondariz leaving his wife ill at San Sebastian.”
[Paraphrase.] From the foregoing the Department will perceive that Primo
de Rivera has not only accepted situation in regard to nonparticipation of
Spain as one of the original signatories of the treaty for the renunciation of
war but has also been able to find in my visit to Mondariz a matter for
national self-congratulation and a continued proof of the esteem which
Spain enjoys abroad.
I do not consider it advisable, therefore, to take matter up again with the
Prime Minister until after his arrival in San Sebastian on the 25th of this
month. At that time I shall talk to him along lines of your telegram and shall
urge Spain’s prompt adherence to the treaty. [End paraphrase.]

Hammonp

[Document 129]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
informed French Foreign Office. Latter expressed real consternation and
most earnest hope that we would not follow course outlined.
Léger20 said he felt sure Briand could never give his consent to this step,
which would necessarily create gravest difficulties for France. Reference
was made to French protectorate established March 30, 1912, by treaty
which conferred upon France Morocco’s diplomatic representation, and
Foreign Office also referred to drafting and signature of Versailles treaty
and treaty of St. Germain, at which, although specific articles refer to
Morocco, the Shereefian Government was not represented.
The seriousness with which Foreign Office appears to regard this new
development cannot be overemphasized.
HERRICK
20 M. Alexis Léger, Assistant Director of Political and Commercial Affairs
and Chief of Cabinet, French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

[Document 130]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
would not have any objection to Morocco’s adherence, but instead would
welcome it. As it appears that objection does exist, the Department does not
at this time desire to push matter further. You may so inform the Foreign
Office.
CASTLE

[Document 131]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
communication from the Prime Minister the pertinent portion of which I
repeat from translation as follows:
“In view of the numerous engagements which will keep me
occupied during the coming week it will not be possible for
Under Secretary Grandi, to absent himself at this moment from
the Ministry. I am therefore unable to comply, as I would have
wished, with the courteous and gratifying desire expressed to me
by Your Excellency. I have, however, charged Count Gaetano
Manzoni, Royal Ambassador at Paris, who has for this purpose
been given full Royal powers, to sign the Kellogg Pact in the
name of Italy. I have today formally advised the French
Government of this designation.”
FLETCHER

[Document 132]
President Coolidge to President Downergue
WASHINGTON, August 26, 1928.
It gives me great pleasure and satisfaction to extend to you and through you
to the representatives of the nations assembled in Paris my cordial
congratulations on the successful outcome of the negotiations inaugurated
by France and the United States for a treaty renouncing war as an
instrument of national policy and pledging the signatories to seek only by
peaceful means the settlement of differences which may arise between
them.
The treaty to be signed in Paris had its inception in the proposal submitted
last year by the Government of France to the Government of the United
States. The idea of Monsieur Briand has been made world wide. I am
confident that the simple provisions of this treaty will be accepted by all
nations because I am sure there is everywhere a will for peace. It is a great
forward step in the preservation of peaceful relations between the nations
and therefore will, I know, prove to be a historic document in the history of
civilization. It has been a privilege to the United States to contribute to the
success of this movement, a satisfaction to have been associated with
France and other peace loving nations in thus writing into international law
one of the deepest aspirations of the human conscience.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

Treaty Series No. 796
[Document 133]
Treaty Between the United States and Other Powers, Signed at
Paris, August 27, 192822
THE PRESIDENT OF THE GERMAN REICH, THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE
BELGIANS, THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, IRELAND AND THE BRITISH
DOMINIONS BEYOND THE SEAS, EMPEROR OF INDIA, HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF ITALY, HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF JAPAN,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND, THE PRESIDENT OF THE CZECHOSLOVAK REPUBLIC,
Deeply sensible of their solemn duty to promote the welfare of mankind;
Persuaded that the time has come when a frank renunciation of war as an
instrument of national policy should be made to the end that the peaceful
and friendly relations now existing between their peoples may be
perpetuated;
Convinced that all changes in their relations with one another should be
sought only by pacific means and be the result of a peaceful and orderly
process, and that any signatory Power which shall hereafter seek to promote
its national interests by resort to war should be denied the benefits furnished
by this Treaty;
Hopeful that, encouraged by their example, all the other nations of the
world will join in this humane endeavor and by adhering to the present
Treaty as soon as it comes into force bring their peoples within the scope of
its beneficent provisions, thus uniting the civilized nations of the world in a
common renunciation of war as an instrument of their national policy;
Have decided to conclude a Treaty and for that purpose have appointed as
their respective Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the German Reich:
Dr. Gustav Stresemann, Minister for Foreign Affairs;

The President of the United States of America:
The Honorable Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State;
His Majesty the King of the Belgians:
Mr. Paul Hymans, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister of State;
The President of the French Republic:
Mr. Aristide Briand, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
Dominions Beyond the Seas, Emperor of India:
For Great Britain and Northern Ireland and all parts of
the British Empire which are not separate Members of
the League of Nations:
The Right Honourable Lord Cushendun, Chancellor of
the Duchy of Lancaster, Acting Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs;
For the Dominion of Canada:
The Right Honourable William Lyon Mackenzie King,
Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs;
For the Commonwealth of Australia:
The Honourable Alexander John McLachlan, Member
of the Executive Federal Council;
For the Dominion of New Zealand:
The Honourable Sir Christopher James Parr, High
Commissioner for New Zealand in Great Britain;
For the Union of South Africa:
The Honourable Jacobus Stephanus Smit, High
Commissioner for the Union of South Africa in Great
Britain;
For the Irish Free State:
Mr. William Thomas Cosgrave, President of the

Executive Council;
For India:
The Right Honourable Lord Cushendun, Chancellor of
the Duchy of Lancaster, Acting Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs;
His Majesty the King of Italy:
Count Gaetano Manzoni, his Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary at Paris.
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan:
Count Uchida, Privy Councillor;
The President of the Republic of Poland:
Mr. A. Zaleski, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
The President of the Czechoslovak Republic:
Dr. Eduard Benes, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
who, having communicated to one another their full powers found in good
and due form have agreed upon the following articles:
ARTICLE I
The High Contracting Parties solemnly declare in the names of their
respective peoples that they condemn recourse to war for the solution of
international controversies, and renounce it as an instrument of national
policy in their relations with one another.
ARTICLE II
The High Contracting Parties agree that the settlement or solution of all
disputes or conflicts of whatever nature or of whatever origin they may be,
which may arise among them, shall never be sought except by pacific
means.
ARTICLE III

The present Treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting Parties named
in the Preamble in accordance with their respective constitutional
requirements, and shall take effect as between them as soon as all their
several instruments of ratification shall have been deposited at Washington.
This Treaty shall, when it has come into effect as prescribed in the
preceding paragraph, remain open as long as may be necessary for
adherence by all the other Powers of the world. Every instrument
evidencing the adherence of a Power shall be deposited at Washington and
the Treaty shall immediately upon such deposit become effective as
between the Power thus adhering and the other Powers parties hereto.
It shall be the duty of the Government of the United States to furnish each
Government named in the Preamble and every Government subsequently
adhering to this Treaty with a certified copy of the Treaty and of every
instrument of ratification or adherence. It shall also be the duty of the
Government of the United States telegraphically to notify such
Governments immediately upon the deposit with it of each instrument of
ratification or adherence.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Treaty in the
French and English languages both texts having equal force, and hereunto
affix their seals.
DONE at Paris, the twenty-seventh day of August in the year one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-eight.
[SEAL] GUSTAV STRESEMANN
[SEAL] FRANK B. KELLOGG
[SEAL] PAUL HYMANS
[SEAL] ARI. BRIAND
[SEAL] CUSHENDUN
[SEAL] W. L. MACKENZIE KING
[SEAL] A. J. MCLACHLAN
[SEAL] C. J. PARR
[SEAL] J. S. SMIT
[SEAL] LIAM T. MACCOSGAIR

[SEAL] CUSHENDUN
[SEAL] G. MANZONI
[SEAL] UCHIDA
[SEAL] AUGUST ZALESKI
[SEAL] Dr. EDUARD BENES
[The treaty also went into effect on July 24, 1929, for the following States
whose duly ratified instruments of adherence had already been deposited at
the Department of State:
Afghanistan (November 30, 1928)
Albania (February 12, 1929)
Austria (December 31, 1928)
Bulgaria (July 22, 1929)
China (May 8, 1929)
Cuba (March 13, 1929)
Denmark (March 23, 1929)
Dominican Republic (December 12, 1928)
Egypt (May 9, 1929)
Estonia (April 26, 1929)
Ethiopia (November 28, 1928)
Finland (July 24, 1929)
Guatemala (July 16, 1929)
Hungary (July 22, 1929)
Iceland (June 10, 1929)

Latvia (July 23, 1929)
Liberia (February 23, 1929)
Lithuania (April 5, 1929)
Netherlands (July 12, 1929)
Nicaragua (May 13, 1929)
Norway (March 26, 1929)
Panama (February 25, 1929)
Peru (July 23, 1929)
Portugal (March 1, 1929)
Rumania (March 21, 1929)
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Kingdom of the, (February 20, 1929)
Siam (January 16, 1929)
Spain (March 7, 1929)
Sweden (April 12, 1929)
Turkey (July 8, 1929)
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (September 27, 1928)
The treaty went into effect for the following States upon date of deposit at
the Department of State of duly ratified instruments of adherence:
Brazil, May 10, 1934
Chile, August 12, 1929
Colombia, May 28, 1931

Costa Rica, October 1, 1929
Danzig, Free City of, September 11, 1929 (transmitted by the
Polish Government on behalf of Danzig)
Ecuador, February 24, 1932
Greece, August 3, 1929
Haiti, March 10, 1930
Hedjaz and Nejd, Kingdom of the, February 24, 1932 (invitation
to adhere issued after recognition of the Hejazi Government in
1931)
Honduras, August 5, 1929
Iraq, March 23, 1932 (invitation to adhere issued after recognition
of the Iraqi Government in 1931)
Luxemburg, August 24, 1929
Mexico, November 26, 1929
Paraguay, December 4, 1929
Persia, July 25, 1929
Switzerland, December 2, 1929
Venezuela, October 24, 1929
Instruments of adherence were not deposited by the following States:
Argentina, Bolivia, El Salvador, and Uruguay.]
22 In English and French; French text not printed. Ratification advised by
President, Jan. 17, 1929; instruments of ratification deposited at

Washington, Mar. 2, 1929, by the United States of America, Australia,
Dominion of Canada, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Great Britain, India, Irish
Free State, Italy, New Zealand, and Union of South Africa, Mar. 25 by
proclaimed by the President, July 24, 1929.

[Document 134]
President Doumergue to President Coolidge
[Translation]
I very sincerely thank Your Excellency for your kindly sending me, and
through me the representatives of the nations assembled in Paris, a message
which evinces the great importance you so rightly attach to the solemn
signing of the general compact renouncing war as an instrument of national
policy. The fact that the ceremony is on this day celebrated in Paris comes
from a desire which you put in a peculiarly nice form that of acknowledging
the initial part taken by the French Government and its Minister for Foreign
Affairs in bringing about the great project, the French nation is thankful for
and proud of the honor bestowed upon it in the reception of the foreign
plenipotentiaries can not forget that thanks are due to the skilful and
conciliatory efforts of the President and of the Secretary of State of the
United States for the manner in which the covenant was received by the
leading nations of the world which befitted the trait of universality that
makes its power and greatness. I therefore feel sure that I am voicing the
sentiments of the original signatories of the treaty as well as those of the
still larger number who will adhere anon, when I express to Your
Excellency and your Government the thanks of the civilized world. I am, as
you are, convinced that the act accomplished on this day responds to the
innermost longings of all mankind.
GASTON DOUMERGUE

[Document 135]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Acting Secretary of
State24
265. The Secretary asks that the following message from him be sent at
once to all missions to which the circular telegram of August 16, 11 p.m.,
was sent direct by the Department. Missions reached via Paris are being
instructed from here:
“Anti-war treaty signed this afternoon. Please deliver as soon as
possible the note transmitted in the Department’s circular
1928. Do not fail to transmit French text of the treaty at the same
time. Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State.”
HERRICK

Notifications of adherence
[136] The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 27, 1928.
[137] The Minister in Liberia (Francis) to the Secretary of State
[138] The Norwegian Legation to the Department of State
Washington , August 28, 1928.
[139] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[140] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State

[141] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[142] The Costa Rican Chargé (González) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 30, 1928.
[143] The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
[144] The Netherlands Chargé (Van Hoorn) to the Acting Secretary of
State
Washington, 31 August, 1928.
[145] The Minister in Ethiopia (Southard) to the Secretary of State
[146] The Minister in Finland (Pearson) to the Secretary of State

[147] The Chargé in Austria (Greene) to the Secretary of State
[148] The Acting Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (Litvinoff) to the French Ambassador in Russia
(Herbette)
Moscow, August 31, 1928.
[149] The Minister in Sweden (Harrison) to the Secretary of State
[150] The Banish Minister (Brun) to the Acting Secretary of State
[151] The Rumanian Chargé (Sturdza) to the Acting Secretary of State
Washington, September 4, 1928.
[152] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State

[153] The Minister in Latvia (Coleman) to the Secretary of State
[154] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[155] The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State
[156] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[157] The Chargé in Egypt (Winship) to the Secretary of State
[158] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[159] The Chargé in Portugal (Andrews) to the Secretary of State
[160] The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[161] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[162] The Venezuelan Minister (Grisanti) to the Acting Secretary of
State
Washington, September 6, 1928.
[163] The Chargé in Greece (Goold) to the Secretary of State
[164] The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State

[165] The Chargé in Guatemala (Hawks) to the Secretary of State
[166] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Groats and Slovenes
(Prince) to the Secretary of State
[167] The Ambassador in Turkey (Grew) to the Secretary of State
[168] The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
[169] The Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Frost) to the Secretary of
State

[170] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[171] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[172] The Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow) to the Secretary of State
[173] The Secretary of State to the Danish Minister (Brun)
Washington, September 14, 1928.
[174] The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives in All
Countries Except Those Which Were Original Signatories of the Treaty
for the Renunciation of War
Washington, September 17, 1928.
[175] The Chargé in Latvia (Sussdorff) to the Secretary of State

[176] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[177] The Chargé in Siam (Bay) to the Secretary of State
[178] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)
Washington, September 22, 1928.
[179] The Haitian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Leon) to the American
Chargé in Haiti (Gross)
Port au Prince, 22 September, 1928.
[180] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[181] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)

[182] The Chargé in Persia (Treat) to the Secretary of State
[183] The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
[184] The Minister in Hungary (Wright) to the Secretary of State
[185] The Chargé in Bolivia (Horn) to the Secretary of State
[186] The Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow) to the Secretary of State
[187] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)

[188] The Minister in Ethiopia (Southard) to the Secretary of State
[189] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Gunther)
Washington, October 30, 1928.
[190] The Minister in Denmark (Dodge) to the Secretary of State
[191] The Chargé in Colombia (Matthews) to the Secretary of State
[192] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)
[193] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[194] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[195] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)
[196] The Chargé in Salvador (Dickson) to the Secretary of State
[197] The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 27, 1928.

[Document 136]
The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 27, 1928.
SIR: The position taken by that [the] Department, in having initiated the
celebration of a multilateral treaty for the renouncing of war in the world,
signed to-day in Paris by the nations which have accepted it thus marking a
glorious stage in the history of humanity, will be, for all time, a legitimate
source of pride to the great nation of the United States of America.
In fulfillment of the express instructions of the President, Mr. Augusto B.
Leguia, and of his Government, I hasten to express to Your Excellency that
Peru formally, and with sincere enthusiasm, adheres to the anti-war pact
above-mentioned and that as soon as a certified copy thereof shall have
been received, it will be submitted to the cognizance of the National
Congress for ratification.
Peru, who has ever been a partizan of cordiality and peace in international
relations and who aspires, therein, to nothing more than to the
predominance and triumph of justice cannot remain indifferent to the
position taken which the signing of the pact above referred-to implies for
the progress of mankind.
I would therefore request Your Excellency to be so good as to consider Peru
and its Government as adhering to the transcendental treaty in question.
Accept [etc.]
HERNÁN VELARDE

[Document 137]
The Minister in Liberia (Francis) to the Secretary of State
MONROVIA, August 27, 1928.
[Received September 21.]
No. 114 Diplomatic
A.M.25 and to acknowledge receipt of Department’s circular cable of
information’ concerning the signing of the Multilateral Treaty for the
Renunciation of War to take effect on Monday, August 27, 1928, at Paris,
with instructions covering the entire matter. And further to acknowledge
at Paris, containing in the French language the text of the Treaty, with
instructions that the treaty in the French text be delivered to the Foreign
Office of the Republic of Liberia simultaneously with the Note containing
the English text.
As requested the Secretary of State of the Republic of Liberia was, on the
morning of the 23rd day of August, informally advised in accordance with
instructions; and on this day, Monday, August 27, 1928, the original Note,
together with the text of the Treaty in French, was formally delivered to His
Excellency the Secretary of State of the Republic of Liberia, and he was
informed that the French text was delivered at the request of the French
Government and that an identic Note, mutatis mutandis, is being delivered
simultaneously in the other world capitals, and that pursuant to the
procedure which has been followed through the present negotiations the
text thereof is being promptly released for publication.
His Excellency expressed the pleasure of his Government over the
consummation of such an important undertaking and delivered to me, for
transmission to my Government in accordance with Article III of the

Multilateral Treaty, formal notice of the adherence of the Government of
the Republic of Liberia to the treaty.
Inasmuch as there are no daily or weekly publications in Monrovia, an
invitation was extended to the representatives of the monthly publications
to attend a conference at the Legation at 4 P.M., August 23, at which time
the importance of the event was impressed upon them and a memorandum
covering the signing of the Multilateral Treaty was handed to each of them
to be released for publication, as far as their limited space will permit, in the
issue immediately following the 28th of August.
This Legation awaits the arrival of the pamphlets containing the Briand
proposal and the correspondence ending with the Note of July 20, 1928,
when it will make a copy immediately available to the Foreign Office.
I have the further honor to enclose copy of the Note to the Foreign Office of
the Republic of Liberia; original adherence to the treaty by the Republic of
Liberia, copy of the text of the treaty in French; copy of the invitation to the
representatives of the press and copy of the memorandum delivered to the
representatives of the press at the press conference.27
I have [etc.]
W. T. FRANCIS
[Enclosure]
The Liberian Secretary of State (Barclay) to the American Minister (Francis)
MONROVIA, August 27, 1928.
692/D
MR. MINISTER: Having followed with interest and sympathy the negotiations
entered upon by the United States and certain other Powers with a view to
the conclusion of a treaty binding them to renounce war as an instrument of
national policy in their relations with one another, the Government of the
Republic of Liberia have learned with satisfaction that such a treaty has

eventually been concluded and that it was signed today at Paris by the
original parties thereto.
2. My Government being deeply interested in the aim sought to
be achieved by the treaty are desirous of identifying themselves
with the beneficent purposes of the signatory powers. To that end,
therefore, they are availing themselves of the provisions of
Article III of the Treaty, and have instructed me to give formal
notice of the adherence of the Government of the Republic of
Liberia to the treaty for the renunciation of war as an instrument
of national policy, signed at Paris August 27, 1928.
3. Acting upon these instructions, I have the honour formally to
notify you of the adherence of my Government to the treaty above
referred to, and to solicit your good offices in facilitating the
deposit of this instrument of adherence at Washington.
With sentiments of distinguished consideration, I have [etc.]
EDWIN BARCLAY
25 Not printed.
25 Not printed.
27 The enclosures listed in this paragraph are not printed.

[Document 138]
The Norwegian Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The Chargé d’Affaires of Norway has been instructed by his Government to
inform the Department of State that on August 27, 1928, it gave Mr.
Swenson, the United States Minister to Norway, the following reply to his
enquiry regarding the Kellogg Treaty: It is the opinion of the Norwegian
Government that the Treaty is an important step towards the advancement
of peace and justice between nations and the Norwegian Government
consequently approves of the Treaty. In accordance with this viewpoint the
Norwegian Government will, as soon as possible, submit to the Storting a
Royal proposition in regard to the adherence of the Kingdom of Norway to
the Kellogg Treaty to renounce War.
WASHINGTON , August 28, 1928.

[Document 139]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, August 29, 1928.
[Received September 12.]
No. 3052
SIR: I have the honor to report that the Department’s telegram of August 27,
1 P.M.28 was not delivered by the telegraph company at this office until
after 7 o’clock on the evening of that day, and that since the Foreign Office
was closed for business before that hour it was impossible to hand to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Octavio Mangabeira, until half past eleven
on the morning of August 28, the copy of the note the text of which was
contained in the Department’s circular telegram of August 16, 12 M. N.,
accompanied by a copy of the pamphlet entitled “Notes Exchanged between
the United States and other Powers on the subject of a Multilateral Treaty
person.
Late yesterday afternoon Dr. Mangabeira’s reply was delivered at this
office, a copy of the text of which in Portuguese, accompanied by an
English translation, I have the honor to enclose. This reply forms the
The text of the Multilateral Anti-War Treaty was published by the local
press in Portuguese on Sunday, August 26, and the text of my note to the
Foreign Office, together with the text of Minister Mangabeira’s reply, which
latter document was supplied by the Foreign Office, were published in
Portuguese in the local press this morning. The text of the treaty which was
published on August 26, I am informed by the local representative of the
United Press, was supplied from Buenos Aires.

The Portuguese text, with English translation, of four short articles which
have appeared within the last few days in the local press expressing
Brazilian opinion regarding the treaty are herewith enclosed.29
I have [etc.]
EDWIN V. MORGAN
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mangabeira) to the American Ambassador (Morgan)
RIO DE JANEIRO, August 28, 1928.
LA/70
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of note No. 1382, of
the 27th instant, wherein Your Excellency informs me, in the name of your
Government, of the text of the collective treaty to outlaw war, which has
just been signed at Paris.
2. Your Excellency states, in the note to which I refer, not only the
origin of the said treaty but also the procedure adopted in its
elaboration, and the reasons why the negotiations on the subject
were confined to certain nations. You add, however, that your
Government understanding that other States will desire to
associate themselves in such a noble movement for peace
succeeded in having the necessary provision therefor adopted, and
that at any time the respective adhesions will be received with
pleasure.
3. Be assured, Mr. Ambassador, that the Brazilian Government at
this happy moment rejoices with that of the United States of
America and the other States and Dominions authors of the great
pact. And its sincerity is so much the greater because in Brazil the
principles on which the new treaty has conferred the most solemn
of consecrations before being engraved in the very text of the
provisions of the Federal Constitution have been in the
conscience of the nation, to which principles it never expects to

fail to give the fidelity which it owes them whatever the
emergency may be.
Taking note, Mr. Ambassador, of your important communication, for which
I am cordially thankful, I avail myself [etc.]
OCTAVIO MANGABEIRA
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.

[Document 140]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, August 30, 1928—noon.
[Received 2:25 p.m.]
100. Department’s circular August 16, midnight. Panaman Government
accepts in principle and will recommend formal adherence to Congress on
receipt of certified copy of treaty text.
SOUTH

[Document 141]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
translation of note received from Political Department dated today.
“Mr. Minister: We have had the honor to receive the note number
87, dated August 27, by which Your Excellency kindly
transmitted to us the text of the treaty condemning war as an
instrument of national policy, signed the same day at Paris, and
invited the Federal Council to examine the possibility for
Switzerland to accede to this agreement.
We have likewise received a copy of the document published by
the Government of the United States containing the text of the
notes exchanged during the negotiations.
In expressing our thanks for these important communications, we
hasten to inform you that the Federal Council took note of them
with the greatest interest and that it rejoices at the fortunate
conclusion of an agreement which constitutes so eloquent a
manifestation in favor of the maintenance of peace in the world.
A collective treaty such as the Kellogg Pact which condemns
recourse to war for the settlement of international disputes and
proscribes it as an instrument of national policy, a treaty which,
moreover, imposes it as a duty upon the contracting states to
search by pacific means the solution of all differences of
whatsoever nature, was certain to receive the most favorable
welcome from the Government and people of Switzerland.

The renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy is in
full harmony with the traditional policy of Switzerland and is
effectively consecrated by her permanent neutrality which is
indeed for Switzerland axiomatic. The idea that all disputes must
be regulated or solved by pacific means likewise fully accords
with the conception which Switzerland seeks to realize by her
policy in the field of international arbitration.
The Federal Council is accordingly convinced that the careful
study to which it is submitting the question will undoubtedly lead
it to recommend to the Federal Chambers that it be authorized to
accede to the new treaty.
In requesting you to bring the foregoing to the attention of your
Government we avail ourselves, et cetera. Signed Motta.”
Political Department is making the note public tomorrow, August 31.
WILSON

[Document 142]
The Costa Rican Chargé (González) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, August 30, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I have been
informed by my Government that, in response to the kind invitation
received through the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the United States of
America at San José, the Government has declared that it adheres to the
Kellogg pact which will, in due course, be referred to the Congress for its
ratification.
GUILLERMO E. GONZÁLEZ

[Document 143]
The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, August 30, 1928.
[Received September 5.]
No. 414
honor to transmit herewith for the Department’s information a copy of a
note just received from the Cuban Under Secretary of State in connection
with the adherence of Cuba to the Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation
of War, together with a copy of an enclosure therewith comprising certain
remarks of President Machado on this subject, and my reply thereto,32 as
well as translations of the first two documents.
I have [etc.]
NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Cuban Under Secretary of State (Campa) to the American Ambassador (Judah)
HABANA, August 29, 1928.
No. 858
MR. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s
note dated August 27th, informing me, in behalf of your Government, that
on that date there had been signed in Paris a treaty whereby the
governments of Germany, the United States, Belgium, France, Great
Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, the
Irish Free State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland and Czechoslovakia renounce
war as an instrument of national policy in their mutual relations and bind

themselves to submit the arrangement of all differences which may arise in
the future between them to pacific means of solution.
Although in the Note Verbale of this Department dated the 28th I expressed
to Your Excellency the opinion of this Government with regard to this
Treaty and its intention to adhere thereto as soon as the protocol for the
signing thereof provided in Article Three should be opened in Washington,
today, in behalf of the Government of the Republic I am able to inform you
that on proposal of the President of the Republic, the Cabinet resolved
formally to adhere to the Treaty as soon as possible, for which purpose,
telegraphic instructions were transmitted to the Chargé d’Affaires at
Washington. I must add that immediately after said resolution was
approved, the Cabinet Meeting adjourned, thereby paying a marked homage
to the signing of said Pact, which will undoubtedly mark an epoch in the
Destiny of Nations.
I also desire to express to Your Excellency the appreciation of this
Department for supplying it with the English and French texts of said Pact.
Permit me to enclose a copy of the declarations of President Machado,
made today at the termination of the Cabinet meeting, which express his
absolute identification and that of the people of Cuba with this peace policy
set forth in the Paris Treaty and from which justice and well-being are to be
derived for all the nations.
I avail myself [etc.]
MIGUEL ANGEL CAMPA
[Subenclosure—Translation]
Statement by President Machado
The Republic of Cuba will adhere to the multilateral treaty signed in Paris
on August 27th, called the Kellogg Pact, whereby the nations condemn war
as a system of solving international controversies and bind themselves to
use pacific means in the case of a disagreement.

For more than three years my Government has collaborated sincerely in the
efforts made by humanity to organize peace.
Our diplomatic action, active and persevering, was shown to be such in
every international conference, whether it was universal, such as the League
of Nations, or regional, such as the Sixth International American
Conference of Habana.
I am convinced of the effectiveness of this agreement which will join the
nations by sacred ties, and which is to serve as a foundation for the
beneficial interests of peace, just as in the past other treaties created motives
for hatred and for violence which carried states toward pain and ruin.
Blessed be this America of ours from which has come forth this admirable
gesture of concord which will favor the pacific development of the human
race, making it impossible for the work of collective labor in which every
nation has its share and responsibility to be destroyed in an insane hour of
greed or madness!
31 Not printed.
32 Reply not printed.

[Document 144]
The Netherlands Chargé (Van Hoorn) to the Acting Secretary of
State
WASHINGTON, 31 August, 1928.
No. 2844
SIR: In answer to the note of Mr. Norweb addressed to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs at The Hague and extending to Her Majesty’s Government
an invitation to become a signatory to the multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war, I am instructed by my Government and have the
honour to inform you that the Government of the Queen has followed with
the greatest interest and sympathy the progress of the negotiations which
have been brilliantly concluded with the signing on August 27 of the treaty
to renounce war as an instrument of national policy.
My Government, on whose territory the Peace Conferences of 1899 and
1907 have had place and whose policy has always been directed towards
the promotion of world peace, greets the contents of said treaty as a real
progress of mankind, and has immediately taken the necessary measures
prescribed by the constitution in order to be able to adhere to the same.
Please accept [etc.]
L. G. VAN HOORN

[Document 145]
The Minister in Ethiopia (Southard) to the Secretary of State
Referring to the Department’s telegram of August 16, 11 p.m. I transmit as
requested by the Government of Ethiopia the following telegram to you:
“Upon behalf of the Government of the Empire of Ethiopia I
hereby notify adherence of that Government to the Kellogg
Multilateral Treaty renouncing war. I await information as to the
steps necessary to complete act of adherence. Tafari Makonnen,
Prince Regent, Heir to the throne of Ethiopia.”
SOUTHARD

[Document 146]
The Minister in Finland (Pearson) to the Secretary of State
HELSINGFORS, August 31, 1928.
[Received September 13.]
No. 1000
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the telegram received from the American
Embassy, Paris, signed Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State, and dated
August 27, 3 p.m. in which the Legation was requested to deliver to the
Foreign Office a note containing the anti-war treaty signed in Paris, together
with an invitation to the Finnish Government to adhere to the pact. This
note was delivered to the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs on August
28th and the Legation is now in receipt of a reply from the Finnish
Government, a copy of which is enclosed herewith.
I have also been verbally assured by the Acting General Secretary of the
Foreign Office that the Finnish State Council is favorably disposed to the
treaty and will submit a proposition to the Diet for Finland’s adherence to
the Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War.
interpretation of the note based upon a conversation which I had this
morning with the Acting General Secretary of the Foreign Office.
I have [etc.]
ALFRED J. PEARSON
[Enclosure]
The Finnish Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Sunila) to the American Minister (Pearson)
HELSINKI, August 30, 1928.

MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of
August 27th 1928 in which you informed me that the Governments of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Great
Britain, India, the Irish Free State, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland, South
Africa and the United States of America have the same day signed in Paris
a treaty binding them to renounce war as an instrument of national policy in
their relations with one another and to seek only by pacific means the
settlement or solution of all disputes which may arise among them. At the
same time you communicated to me the text of the abovementioned treaty
for the consideration of the Government of Finland, in view of its
adherence.
On account of this I have the honor to inform you for the communication to
your Government that the Government of Finland has received with
pleasure your announcement with the invitation included in it, and that it
takes a favorable attitude in the matter regarding the adherence of Finland
to the treaty. While accepting this attitude in regard to the present treaty the
Government of Finland has taken notice of the authentic declarations given
in regard to the influence of the provisions of the treaty, inter alia, into the
rights and obligations of the contracting Powers in their capacity of
members of the League of Nations. In conformity herewith I have the honor
to bring to your notice that the Government of Finland attaching great
importance to the universality of the treaty, will in due time submit it for the
approval of the Diet.
I avail myself [etc.]
J. E. SUNILA
33 Not printed.

[Document 147]
The Chargé in Austria (Greene) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, August 31, 1928.
[Received September 15.]
No. 1942
SIR: I have the honor to acknowedge the receipt of the Department’s circular
of the note to be dated August 27, 1928, informing the Austrian
Government of the signing of the multilateral Anti-war Treaty in Paris and
quoting the text of the Treaty, and to refer to my telegrams No. 39 of
complied with the Department’s instructions and stating that the Austrian
Government was ready to adhere to the Anti-war pact and that the question
would be taken up at a meeting of the Cabinet Council on August 30.
I now have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy and translation
of a note dated August 30, received today from Dr. Seipel, Federal
Chancellor and Minister of Foreign Affairs. This note, in acknowledging
the receipt of my note of August 27, states that the Austrian Government at
the meeting of the Cabinet Council yesterday August 30, decided to adhere
to the Treaty and that it will submit the resolution to the National Council
and the Bundesrat as soon as possible. As soon as the National Council and
the Bundesrat, which meet in September, exact date as yet unannounced,
have approved Austria’s adherence to the Treaty, the Austrian Minister in
Washington will be appropriately instructed.
In connection with my presentation of the note, I have the honor to report
that the Secretary’s telegram from Paris dated August 27, 3 p.m., was not
delivered to the Legation until 8 p.m. I had of course informed the Foreign
Office that I expected to deliver the note on August 27 immediately after
receiving the Secretary’s telegram. Owing to the lateness of the hour, the

Austrian Foreign Office informed me by telephone that they would prefer
the note to be delivered on the morning of August 28. This I did, at the
same time including in a second note, also dated August 27, a copy of the
official French text of the Treaty, in compliance with the Department’s
Instruction dated August 21 received from the American Embassy in
Paris.35
The Austrian Foreign Office on the same day gave a translation of the note
for publication, and this appeared in the afternoon editions of August 28.
Secretary General Peter, acting for Dr. Seipel in the latter’s absence,
informed me that the Federal Chancellor was most anxious to have the note
published at the earliest possible moment, and acting under his instructions
the Austrian Foreign Office insured its publication in the local press on the
day the note was received.
I have [etc.]
ELBRIDGE GERRY GREENE
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Seipel) to the American Chargé (Greene)
VIENNA, August 30, 1928.
Mr. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the
esteemed note of the 27th instant, in which you inform me of the fact that a
general war proscription pact has been signed in Paris and in the name of
your Government invite Austria to adhere to this pact.
I am happy to be able to inform you today that the Austrian Government,
in recognition of the fact that this pact forms an excellent means for
assuring universal peace;
in the consciousness that the ideas expressed in the pact correspond
absolutely with the fundamental ideas according to which the policy of the

Austrian Republic has always been conducted;
and in the desire to express not only its full sympathy for the pact, but also
its appreciation for those men to whose brave initiative the realization of
this important treaty is due, by means of a speedy declaration of adherence
to the pact;
has decided to carry out the adherence of Austria to the war proscription
pact signed on August 27 a. c. in Paris by the authorized representatives of
the United States of America, Australia, Belgium, Germany, France, Great
Britain, India, the Irish Free State, Italy, Japan, Canada, New Zealand,
Poland, South Africa and Czechoslovakia, according to article III of the
said pact.
The Federal Government will endeavor to submit this resolution as soon as
possible to the National Council and the Federal Council for approval. As
soon as this is done, the Austrian Minister at Washington will be instructed
to present to the Secretary of State of the United States the declaration of
adhesion.
Begging you to inform your Government of the above, I beg [etc.]
SEIPEL
34 Neither printed.
35 Not printed.

[Document 148]
The Acting Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (Litvinoff) to the French Ambassador in
Russia (Herbette)36
[Translation]
MOSCOW, August 31, 1928.
MR. AMBASSADOR: On August 27 you were good enough to advise me officially
under instructions from your Government that on that same day the
Governments of the German Republic, the United States of North America,
Belgium, France, Great Britain and its Dominions, Italy, Japan, Poland and
Czechoslovakia had signed at Paris a multilateral pact whereby they pledge
themselves not to resort in their mutual relations to war as an instrument of
national policy, but to solve the differences which might arise among them
by exclusively pacific means. In handing me a copy of the said Pact and
briefly stating its history, you were also good enough, Mr. Ambassador, to
inform me:
(a) that the limitation of the number of the original signatories of
the Pact was prompted solely, according to the Government of the
United
States
of
North
America,
by
purely
practical
considerations and was for the purpose of facilitating the effective
application of the Pact in the shortest time possible, but that it had
always been intended that as soon as the Pact should be finally
made effective the immediate concurrence of all the nations in the
world would be guaranteed on the same conditions and with the
same advantages as those that are given to the original signatories
of the Pact;
(b) that in accordance with the foregoing, the Government of the
United States of North America was charged with the duty of

accepting the declarations of all States desiring to adhere to the
Pact;
(c) that the representatives of the Government of the United
States of North America in all foreign States, with the exception
of those whose representatives have already signed the Pact have
been instructed to communicate to the governments to which they
are accredited the text of the Pact signed in Paris;
(d) that the Government of the United States of North America
declared its readiness to receive from now on the instruments of
adherence of those governments;
(e) that the Government of the French Republic accepted the
mission of advising the Government of the U. S. S. R., through
you, Mr. Ambassador, of the text of the said Pact and to inquire
whether it was willing to accede and
(f) that, if so, you, Mr. Ambassador, were authorized to receive
the instrument of adherence to the Pact for transmission to
Washington.
In communicating to you, by the present note, the reply of the Government
of the U. S. S. R. to your inquiry, I have the honor to beg you, Mr.
Ambassador, to communicate the following to your Government with the
request that it kindly transmit it to the Government of the United States of
North America.
1. The Soviet Government, which from the very beginning of its
existence has based its foreign policy on the protection and
guarantee of general peace, has always been a consistent
supporter of peace and has always met half way any action taken
in that direction. The Soviet Government, furthermore, has
always believed, and still believes, that the one effective way of
preventing armed conflict is to accomplish the program of general
and total disarmament, as in the feverish atmosphere of general
armament any rivalry between States unavoidably leads to war,
which is the more murderous in proportion as the system of

armament is perfected. A detailed plan of complete disarmament
had been proposed by the delegation of the Soviet Union to the
Preparatory Commission of the Conference on Disarmament at
the League of Nations,37 but unfortunately did not win the
support of a majority of that Commission, including the
representatives of those very Powers which are the original
signatories of the Pact of Paris. The plan was rejected although its
acceptance and enforcement would have meant a genuine
guarantee of peace.
2. Unwilling to overlook any chance of contributing to the
lessening the burden of armament which is a crushing one for the
peoples, the Soviet Government, after the rejection of its
proposals for total disarmament, not only did not decline to
discuss the partial reduction of armaments but itself intervened
through its delegation in the Preparatory Commission with a
detailed draft of a plan of partial but substantial disarmament. Yet
the Soviet Government, unfortunately, must point out that this
plan also was not supported by the Preparatory Commission
which thereby once more proved the total impotence of the
League of Nations in the field of disarmament which,
nevertheless, is the most substantial guarantee of peace and the
most powerful means of abolishing war; this took place in the
face of the obvious resistance offered to the Soviet proposals by
nearly all the States which were the first to sign the Pact
prohibiting war.
3. Aiming to bring into effect its policy of peace, the Soviet
Government, besides its systematic defense of the cause of
disarmament, had also addressed the other governments, long
before the idea of the Pact recently signed at Paris had arisen,
with the proposal to renounce through bi-lateral pacts not only the
wars foreseen in the Pact of Paris but any mutual aggression and
any armed conflict whatsoever. Certain States such as Germany,
Turkey, Afghanistan, Persia and Lithuania accepted this and
concluded with the Soviet Government appropriate pacts. Other
Governments ignored this proposal and avoided answering it, and

again others rejected it, giving the strange reason that the
unreserved renunciation of aggression would be incompatible
with their obligations towards the League of Nations. That,
however, did not prevent those same Powers from signing the
Pact of Paris without mentioning in the text itself the sacredness
of the above mentioned obligations.
4. The facts hereinabove stated afford unquestionable proof that
the idea of eliminating wars and armed conflicts from the field of
international politics is the predominant idea of the foreign policy
of the Soviets. Nevertheless, the originators of the Pact of Paris
did not see fit to ask the Soviet Government either to join in the
pourparlers which preceded this Pact or in the drawing up of the
text of this Pact. Likewise, no invitation was sent to certain
Powers really concerned in the maintenance of peace, because,
either in the past (Turkey and Afghanistan), or in the present, (the
Republic of the great Chinese people) they have been or are
attacked. Neither does the invitation, transmitted by the French
Government, contain conditions which would make it possible for
the Soviet Government to exercise any influence on the text itself
of the instrument signed at Paris. Yet, the Soviet Government lays
down as a basis the axiom that under no condition whatsoever can
it be deprived of the right which has accrued or may hereafter
accrue to the governments that have signed the Pact, and standing
on that right the Soviet Government must in particular first offer
several remarks concerning its attitude towards the Pact.
5. First of all the Soviet Government can not refrain from
expressing its most profound regret that there is not in the Pact of
Paris any obligation whatsoever concerning disarmament. The
Soviet Delegation to the Preparatory Commission of the
Disarmament Conference already has had occasion to declare that
it is only by joining a pact prohibiting war with the
accomplishment of total and general disarmament that the
maintenance of universal peace could be effectively guaranteed
and that, on the contrary, an international treaty prohibiting war,
but not accompanied by even that elementary guarantee offered

by the limitation of armaments that are continually increasing
would be a dead letter without any real importance. The public
declarations recently made by certain signatories of the Pact of
Paris concerning the unavoidable continuation of armament even
after the Pact is concluded are truly a confirmation of the
foregoing. The new political international groups which have
arisen in the meanwhile with especial regard to the question of
naval armaments have added force to this position. That is why
the present situation makes it more than ever imperative to take
decided measures in the field of disarmament.
6. In considering the text of the Pact the Soviet Government
deems it necessary to call attention to the lack of definiteness and
clearness in Article 1 of the very formula that prohibits war, this
formula being open to divergent and arbitrary interpretations. For
its part, the Soviet Government believes that all international
warfare must be prohibited either as an instrument of what is
styled “national policy” or as a means to promote other ends (for
instance, the repression of movements for the liberation of
peoples, etc.). According to the Soviet Government wars must be
prohibited not only in the juridical and formal construction of the
word (that is to say, implying a “declaration of war”, etc.) but also
such military actions as, for instance, intervention, blockade,
military occupation of foreign territories, of foreign ports, etc.
The history of these last few years presents quite a number of
military actions of this kind which have brought upon peoples
terrible calamities. The Soviet Republics themselves have been
the object of such aggressions and at the present time the
immense population of China is suffering from such attacks.
What is more, such military actions often assume the proportions
of great wars which it becomes completely impossible to stop,
and yet, the Pact makes no mention of these questions that are so
grave from the standpoint of peace. Next, the same Article 1 (sic)
of the Pact deals with the necessity of solving all disputes and all
international disputes by exclusively pacific means. Taking this
position as a point of departure, the Soviet Government believes
that it is also necessary to include in the number of non-pacific

means that are prohibited by the Pact such means as a refusal to
resume normal pacific relations between nations or breaking such
relations, for such acts, by eliminating the pacific means which
might settle controversies, embitter relations and contribute to the
creation of an atmosphere that is conducive to the unleashing of
wars.
7. Among the restrictions made in writing at the time of the
diplomatic pourparlers among the original signatories of the Pact
the Soviet Government noticed in particular the reservation of the
British Government in paragraph 10 of its note of May 19 of this
year. The British Government there reserves to itself absolute
freedom of action as towards several regions which it does not
even specially enumerate. If they are regions forming part of the
British Empire or its dominions all of them are already included
in the Pact and the case of any aggression against them is
provided for in the Pact so that the reservation of the British
Government in respect thereof might seem to be at least
superfluous. But if other regions are referred to, the signatories of
the Pact have a right to know exactly where the freedom of action
of the British Government begins and where it ends.
But the British Government reserves to itself full freedom of
action not only in case of armed aggression against those regions
but even in case of any act whatsoever of enmity or of
“interference” which would justify the British Government in
opening hostilities. Recognition of such a right for that
Government would amount to justifying war and might serve as a
contagious example to other signatories of the Pact who, equality
of rights being assumed, would also claim the same liberty with
regard to other regions and the result would be that there would
probably be no place left on the terrestrial globe where the Pact
could be applied. Indeed, the restriction made by the British
Government carries an invitation to another signatory of the Pact
to withdraw from its operation still other regions. The Soviet
Government is unable to regard this reservation as anything but
an attempt to use the Pact itself as an instrument of imperialistic

policy. But the said note of the British Government is not
communicated to the Soviet Government as an integral part of the
Pact or an annex thereto, therefore it can not be considered as
binding on the Soviet Government, just as the other restrictions
concerning the Pact mentioned in the diplomatic correspondence,
are not binding on the Soviet Government. Neither can the Soviet
Government agree to all of the restrictions that may justify war
and particularly the restrictions made in the said correspondence
in order to withdraw from the operation of the Pact decisions
flowing from the constitution of the League of Nations and the
Locarno Agreements.
8. Summing up the foregoing, I have still to note the absence
from the Pact of obligations concerning disarmament which
stands as the one essential element by which peace can be
guaranteed; the inadequacy and uncertainty of the very formula
concerning the prohibition of war and finally the existence of
several restrictions the purpose of which is to avoid any
appearance of a promise with respect to the cause of peace.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as the Pact of Paris imposes on the
Powers certain obligations as to public opinion and affords the
Soviet Government a new possibility of placing before all those
who are parties to the Pact the most important question for the
cause of peace, that of disarmament, the solution of which
remains the only guarantee capable of eliminating warfare, the
Soviet Government expresses its consent to adhere to the Pact of
Paris.
In accordance with the foregoing, I shall, Mr. Ambassador, have the honor
shortly to forward to you the instrument of adherence of my Government as
soon as the formalities connected with it shall have been accomplished.
I take [etc.]
M. LITVINOFF

36 Transmitted to the Department of State by the French Embassy in
Washington on Sept. 27, 1928.

[Document 149]
The Minister in Sweden (Harrison) to the Secretary of State
Minister for Foreign Affairs acknowledged the receipt of my note of August
27, containing the text of the Multilateral Anti-War Treaty and replies as
follows:
“Animated by the same desire to ensure the maintenance of peace
which inspired the signatory powers, the Royal Government
proposes to ask the Riksdag as soon as possible to give its consent
to Sweden’s adherence to the [above-mentioned] treaty.”
A statement to this effect will be given out tonight and full text will be
released on September 3.
HARRISON

[Document 150]
The Banish Minister (Brun) to the Acting Secretary of State
BAR HARBOR, MAINE, September 1, 1928.
[Received September 4.]
No. 122
SIR: On the 27th of August this year the American Minister at Copenhagen
transmitted to the Danish Minister of Foreign Affairs a note by which the
Danish Government was invited to adhere to the treaty signed on that same
day at Paris, which condemns the recourse to war for the solution of
international disputes.
With reference to the said note the Minister of Foreign Affairs has
instructed me to state to you, that the Danish Government has great pleasure
in joining entirely in the high ideas which have inspired this treaty, and has
felt a deep satisfaction at the completion of this great plan which is destined
to contribute to the steady advance of the idea of peace among the nations
of the world.
I am furthermore instructed to declare formally to you, that the Danish
Government adheres to the said Treaty, with reservation only of ratification
in accordance with the Danish Constitution.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs is prepared to submit the Treaty in due time
to the Danish Parliament (“Rigsdag”) in the session which opens at the
beginning of the month of October next.
I have the honor to ask you to be so good as to acknowledge the receipt of
my present communication.
I have [etc.]
C. BRUN

[Document 151]
The Rumanian Chargé (Sturdza) to the Acting Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, September 4, 1928.
SIR: In conformity with telegraphic instructions I have the honor of
transmitting to Your Excellency the following note received from the Royal
Government:38
“I had the honor to receive on August 27th a note in which the
Chargé d’Affaires of the United States advises the Royal
Government that the treaty of renunciation of war has been signed
at Paris by the representatives of the governments of Germany,
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Great
Britain, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa,
and the United States of America.
“By the same note the Royal Government is advised as to the
means of adhesion to the treaty by the states which have not taken
part in the signature at Paris.
“It is shown with absolute clearness by the negotiations
preliminary to the signature of the treaty as well as by the changes
which have been made in the preamble with respect to its original
text and the explanations contained in the note under date of June
23, 1928, of the Government of the United States addressed to the
governments invited to sign the treaty, that this treaty in no
respect modifies the provisions of the covenant of the League of
Nations. Consequently, the rights and obligations derived from
the new treaty constitute neither an extension nor a reduction of
the rights and obligations derived from the covenant of the
League of Nations, which remain as they are. It also appears that
the new treaty does not conflict with the neutrality treaties nor, in
general, with the engagements contained in existing treaties

which the Royal Government has contracted up to the present. It
also follows from the note of the Government of the United States
of June 23rd39 and the above-mentioned acts and negotiations that
any violation of the multilateral treaty by one of the contracting
parties ipso facto releases the other powers signatory to the treaty
from their obligations toward the power which has violated the
engagements of the same treaty. It follows moreover that the right
of defense is in no way affected or restricted by the engagements
of the new treaty and that each power is entirely free to defend
itself at will and according to its necessities against an attack or a
foreign invasion.
“Thus defined, whether in the text of its preamble, or the
statements in the note of the Government of the United States of
June 23, 1928, or in the observations made preliminary to
signature by the various governments taking part in the
negotiations, especially by that of the French Republic, the object
of the new treaty is to consolidate and maintain the relations of
peace and peaceful and friendly cooperation under the contractual
conditions in which they are now established between the nations
concerned.
“In the light of the explanations given above and which, while
confirming the explanations given by the signatory powers, define
the terms of the consent and signature of Rumania, at the moment
when she is invited to give them, the Royal Government is happy
to be able to reply in the affirmative to the invitation given it to
adhere to the treaty signed at Paris August 27, 1928.
“The Royal Government considers that it is its duty to render
homage to the noble initiative of the United States for the purpose
of prohibiting war as an instrument of national policy with the
object of satisfying selfish interests, as well as to the efforts of all
the states, thanks to the valuable support of which this initiative
has been crowned with success. Rumania, which aspires only to
labor in peace, sees in the signature of the new treaty one of the

most important events in the progress of the world toward
universal concord.
Argetoianu.”
Concluding, I have the honor to communicate to Your Excellency that I am
instructed to adhere immediately to the pact to which the note of my
Government refers.
I am informed by the Royal Government that my full powers have been
communicated to the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States in Bucharest.
This procedure was adopted as a matter of urgency and expediency and the
text will arrive by mail.
[MIHAIL R.] STURDZA
38 The quotation which follows is a translation of the French text.

[Document 152]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
109. Your circular telegram of August 16, midnight, relative to multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war.
I have received from the Foreign Office a note dated September 4th, which,
after detailed paraphrase of my note of August 27th, reads as follows in
translation:
“My Government has given the most careful consideration to the
momentous note of Your Excellency, appreciating in all its
transcendental importance the work brought to a conclusion at
Paris by the United States of America through the signing of the
treaty against war. Conforming to the exalted purposes of that
treaty, my Government is pleased to declare its decision to adhere
to it as soon as the respective ratifications of the original
signatory powers for putting the treaty into effect have been
received.
In the meanwhile my Government expresses through Your
Excellency to the Government of the United States its most
enthusiastic congratulations for the brilliant success achieved at
Paris on behalf of world peace.
Please accept et cetera. Signed Augusto C. Coello, Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs.”
SUMMERLIN

[Document 153]
The Minister in Latvia (Coleman)40 to the Secretary of State
72. Estonian Minister at Riga informed me yesterday that Estonia would
adhere to the Kellogg Peace Pact. Formal letter of adherence to follow.41
COLEMAN
40 The Minister in Latvia was also accredited to Estonia and Lithuania.
becoming effective Feb. 25, 1929. Text transmitted to the Department in

[Document 154]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)42 to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, September 4, 1928.
[Received September 17.]
No. 11
Luxemburg Government’s decision to adhere to the General Pact for the
Renunciation of War, I have the honor to enclose a copy and translation of a
note from the Minister of State, dated August 29, 1928, informing me of
this decision.
I have [etc.]
HUGH GIBSON
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Luxemburg Minister of State (Bech) to the American Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)
LUXEMBURG, August 29, 1928.
MR. AMBASSADOR: On August 28 Your Excellency did me the honor to hand over
invitation from the United States to adhere to the Pact for the Renunciation
of War as an instrument of national policy.
Hereby I hasten to inform Your Excellency that the Grand-ducal
Government, faithful to the pacific aspirations of the Luxemburg people
and to the constitutional traditions of its foreign policy, gives its adhesion to
the Pact signed at Paris on August 27.

As soon as the project of law carrying the ratification of this adhesion will
have been approved by the legislative power which will be informed thereof
immediately, the Grand-ducal Government will transmit the instrument of
adhesion to Washington.
I desire to renew to Your Excellency the sentiments of gratitude and pride
which the Grand-Duchy feels in being associated to the great peace work
due to the generous initiative of the Government of the United States and of
France. I beg Your Excellency to be the interpreter of these sentiments to
the Government of the United States, and more specially to His Excellency
the Secretary of State, Mr. Kellogg.
Kindly accept [etc.]
BECH
42 Also accredited as Minister to Luxemburg.
43 Not printed.

[Document 155]
The Ambassador in Spain (Hammond) to the Secretary of State
SAN SEBASTIAN, September 4, 1928.
[Received September 17.]
No. 1018
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and translation of a note
under date of August 30th last from General Primo de Rivera in reply to the
note which I delivered to him on August 28th last, No. 602, dated August
27, 1928, in accordance with the Department’s telegraphic circular
instruction dated August 27, 1928, at Paris.
As the Department will observe, General Primo de Rivera although
expressing sympathy with the aims of the anti-war pact, has refrained from
committing himself as to when Spain will adhere.
I have been reliably informed that it is the intention of the President44 to
adhere to the treaty at some future time, but to defer this action for the
present in order to avoid hurting the susceptibilities of the Latin-American
republics, and in particular of the Argentine, which country is reported to
have refused to adhere to the anti-war treaty. Such articles as the interview
given to the press by Señor Fernandez Medina, Uruguayan Minister at
Madrid, reported in the Embassy’s despatch No. 1007 dated August 21,
1928,45 as well as several other articles from Latin-American sources
hostile to the pact, have undoubtedly been effective in causing General
Primo de Rivera to postpone Spain’s adhesion.
I have [etc.]
OGDEN H. HAMMOND
[Enclosure—Translation]

The Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Estella) to the American Ambassador (Hammond)
SAN SEBASTIAN, August 30, 1928.
No. 267
EXCELLENCY: I have received Your Excellency’s courteous note of the 27th inst.
in which you were good enough to transcribe the text of the treaty signed in
Paris on that date by the Governments of South Africa, Germany, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Great Britain, Italy, Ireland,
India, Japan, New Zealand, Poland and the Government which Your
Excellency so worthily represents, and by reason of which, war is
renounced as an instrument of national policy, those Governments
undertaking to employ peaceful means for the solution of all difficulties
which may arise between them.
In the note above acknowledged, Your Excellency details the history of the
negotiations which preceded the signing of the above mentioned pact,
transmitting likewise a bulletin containing the diplomatic correspondence
exchanged for that purpose, and finally in accordance with Article 3 of the
Agreement under instructions from the Government of the United States,
Your Excellency informs me that the pact will be open to the adhesion of all
countries in the world as soon as it has entered into effect, once it has been
ratified by the signatory nations, that such adhesions are to be made at
Washington, and that the signatory nations have hoped and desired that the
multilateral treaty signed in Paris may become a World pact.
In thanking Your Excellency for transmitting the amiable sentiments which
Your Government expresses, echoing those of all the other countries that
have signed the anti-war pact, I wish to express the sympathy with which
Spain’s government, and I personally, have regarded this new step toward
World peace consecrating the employment of procedure and measures of an
anti-bellicose nature for the solution of international difficulties and
conflicts; in the hope that through successive ratifications it may enter into
effect as soon as possible, and that through the adhesion of all civilized
countries the pact may have a universal force, Spain intending not to remain
behind any country in expressing at the opportune moment the will and
desire of the Spanish people regarding ideas for which the Government over

which I preside has labored since its accession to power and for which it
proposes to work.
I avail myself [etc.]
MARQUÉS DE ESTELLA
44 President of the Council of Ministers, office held by General Primo de
Rivera, Marqués de Estella, who was also Spanish Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
45 Not printed.

[Document 156]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
MANAGUA, September 4, 1928.
[Received September 24.]
No. 789
SIR: I have the honor to report that the Department’s circular telegram of
had been signed on that date was received at this Legation late in the
evening of the same day. The note referred to in the Department’s circular
telegram of August 16th, 12 midnight, was duly handed to the Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs on August 28th. I have the honor to transmit
herewith the Nicaraguan Government’s reply dated August 30th.
It will be noted that this reply states that the Nicaraguan Government
adheres gladly to the Treaty referred to although this adherence is ad
referendum pending the constitutional approval of the Congress. I
understand, however, that the Government is now preparing a formal
Presidential decree providing for the adherence of Nicaragua to the Treaty
and that this decree will be issued in the near future.47 I have therefore
refrained from advising the Department by telegraph of the attitude of the
Government pending the issuance of this decree.
The Nicaraguan Government had at first intended to propose to the
Congress at its next session that Nicaragua adhere to the Treaty in order that
definite final action might be taken at that time. Upon learning from cabled
press despatches, however, that the majority of the other Governments of
the world were adhering to the Treaty at once the Nicaraguan Government
decided to take immediately such action as lay within the province of the
Executive.
I have [etc.]

For the Minister:
DANA G. MUNRO
[Enclosure—Translation48 ]
The Nicaraguan Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Pasos) to the American Minister (Eberhardt)
MANAGUA, August 30, 1928.
No. 497
EXCELLENCY: Agreeably impressed by the reading of the treaty for outlawing and
condemning war, of which Your Excellency was so kind as to send this
Ministry two copies, one in English and the other in French, and especially
by the fact that the said treaty was recently signed in Paris, I address the
present note to Your Excellency to congratulate the Government of the
United States of America, through the worthy channel of Your Excellency,
in the name of my Government, and on particular instructions from His
Excellency President Adolfo Díaz, on the important and far-reaching
diplomatic triumph thus attained, which will undoubtedly result in every
benefit for the interests of the human race.
The noble ends sought in the treaty referred to in condemning war and
renouncing it as an instrument and recourse of international policy cannot
but win the approval and praise of all the nations of the world and
particularly of small nations like ours; and it is by reason of the above that
Nicaragua joyfully adheres to the said treaty, as my Government is
completely in accord with its text, as signed at Paris and recorded in the
English and French copies transmitted by Your Excellency; it being
understood that this adherence is ad referendum, that is, subject to the
constitutional approval of the Congress of the Republic, to which it will be
submitted at the next session and by which approval undoubtedly will
immediately be granted.
CÉSAR PASOS

48 File translation revised.

[Document 157]
The Chargé in Egypt (Winship) to the Secretary of State
BULKELEY, September 4, 1928.
[Received September 26.]
No. 30
to the effect that the Egyptian Government has by an official Note adhered
to the Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War. The Note, with
translation, is enclosed herewith, and is self explanatory, but it is of interest
and important to note that in handing same to me the Minister of Foreign
Affairs drew special attention to the fifth paragraph which does not admit or
recognize the possible insertion or application of any reservation
whatsoever as regards Egypt.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs asked me not to cable this but to make it
plain in my despatch that Egypt adhered to the Treaty as signed in Paris
without admitting any possible British reservation.
The text of the enclosed Note will be given to the local press today.
Clippings for this week on the pact will be included in the Press Report
unless something of exceptional importance appears.
I have [etc.]
NORTH WINSHIP
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Afifi) to the American Chargé (Winship)
BULKELEY, 3 September, 1928.

MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Note
of the 27th of August by which you have been so kind as to inform me of
the signature, at Paris on the same day, of the Treaty solemnly proclaiming
the abolition of war as an instrument of national policy, and to transmit to
me with the text of the Treaty the invitation of the Government of the
United States to adhere to it.
Confident of being the faithful interpreter of the sentiments of the Egyptian
people, the Royal Government takes pleasure to express to you its most
hearty approval of the lofty purpose which led the Government of the
United States to propose and conclude in the form of a Multilateral pact, the
Treaty carrying the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy.
It renders homage to the untiring activity of the Government of the United
States and to its high authority as well as to the invalujable co-operation of
the other Great Powers which have succeeded in transforming the
beneficient idea that war is beyond the law—to an international obligation.
The Egyptian Government is pleased at the offer which has been so
cordially extended to it to bring its own assistance to this great and
generous enterprise and to assist in this way to assure the universality of the
Treaty.
It has even more the sincere desire and the indefectible wish that peace is
for Egypt not only a national temperament but even a necessity for
preservation. The renunciation by her as well as by the other signing States
or adherents to the pact of war as an instrument of national policy would be
for Egypt the best guaranty of security and the beginning of the
development in order and progress.
It is for this reason the Egyptian Government declares fully to adhere to the
pact just as it was signed at Paris, without this adherence at any time being
construed as an admission of any reserve whatever made on the subject of
this pact.
The Egyptian Government is convinced that the new Treaty will establish
solid foundations for peace and security of the world, that it will lead to
greater solidarity among the people and in consequence a fertile co-

operation for the progress of humanity and finally that it will profoundly
and favorably influence international relations.
Be so kind [etc.]
H. AFIFI
49 Not printed.

[Document 158]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
BUENOS AIRES, September 4, 1928.
[Received September 28.]
No. 378
in translation the note received that day from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs acknowledging the receipt of the one I handed him in accordance
with the Department’s circular telegram of August 16, 12 midnight, relative
to the signing of the Multilateral Anti-War Treaty, I have the honor to
transmit herewith a copy of the said note, together with a translation.
I have the further honor to transmit a number of newspaper editorial
comments on the Multilateral Treaty, some accompanied by translation and
others by brief summaries.50
As the Department’s circular instruction of August 16 gave no in-
instruction or intimation that I was to do more than deliver its note to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I have refrained from urging the Minister to
act favorably on the opportunity offered to become a party to the treaty, but
I have advanced the obvious arguments in favor of Argentina’s adhering to
it. However, in conversation with various prominent Argentines, who have
brought up the subject, I have called attention to the statement in Dr.
Gallardo’s note in answer to mine (both of which have been published here)
that the principle of the pacific settlement of international conflicts has
always inspired the conduct of Argentina in its foreign relations, and I have

expressed the opinion that failure to adhere to the treaty would appear to be
a negation of that very principle which the Minister has emphasized.
I shall continue to keep the Department informed of any further important
developments regarding the Multilateral Treaty, but I have no expectation
that anything further will be done by this Administration, unless the
Argentine Congress should take the initiative in requesting information on
the matter.
I have [etc.]
ROBERT WOODS BLISS
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs (Gallardo) to the American Ambassador (Bliss)
BUENOS AIRES, August 31, 1928.
MR. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No.
124, of the 27th instant, in which Your Excellency kindly informed me that
the Governments of Germany, the United States of America, Belgium,
France, Great Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South
Africa, the Irish Free State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland and Czechoslovakia
had signed that day a Treaty which obligated them to renounce war as an
instrument of national policy in the relations between them, and to secure
only by pacific means the arrangement or solution of all differences which
might arise between them. Your Excellency was also good enough to
communicate to me officially the text of the said Treaty, in Article 3 of
which there is decreed the manner and conditions of adhesion for those
countries which were not original signatories thereof.
The Argentine Government is pleased to take note of the auspicious act by
which there has been consecrated in a treaty of this importance the principle
of the pacific settlement of international conflicts, which has always
inspired the conduct of the Argentine Republic in its foreign relations.
The Executive Power will hasten to inform Your Excellency of the
resolution which may be adopted regarding the said treaty, which it will

consider with the sympathy and interest which our country has professed
for all initiatives tending to the maintenance of peace.
I renew [etc.]
ANGEL GALLARDO
50 Not printed.
50 Not printed.

[Document 159]
The Chargé in Portugal (Andrews) to the Secretary of State
LISBON, September 5, 1928.
[Received September 18.]
No. 2377
SIR: With reference to the Legation’s telegram No. 34 of September 1 and
preceding despatch No. 2375 of August 29,52 in respect of the Note
delivered to the Portuguese Government on the Treaty for the renunciation
of war as an instrument of national policy, I have the honor to enclose
herewith the original and a translation of a note from the Ministry of
definite adherence of the Portuguese Government to the Treaty. I am
sending the original in view of the exceptional importance of the Note, a
copy being retained in the Legation files.
I have the honor to report that the government has made no public
pronouncements on the Treaty and that no editorial comments have
appeared in the leading newspapers here subsequent to the publication of
the Note, the press having confined itself to quotations from the Parisian
papers.
I have [etc.]
WM. WHITING ANDREWS
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Rodrigues) to the American Chargé (Andrews)
LISBON, August 31, 1928.

MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: Having acquainted His Excellency the President of the
Portuguese Republic with the text of the Treaty for the renunciation of war
as an instrument of national policy, which you did me the honor to deliver,
for which I have already thanked you by my note of the 28th instant,53 I
have now the greatest satisfaction in being able to inform you that the
Portuguese Government, in full accord with the spirit and wording of that
Treaty, gives to it its entire adhesion.
I avail myself [etc.]
DR. BETTENCOURT RODRIGUES
52 Neither printed.
53 Department of State Publication No. 468, Treaty for the Renunciation of
War, p. 251.

[Document 160]
The Minister in Bulgaria (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
SOFIA, September 5, 1928.
[Received September 26.]
No. 1320
SIR: Referring to the Legation’s Despatch No. 1315 of the third instant and
confirming the Legation’s telegram No. 21 of to-day’s date,54 I have the
honor to enclose, herewith, a translation of the note from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs accepting the invitation extended to Bulgaria to become a
signatory of the Anti-War Pact signed at Paris on August 27, 1928.
I also have the honor to enclose, herewith, a number of translations from the
newspapers commenting upon the adhesion of Bulgaria to the pact.55
I have [etc.]
CHARLES S. WILSON
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Bulgarian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Bouroff) to the American Minister (Wilson)
SOFIA, September 5, 1928.
No. 9480 I
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Note No.
727, dated August 27th, in which Your Excellency was so kind as to notify
me of the signature at Paris of the Treaty for the renunciation of war, and
enclosing at the same time the text of this Treaty, to be submitted to the
examination and approval of the Royal Government.

In thanking you for your kind communication, I hasten to inform Your
Excellency that the Council of Ministers, at its meeting yesterday,
unanimously approved the adherence of Bulgaria to the above mentioned
Treaty, in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 3.
The Bulgarian representative at Washington will shortly receive the
necessary instructions on this subject, and all the formalities, prescribed by
the laws in force in the Kingdom for such cases, will be carried out with the
least possible delay.
I avail myself [etc.]
A. BOUROFF
54 Neither printed.
55 These enclosures not printed.

[Document 161]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:18 p.m.]
88. My Lithuanian colleague called this morning to present to me a note
from Premier Voldemaras to the Secretary of State by which Lithuania
adheres to the Kellogg Pact. The Lithuanian Minister explained that since
the Premier was now in Geneva he requested me to transmit this message
rather than sending it through Mr. Coleman in order to have it reach
Washington at the earliest possible moment. He added that under their form
of government a decision by the Cabinet is sufficient for adherence and it is
not necessary that Parliament ratify it, Mr. Voldemaras will hand the
document to the press on the morning of Saturday the 8th instant. Original
text in French, translation follows:
“Kovno, September 5, 1928.
Mr. Secretary of State: Your Excellency’s proposal, dated August
27th last, to adhere to the Pact for the Renunciation of War as an
instrument of national policy has been submitted to a thorough
examination by the Lithuanian Government.
I am happy to be able to communicate to Your Excellency that on
the 28th of August the Government of the Republic instructed me
to notify the Government of the United States of its complete
approval and adherence to the said Pact. The Lithuanian
Government does this with the more readiness in that Lithuania
from the moment of the rebirth of its independent existence in
1918 instituted a policy of peace.
Thus the Lithuanian Government succeeded in inserting in the
treaty of peace concluded with Russia at Moscow on July 12,

1920,56 a clause (article 5) recognizing the permanent neutrality
of Lithuania. Russia declared itself ready to participate in
international guarantees of this neutrality if the other great powers
likewise recognized and guaranteed it.
The same policy of peace has been followed toward Poland in
spite of the Polish efforts to prevent Lithuania from becoming an
independent state. The treaty of Suvalki, October 7, 1920,57
contains a provision for the determination of the frontiers between
the two states and for the solution exclusively by peaceful
methods of all problems existing between Lithuania and Poland.
Unfortunately on October 9, 1920, Poland violated this treaty by
occupying the Lithuanian capital Vilna. In spite of repeated
requests of the Lithuanian Government for the fulfillment of the
convention, the Polish Government has refused to do so and has
rejected the Lithuanian proposal to submit the matter to the
Permanent Court of International Justice at The Hague.
At the present moment a third of the territory ceded by Russia to
Lithuania by the treaty of peace is held by the Poles.
Nevertheless the Lithuanian Government has maintained its faith
in a peaceful solution of the question of Vilna in reparation for the
damages caused Lithuania by Poland. Its faith is strengthened by
the signature of the Kellogg Pact between different states of the
Globe. There is ground for hope that shortly this Pact will become
the guiding principle of the entire World.
Finally the Lithuanian Government is profoundly convinced that
the signature of the Pact for the Renunciation of War is only the
first step toward the organization of world peace.
Accept, et cetera. Signed Professor A. Voldemaras, President of
the Council, Minister of Foreign Affairs.”58
Copy to Legation at Riga. Original text by mail.

WILSON
56 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. III, p. 105.
57 Ibid., vol. VIII, p. 173.
58 Subsequently the Lithuanian Minister in the United States stated that the
above note was “merely a notification to the United States of the intention
of the Lithuanian Government to adhere” to the treaty, and that his
Government proposed to transmit “a formal declaration of adherence in due
form as soon as the treaty has come into force through ratification by the

[Document 162]
The Venezuelan Minister (Grisanti) to the Acting Secretary of
State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, September 6, 1928.
No. 398
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that, according to a
cablegram received from my Government yesterday, Venezuela adheres to
the General Agreement for the Renunciation of War signed in Paris the 27th
of last August.
Allow me, Your Excellency, in making this announcement, to express the
deep pleasure which I feel since the Agreement in question, wherein the
individuality of His Excellency, Mr. Kellogg, stands forth in such relief in
the faithful interpretation of high American ideals, is a great benefit, being
an unequivocal pledge of national security.
I take [etc.]
CARLOS F. GRISANTI

[Document 163]
The Chargé in Greece (Goold) to the Secretary of State
ATHENS, September 6, 1928.
[Received September 19.]
No. 663
SIR: Adverting to your circular instruction of August 16, 11 P.M., containing
the text of the note concerning the signing of the Peace Pact at Paris which I
duly handed to the Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs (in absence of the
Minister) on the morning of August 28th, I have the honor to enclose copies
and translations of Foreign Office note No. 9690 of August 31, in which it
appears that as soon as the Chamber of Deputies convenes, the President of
the Republic will request its authorization to adhere to the Treaty.
I furthermore have the honor to forward translations of articles which
appeared in the Athens press concerning the signing of the treaty59 and to
report that in general the signature is welcomed as the creation of another
obstacle to war in the efficacy of which there is more hope than confidence.
In diplomatic circles here which may or may not reflect opinion of the
respective countries, only the Italians seem to have an expectation
bordering on hope that the Treaty will fail. To them it seems to be the
attempt of the satiated powers to preserve what they have, nearly all of
which was won by war; to make it disreputable for anyone ever to
dispossess them of their vast war got gains. For the next fifteen or twenty
years, so an Italian colleague of mine states, Europe will feel the fatigues of
1914–18 to such a degree that Treaty or no Treaty, there will be no danger
of war between the major powers. But during this period, there will be an
accumulation of wealth, a new generation will come to the front and the
equilibrium will become unbalanced. Some nations will feel themselves
stronger than others and will resent the possession by the others of colonies,
protectorates, mandates, and influence. And, of course, these other nations

will not offer to share any of their patrimony with the rising young peoples.
And so a condition will arise when the growing communities will have to
decide whether to submit to the arrest of their development, or fight. They
will, of course, adopt the second alternative. And it is well that they will do
so, for peace under such circumstances degenerates into mere stagnation
whereas struggle so sharpens man’s wits and capabilities that it is positively
worth the temporary destruction of wealth entailed. Good, sound von
Bernhardi doctrine, clearly expounded in the General’s remarkable book
which appeared sometime in 1912–13. It may be worth while to observe to
what an extent such doctrine is taking hold of Italian youth.
I have [etc.]
H. S. GOOLD
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs (Carapanos) to the American Chargé (Goold)
ATHENS, August 31, 1928.
No. 9690
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note
of August 27, in which you were good enough to inform me in the name of
the Government of the United States of America that the Governments of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Great
Britain, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland, South Africa and
the United States of America had signed on the same day at Paris a treaty
by which they renounce war as an instrument of national policy in their
mutual relations and recognize that the settlement or the solution of all
differences which arise between them should be settled by pacific means.
Furthermore, you were good enough to draw the attention of the
Government of the Republic to Article III, Paragraph 2, according to which
the treaty is open to the adhesion of all the other powers of the world.
The Hellenic Government is happy to note that the high pacific purposes
which brought about the conclusion of the treaty are the same as those

which constitute the basis of its own efforts.
Consequently, I have the honor to inform you, in the name of my
Government, that it will hasten to adhere to the treaty signed at Paris at the
noble initiative of the Government of the United States of America. To that
end, the President of the Hellenic Government will ask the Chamber of
Deputies for the necessary authorization immediately after it convenes.
Accept [etc.]
For the Minister,
The Director General
M. TSAMADOS
59 Articles not printed.

[Document 164]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
QUITO, September 6, 1928.
[Received October 6.]
No. 1149
in which the Department was informed of the delivery to the Minister of
Foreign Relations, on August 28th, of the formal note announcing the
signing on August 27th, in Paris, of the Multilateral Treaty to Renounce
War by the interested powers.
I have the honor to report that the Legation received on August 31st the
answer from the Ecuadoran Government signed by Homero Viteri Lafronte,
Minister of Foreign Relations (copy and translation hereto attached).61
It will be noted that the Minister of Foreign Relations merely acknowledges
receipt of the Legation’s note without in any way committing himself as to
the possible attitude the Ecuadoran Government will assume in the matter.
As both the Minister of Foreign Relations as well as President Ayora, with
whom the American Minister had the opportunity of discussing the treaty in
an informal manner, expressed themselves as greatly interested and in terms
laudatory of the treaty, it is to be presumed that Ecuador will sooner or later
also become an adherent of the treaty, awaiting merely the action which
other Latin American countries will take.
Of interest, however, in this connection is an editorial which appeared in
“El Telégrafo” of Guayaquil, the leading newspaper of Ecuador.

The writer of the editorial apparently has not analyzed the treaty very
carefully but is mainly interested in the fact that Latin American countries
did not participate in the preliminary discussion and in the signing of the
treaty.
He interprets this as due to a desire of preventing the treaty from being
influenced by the “Latin American tendency to make the Great Powers
respect its rights” and calls it “a grotesque imposition, incompatible with
the dignity and equality of the nations.”
The writer then makes reference to the Peruvian-Ecuadoran boundary
difficulties and points out the desirability of obtaining from the United
States Government the promise to interpose its good offices for the pacific
solution of that controversy and finally advocates that Ecuador adhere to the
treaty “ad referendum”, subject to the approval of the Legislative Power.
The editorial is as follows:
[Here follows translation of the editorial.]
I have [etc.]
G. A. BADING
60 Not printed.
61 Department of State, Treaty for the Renunciation of War, p. 164.

[Document 165]
The Chargé in Guatemala (Hawks) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:10 p.m.]
109. Department’s circular of August 16, midnight. Note received from the
Foreign Office62 states in part that the Government of Guatemala “accepts
in principle all the bases of the Anti-War Treaty to which it will adhere
opportunely in conformity with the conditions of the Pact itself.”
HAWKS
62 Department of State, Treaty for the Renunciation of War, p. 183.

[Document 166]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Groats and Slovenes
(Prince) to the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, September 7, 1928.
[Received September 21.]
No. 485
with the Department’s circular telegram of August 16, 11 p.m., I delivered
on August 28th to the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Šumenković,
the note dated August 27, 1928, informing the Yugoslav Government that
the multilateral antiwar treaty had been signed at Paris. I had in the
meantime informally acquainted the Minister with the contents of the note.
This act was given wide publicity and was favorably received by all
sections of the press. The only exception to the general approval of the
Treaty was the construction placed on the Foreign Minister’s comment by
Mr. Pribičević, as reported in Legation’s Despatch No. 486 of September 7,
On August 30th, the Acting Foreign Minister handed me the Government’s
formal reply in French, a copy of which is transmitted herewith (the slight
grammatical errors appeared in the original).
It will be observed from the enclosed translation of the note that the
Government, after referring to its right of self-defense, its international
obligations, and its duties towards the League of Nations, states that the
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes will adhere to the Treaty as
soon as the necessary formalities can be completed.
I have [etc.]

JOHN DYNELEY PRINCE
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Shumenkovitch) to the American Minister (Prince)
BELGRADE, August 30, 1928.
MR. MINISTER: Acknowledging the receipt of your note of the 27th instant in
which you were good enough to inform me formally of the signature of the
Renunciation of War Treaty and to communicate the text of that Treaty for
the consideration and eventual approval of the Serb-Croat-Slovene
Government, I hasten to inform you that the Royal Government has taken
cognizance of this act with a feeling of great sympathy.
The formal engagement to renounce war as an instrument of national policy,
which is incorporated in the Treaty, corresponds entirely to the principles
which, according to the conceptions of the Government of the Kingdom of
the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes ought to govern international relations.
Recognizing the great purport of this solemn declaration which has already
received the signatures of numerous States and which is destined to receive
the adhesion of the enormous majority if not all of the Powers of the World,
the Royal Government desires to pay respectful homage to the great
American Republic and to the promoters of this new and noble effort to
guarantee Peace and to thank them for the opportunity offered to the
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to take a part in it.
The Royal Government accordingly entirely approves of the Renunciation
of War Treaty signed in Paris on August 27th, 1928, and it will not fail to
give its formal adhesion to it as soon as it is in a position to do so under the
terms of Article 3 of the said Treaty.
Besides the text of the Treaty, Your Excellency was good enough to
transmit to me with your letter a white book reproducing the
correspondence exchanged between the Contracting States upon the
occasion of the preparation of the conclusion of the Treaty and containing
the views of those States on the exact sense and significance of the text of
the Treaty.

It is particularly agreeable to me to be in a position to assure Your
Excellency that the Royal Government shares these views. More
particularly, it is in accord with the idea that the Treaty, while having for its
object the maintenance of peace, does not deprive the contracting parties of
the right of protection against an attack or invasion (it being understood that
it is the competence of the attacked State to decide whether the
circumstances demand the resort to war for its own protection), as well as
that it completely frees the Contracting States from any party who might
violate the Treaty.
The Royal Government also shares the opinion that the Treaty is regarded
as an instrument whose object is to perpetuate the pacific and friendly
relations under the contractual conditions established to-day and that
nothing in this Treaty is intended to be interpreted contrary to the Covenant
of the League of Nations, the agreements of Locarno or against the Treaties
of Neutrality, or in general against the international obligations which the
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes has thus far contracted.
I am grateful to you for the indications contained in your note regarding the
procedure to be followed for adherence to the Treaty, which procedure the
Royal Government will not delay in following so as to carry out
immediately its very strong desire to participate in this act of reinforcing
peace.
Accept [etc.]
I. SHUMENKOVITCH
63 Neither printed.
64 Not printed.

[Document 167]
The Ambassador in Turkey (Grew) to the Secretary of State
CONSTANTINOPLE, September 7, 1928.
[Received September 26.]
No. 474
Affairs announcing Turkey’s adherence to the Multilateral Pact for the
Renunciation of War, without reservation, I have the honor to transmit
herewith copy with translation of Foreign Office Note 47668–26, dated
Angora September 6, 1928, on which my telegram was based.
I have [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Rouschdy) to the American Ambassador (Grew)
ANGORA, September 6, 1928.
MR. AMBASSADOR: I have had the honor to receive the two Notes dated August 27,
in order to advise me of the signature at Paris of the Multilateral Treaty for
the Renunciation of War as an instrument of national policy among the
Governments of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France,
Germany, Great Britain, India, the Irish Free State, Italy, Japan, New
Zealand, Poland, South Africa and the United States of America.

Your Excellency who transmits to me in your Notes the text of the aforesaid
Multilateral Treaty as well as the complete dossier of the correspondence on
this subject, exchanged among the participant States, is desirous of
submitting the Treaty to the approval of the Government of the Republic for
the purpose of its adhesion should it so desire.
My Government has devoted very special attention to the study both of the
signed text of the Multilateral Treaty and of the pertinent dossier. Moreover,
since the time of the proposal of the plan by the distinguished Secretary of
State of the United States of America, Turkey, to whose eminently pacific
policy this proposition was wholly in conformity, followed with great
sympathy the development of the negotiations which it was sincerely
desirous of seeing successfully concluded.
In consequence, considering that the neutrality treaties between Turkey and
other States harmonize in spirit and in letter with the aim and object of the
treaty which you submit for our approval, and, on the other hand, being in
perfect accord with the explanations supplied by the American Note of June
23, 1928, with reference to the correspondence exchanged between the
Government of the United States and those of the other States, Turkey
agrees to sign without reservation the Multilateral Pact for the Renunciation
of War of August 27, 1928, which harmonizes with its pacific viewpoint,
and it declares that it considers itself reciprocally bound by the text of the
proposed Act apart from all documents which have not been submitted as
an integral part of the Pact to the collective signature of the participating
States.
Accordingly, I hasten to apprise your Excellency that powers necessary for
the signature have been conferred on our Ambassador at Washington.
Accept [etc.]
DR. ROUSCHDY
65 Not printed.

[Document 168]
The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, September 8, 1928.
[Received October 3.]
No. 14
the nature of the reply of the Chilean Government to the invitation to adhere
to the Multilateral Anti-War Treaty, I have the honor to transmit herewith
copies and translation of the reply of the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
In making this noncommittal reply, the Chilean Government followed the
lead of what it believes to be the policy of Brazil and Argentina. I have
detected no resentment among the Chilean officials of the fact that this
Government was not invited to be one of the original signers of the Anti-
War Pact. If it were not for the vague feeling that Chile should orient its
policy in accordance with what is believed to be the common interest of the
A. B. C. powers, the Chilean Government, I believe, would have adhered to
the Anti-War Pact immediately and as a matter of course. As I have said,
there is a tendency here in spite of the recognized difficulties, to develop an
entente with Bolivia and Peru but it no doubt seemed premature to follow
these countries in a declaration in favor of immediate adhesion to the Anti-
War Pact. However, it seems clear that as soon as ratification of the Anti-
War treaty by all the original signatories becomes evident, the Chilean
Government will adhere. In this connection, attention is called to the second
paragraph of the enclosed note.
I have [etc.]
W. S. CULBERTSON
[Enclosure—Translation]

The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs (Gallardo) to the American Ambassador (Culbertson)
SANTIAGO, September 5, 1928.
No. 6570
MR. AMBASSADOR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your courteous
Note of August 27th last, in which Your Excellency was good enough to
inform my Government officially of the celebration of the Pact for the
proscription of war that was on that date signed at Paris by Your
Excellency’s Government, together with Germany, Belgium, France, Great
Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, the
Irish Free State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.
In accordance with Article III of the aforementioned Treaty, the text of
which is included in Your Excellency’s Note, the countries which, like
Chile, have been invited to adhere to it may do so as soon as all the original
signatories have ratified the Treaty and it becomes effective.
My Government is grateful for this communication and, in making note
thereof with every interest, is pleased to request Your Excellency to
communicate to Your Government and to the Secretary of State, Mr.
Kellogg, its congratulations upon the success of the efforts which, for some
time, have been made to bring about the realization of this memorable Pact,
which is a new and valuable guarantee for the maintenance of international
concord.
My Government has always lent with enthusiasm its adhesion to the policy
of peace which progressively guarantees in the world its beneficent
dominion, and has thus well manifested it by significant acts in dealing with
all its foreign problems and by its prompt ratification of the Treaty to Avoid
or Prevent Conflicts Between the American States, which my Government
was pleased to subscribe to at the Fifth Pan-American Conference in
Santiago, Chile.
I avail myself [etc.]
CONRADO RIOS GALLARDO

66 Not printed.

[Document 169]
The Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Frost) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, September 10, 1928.
[Received September 19.]
No. 1004
SIR: Supplementing the Legation’s despatch No. 999 of September 4,
1928,67 relative to the invitation to the Dominican Government to adhere to
the treaty of renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy, I have
the honor to transmit herewith a translation of a note, under date of
September 7, 1928, from the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
formally announcing the decision of his Government to adhere to the treaty.
I have [etc.]
FRANKLIN B. FROST
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Dominican Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Sánchez) to the American Chargé (Frost)
SANTO DOMINGO, September 7, 1928.
No. 262
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the note
marked with number 124, of August 27th of the present year, by which, in
the name of your Government, you transmitted to my Government for its
consideration and approval, in case of agreement, the text of the treaty of
renunciation of war as an instrument of policy in the relations of the states
and which establishes the adjustment and solution of all disputes between
states by pacific means.

My Government has given its best attention and its most careful study as
well to your note already indicated as to the treaty, whose text is integrally
published in the mentioned note, and I have received the charge of
communicating to you the acceptance on the part of the Dominican
Government of the terms of the treaty of renunciation of war signed in Paris
on the 27th of August of the present year between the Governments of
Germany, United States of America, Belgium, France, Great Britain,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, the Irish Free
State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland and Czecho-Slovakia.
The decision to accept the terms of said treaty and to adhere to it, ad
referendum, will be submitted to the approval of the legislative chambers, at
which time my Government will formally instruct our diplomatic
representative in Washington to subscribe the act of adhesion.
In accepting the treaty of renunciation of war as a means for solving the
conflicts between States, my Government is maintaining the invariable
criterion of the Dominican Republic in this matter, which culminated and
took form in Art. 100 of our political constitution which reads thus:
“The powers instituted by this constitution cannot declare war
without previously proposing arbitration.
Paragraph. To guarantee this purpose, in all the international
treaties which the Republic makes there shall be provided clauses
relative to resolving every difference by means of arbitration.”
It is, then, for my Government a source of real satisfaction to adhere to the
treaty of Paris of the date already indicated, which crystallizes the efforts of
the world in the elimination of war as a means of adjusting and resolving
the disputes between States.
I beg you to transmit to your Government the thanks which my Government
expresses for the invitation contained in the note under reference, as well as
the sympathy with which my Government has contemplated the valuable
contribution which your Government has given to the work of the guarantee
of the peace and of the progress of the world.

Rava Auze. SANCHEZ

©! Not printed.

[Document 170]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
BUENOS AIRES, September 10, 1928.
[Received October 4.]
No. 382
SIR: Referring to the closing paragraph of my despatch No. 378 of
September 4, regarding the Argentine Government’s attitude towards the
Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War, I have the honor to report
that a resolution was introduced in the Senate on Thursday, September 6, by
Señor Alejandro Ruzo, Senator from Catamarca, by the terms of which that
body would inform the Executive of the satisfaction with which it would
see Argentina adhere to the Multilateral Treaty and see her endeavor to
render the treaty effective.
The text of the resolution (which was also signed by Senators Teófilo
Sanchez de Bustamante, C. Vallejo and R. Gomez) and of the debate on the
subject which followed its introduction, are transmitted herewith in copy
and translation.68
Although the discussion on the subject in the Senate is rather lengthy, it is
important to transmit it in full that the Department may have accurate
examples of two opinions held by Argentines regarding the Kellogg Pact
which have a quite extensive support in Buenos Aires. I still find among
those opposed to Argentina’s adhering to the treaty an underlying but
definite objection based on wounded feelings because their country was not
included among the original signers.
Senator Ruzo in presenting his resolution warmly advocated the adhesion of
Argentina to the Treaty, and expressed surprise that there should be any
hesitancy or delay on her part in joining the rest of the world in such an
important effort to prevent war; he emphasized the pacific principles which

Argentina had always advocated and upheld, and pointed out that it was not
in accordance with her dignity or interest to be one of the last nations to
signify its adhesion to the Treaty. He laid considerable stress on Article 27
of the Argentine Constitution on the necessity of maintaining relations of
peace and commerce with foreign Powers by means of treaties, and drew
attention to the liberality, clearness and superiority of the Argentine
Constitution as compared with those of other Republics, even those
established since the World War.
The motion of Señor Ruzo was opposed by Dr. Molinari, Senator for the
Federal District, who has proved himself in this, his first, session the most
militant member of the Senate,—sometimes referred to as “L’enfant térrible
du Sénat”. Nevertheless, importance must be given to the opinions
expressed by Dr. Molinari on this occasion when he opened his remarks by
saying that he spoke in the name of the Unión Cívica Radical, “in the name
of the Government which was chosen at the elections of April 1,” and for
the man who is about to assume the presidency. It cannot be conceived that
Dr. Molinari would make such a statement without the authorization of
Señor Irigoyen, and the Senator’s opposition to the Pact and his reasons
may, therefore, be a fairly definite indication of President Irigoyen’s attitude
towards the Multilateral Treaty. Whether the dislike of the United States
which this speech reflects is only personal or whether it reflects the feelings
of the new President, I am not at present prepared to say.
Dr. Molinari based his opposition on the necessity of a careful study of the
reservations made in the preliminary negotiations of the Multilateral Treaty,
on the Monroe Doctrine and the intervention of the United States in
Nicaragua. He devotes much attention also to the failure of the United
States to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, a point to which he attaches
importance as indicating that Mr. Kellogg’s main object in proposing and
securing the signing of the Treaty was a purely internal political affair and
was lacking in any form of sincerity. And he contends that there is no need
for Argentina to sign any treaty to assure peace, for peace is understood by
Argentina, war in itself is illegal and the only international conflicts in
which Argentina has found itself in the past have been the result “of a
generous sentiment, a noble and lofty cause, the cause of America, the
cause of humanity!”

The Senate, after debating the resolution of Señor Ruzo, voted to refer the
matter to committee before which the Minister for Foreign Affairs would be
invited to appear to express the opinion of the Executive.
I have [etc.]
ROBERT WOODS BLISS
68 Not printed.

[Document 171]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, September 13, 1928.
[Received September 26.]
No. 520
honor to enclose herewith copies of the Note of the Albanian Minister for
Foreign Affairs expressing the desire of the Royal Government of Albania
to adhere to the multilateral treaty against war.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES C. HART
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Vrioni) to the American Minister (Hart)
TIRANA, September 8, 1928.
MR. MINISTER: In your Note numbered 203 and dated August 27 last, Your
Excellency was pleased to communicate the text of the treaty for the
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy, signed on that same
day at Paris, and asking me at the same time whether the Royal
Government would be inclined to adhere to the said pact.
With very earnest thanks to Your Excellency for that important
communication, I have the honor to inform you that the Royal Government,
upon a very profound sympathetic examination of Your Excellency’s note,
as well as of the text of the treaty thereto annexed, deems it its duty to do
homage to the generous thoughts which inspired the Government of the

United States on proposing the said pact, and to join in the congratulations
of that Government and of the other Powers signatory to the pact on that
grand manifestation of concord and international brotherhood that is so
comformable to the wishes and deep sentiments of the family of nations.
Albania, in view of its strong and constant attachment for the ideal of peace
will deem herself very happy to join heartily in this great common
undertaking destined to develop among the peoples the spirit of peace and
to bring new obstacles in the way of war.
It is, therefore, with a very keen pleasure that I hasten to declare to Your
Excellency that the Royal Government is ready to give its adhesion to the
Multilateral Anti-war Treaty, and is instructing its Minister in Washington,
Mr. Faik Konitza, to that effect.
ILIAS VRIONI

[Document 172]
The Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow) to the Secretary of State
MEXICO, September 14, 1928.
[Received September 20.]
No. 970
the receipt of a note from the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs in answer
to Ambassador Morrow’s note of August 27th, 1928, inviting the adherence
of the Mexican Government to the Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation
of War as an Instrument of National Policy, I have the honor to enclose a
copy and translation of the Mexican note accepting this invitation.
I have [etc.]
For the Ambassador:
H. F. ARTHUR SCHOENFELD
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Mexican Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Estrada) to the American Ambassador (Morrow)
MEXICO, September 14, 1928.
No. 12050
Mr. AMBASSADOR: I have received note No. 525 of August 27, last, in which
Your Excellency was pleased to inform me that on that day the
Governments of Germany, the United States of America, Belgium, France,
Great Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, the Irish Free
State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland and Czechoslovakia signed in Paris a treaty
binding them to renounce war as an instrument of national policy in their
relations with one another and to seek only by pacific means the settlement

or solution of all disputes which might arise among them. Your Excellency
goes on to state therein certain facts relating to the negotiations which led
up to said Treaty and that the United States has been anxious from the
beginning that no State should feel deprived of an opportunity to participate
in the new treaty, and thus not only align itself formally and solemnly with
this new manifestation of the popular demand for world peace, but also
avail itself of the same benefits enjoyed by the original signatories, to which
end there was included in the draft of the treaty proposed by the United
States a specific provision for the participation in the treaty of any and
every power desiring to identify itself therewith, which provision is found
in the definitive instrument signed in Paris. It is likewise observed that the
Powers signing the treaty have recorded in the preamble thereof their hope
that every nation of the world will participate in the treaty and that in this
connection Your Excellency is happy to be able to say that your
Government has already received from several Governments informal
indications that they are prepared to do so at the earliest possible moment.
Your Excellency adds that in view thereof you are pleased to communicate
officially for my consideration and the approval of the Mexican
Government the text of the treaty in question.
In reply and under instructions of the President of the Republic, I have the
honor to advise Your Excellency, begging that you so inform the
Government of the United States of America, that the Mexican Government
has been following with the greatest interest the course of the negotiations
which determined the conclusion of the treaty by which the signatory and
adhering! Powers condemn recourse to war for the solution of their
international controversies and renounce war as an instrument of national
policy in their relations with each other, binding themselves to seek only by
pacific means the settlement or solution of all disputes or conflicts.
Such a high ideal, as accurately expressed in Your Excellency’s note, is a
manifestation of the popular demand for world peace, always recognized by
the people and the Government of my country, which has never committed
an act of warlike aggression against any nation, nor incited the thought of
the Republic to war against any people.

Although this traditional conduct is universally recognized, I believe it
opportune, nevertheless, to mention the attitude of Mexico, not long ago, in
the matter of international war. During the International Meeting of
Lawyers held in Rio de Janeiro in 1927,71 in discussing the matter of
maritime neutrality, the Delegation of my country expressed itself in these
words: “The project of maritime neutrality is accepted by the Mexican
Delegation, because the policy of Mexico has always been not to intervene
in armed conflicts except in case of provocation.” At the same meeting, in
discussing the subject of diplomatic missions, the Mexican Delegation
asked that the word “war” be deleted from one of the clauses regarding the
termination of diplomatic representations, which, after some opposition,
was approved unanimously. Perhaps it was because of this that at the time
of the Sixth International American Conference at Habana72 the European
press stated that Mexico was the first country in America to advise the
condemnation of war.
In the Sixth International American Conference held the beginning of the
current year, Mexico expressed the same view as regards war. Thus, in
discussing the project regarding Treaties in the session of February 11, one
of the Delegates pointed out that said project was incomplete because it did
not contain provisions relating to the endurance (vigeneia) of treaties
entered into prior to a war between two nations and presented at the same
time a draft of several new articles; but the Mexican Delegation opposed
the inclusion of said articles, declaring that war should be proscribed in
America, and that all the international codification being elaborated at that
time related to the International Law of peace; adding that it would create
the worst kind of impression for the Conference to admit the possibility of
an impending war. It will be recalled that in accordance with the opinion of
Mexico, the proposal was withdrawn.
Mexico defined its attitude still further when its Delegation, in connection
with article 13 of the same project, relative to the intervention on the part of
a State responsible for the execution of a treaty, against one of the parties,
declared that said article was not acceptable to this country because it could
not admit the possibility of an intervention, stating in addition that Mexico
only admitted war in self defense. And in signing the Convention in

question, the Mexican Delegation made the reservation that under no
circumstances did it accept said article 13.
The Delegation of my country likewise declared before the Commission on
International Law that it was painful to observe that the Delegates of some
American countries were considering the possibility of war, and, therefore,
it proposed the following resolution, which was unanimously accepted by
the Conference:73
“The Sixth International American Conference:
“WHEREAS:
“The American nations should always be inspired to unified
cooperation with a view to justice and the general welfare;
“Nothing is so opposed to that cooperation as the use of violence;
“There is no international controversy, however serious, which
can not be peacefully settled if the parties really desire to reach a
peaceful solution;
“War of aggression is an international crime against the human
race;
“BE IT RESOLVED:
“I. That all aggression be considered illegal and be
therefore declared prohibited.
“II. That the American States employ all peaceful
means in settling disputes which may arise among
them.”
When that type of war called intervention was discussed, Mexico, through
its Delegation, was steadfast in its opposition to that principle, and ended by
presenting a motion against non-aggression (sic), categorically stating that
pacts such as that drawn up in Locarno and that conceived by President

Wilson when he endeavored, by means of an inter-American treaty, to
establish the fundamental bases of Pan-Americanism on the principles of
independence, non-aggression, arbitration, and neutrality in cases of civil
war, are indispensable in America.
At the time when the United States of America labored during said
Conference to introduce into matters related to arbitration the principle of
“the renunciation of war as an instrument of international policy”, Mexico
set out to establish the prohibition against any warlike aggression,
concurring, beforehand, with the opinions expressed by France in reserving
the right of legitimate self-defence, calling attention to the Locarno treaties
and expressing its desire for the universality of the system, a similarity
which reached such a point that the French Ambassador, in a note addressed
to the Department of State at Washington on March 30th, 1928, declared:
“In the relations between the states of the American Continent
there are similar difficulties which led the American Government
at the Pan-American Conference at Habana to approve a
resolution limited to the very terms ‘war of aggression’ which the
French Government felt compelled to use in characterizing the
renunciation to which it is requested to bind itself by means of a
multilateral treaty.”
On the other hand, it should be observed that the question of the
renunciation of war is linked, by its obvious nature, to that of arbitration,
for not only is it found expressed in the Pan-American resolution, but also
in the very Treaty for the Renunciation of War, for if Article 2 refers to the
solution by peaceful means, there can be no doubt that among these means
those most commonly employed are arbitration and its correlatives, such as
conciliation and mediation.
Accordingly, in view of the repeated declarations made by Mexico
considering war of aggression, offensive war, and, in general, the exercise
of international violence as reprehensible in the relations between peoples,
and in view also of its opinion, already stated, that there is no conflict,
however serious, which can not be settled by peaceful means, the President
of the Republic has instructed me to announce to Your Excellency, as I now
have the honor so to do, that the Government of Mexico accepts with

pleasure the invitation extended by the Government of the United States of
America to adhere to the Treaty against war signed in Paris on August 27th,
1928.
Since that Treaty provides that it shall come into effect as soon as the high
contracting parties shall have deposited in Washington the various
instruments of ratification; and announces, on the other hand, that as soon
as it shall have become effective it will be open to the adherence of the
other powers of the world, the latter also to deposit in Washington the
corresponding instruments of adherence, the Government of Mexico awaits
the announcement of the coming into effect of the Treaty, in order to take
the necessary steps which may formally establish its adherence,
contributing in this manner with a cordial spirit and loftiness of view to the
success of this new step of such moral importance in behalf of the peace of
the world.
Awaiting the documents which you have been good enough to promise me,
I avail myself [etc.]
G. ESTRADA
70 Not printed.
73 See Report of the Delegates of the United States of America to the Sixth
International Conference of American States, etc., p. 26.

[Document 173]
The Secretary of State to the Danish Minister (Brun)74
WASHINGTON, September 14, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge sthe receipt of your note, No. 122 of
September 1, 1928, in which you declare formally that the Danish
Government adheres to the General Pact for the Renunciation of War,
adding that this adherence will become complete when ratified in
accordance with the Danish Constitution. You further inform me that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs is prepared to submit the Treaty to the Danish
Parliament in the session which opens at the beginning of the month of
October next.
I take the greatest pleasure in informing you that your note has been
deposited with the Treaty and that I shall be happy to annex to it in due
course the notification from your Government of the Danish Parliament’s
ratification.
I shall be glad if you will transmit to your Government an expression of my
gratification at their prompt action with respect to the Treaty.
Within a few days I shall transmit to your Government, through the
American Legation at Copenhagen, two certified copies of the treaty for the
purpose of formal adherence.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
74 This note was followed as a precedent in preparing replies to notices of
adherence received from other governments.

[Document 174]
The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives in All
Countries Except Those Which Were Original Signatories of the
Treaty for the Renunciation of War
WASHINGTON, September 17, 1928.
SIRS: There are enclosed herewith two authenticated copies of the
multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war.75 You are instructed at the
earliest possible date, to submit these copies to the Government to which
you are accredited, stating that one copy is to be used for the purpose of
formal adherence, that the other is for the archives of the Government.
You should, when you deliver the copies of the treaty, point out either in a
note or orally, that the instrument of adherence may be executed
immediately in accordance with the constitutional or other legal procedure
of the government adhering. Should the Government to which you are
accredited find it more convenient to send full powers to its Ambassador or
Minister in Washington he could, of course, sign on behalf of his
Government. Such instrument of adherence, which corresponds to the
signature of the treaty, may be filed in Washington at any time before the
treaty formally goes into effect. In all cases where such adherence must be
ratified by the Congress, Parliament or other governmental body of the
country adhering, this may be done after the signing of the instrument of
adherence, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the adhering country,
and the Department of State notified immediately when such ratification
takes place. You should also notify in the same way the Government to
which you are accredited that when formal adherence is made and
adherence duly ratified, when this is necessary, it places the Government so
adhering and ratifying on exactly the same basis as that of the original
signatories, since the government so adhering and ratifying will receive the
full benefits of the treaty as soon as it becomes effective through the
ratification by the original signatories.

You will please keep the Department closely informed as to developments
in this matter.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 175]
The Chargé in Latvia (Sussdorff) to the Secretary of State
RIGA, September 18, 1928.
[Received October 1.]
No. 5564
SIR: Referring to the Department’s circular telegram of August 16, 11 p.m.,
honor to transmit herewith copies of a Note, dated August 30, 1928, from
the Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stating that as the International
Treaty signed at Paris on August 27, 1928, is in full conformity with the
national policy of Latvia, the Latvian Government has decided to adhere to
it and that this decision will in due course be submitted to the Saeima in
order to obtain the necessary ratification.
I have [etc.]
LOUIS SUSSDORFF, Jr.
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Latvian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Balodis) to the American Minister (Coleman)
[RIGA,] August 30, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s
note dated the 27th inst., containing the text of the international Treaty
signed at Paris on the same date and binding the Contracting Parties to
renounce war as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one
another and to seek only by pacific means the settlement or solution of all
disputes which may arise among them.

You were also good enough to inform me that the Treaty will be open to the
participation of every nation of the world.
As the Treaty is in full conformity with the national policy of this country, I
have the honour to announce to Your Excellency the decision of the Latvian
Government to adhere to this Treaty.
This decision will in due course be submitted to the Saeima in order to
obtain the constitutionally required ratification.
I avail myself [etc.]
A. BALODIS
76 Latter not printed.

[Document 176]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
MONTEVIDEO, September 18, 1928.
[Received October 11.]
No. 688
make report of the official notification by the Uruguayan Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the intention of his Government to adhere to the
multilateral Anti-War Pact. A copy and translation of his note are enclosed
herewith.
I have [etc.]
U. GRANT-SMITH
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Dominguez) to the American Minister (Grant-Smith)
MONTEVIDEO, September 7, 1928.
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s
Governments of Germany, the United States, Belgium, France, Great
Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, the Irish Free State,
India, Italy, Japan, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, signed on that day in Paris
a treaty by which they condemn recourse to war for the settlement of

international disputes, renouncing it as an instrument of national policy in
their relations between one another, and recognizing that the solution of all
disputes or litigations of whatever origin that might arise between them
shall be sought only by pacific means.
At the same time Your Excellency refers to the origin of this Pact, to the
procedure followed for its conclusion, to the broadening of its scope, and
expressing, thus, that you submit the text to the consideration of my
Government, with a view to its adhesion.
In reply, I have the honor to advise Your Excellency of the satisfaction with
which this Government has received that communication.
The principle sanctioned by the treaty has always guided our international
conduct, and we have never omitted any effort, nor has any opportunity
been neglected, that would afford an occasion to contribute towards its
establishment.
That the relations between states be always maintained within the limits of
law is an ideal deeply rooted in our people, which has sought to make it an
integral part of its own constitution.
The treaty which has just been signed in Paris, condemning as it does
recourse to force and insuring the pacific solution of disputes between
nations, can receive, therefore, only the most cordial reception, and it is for
this reason that this Government is disposed to favor the adhesion of
Uruguay, to which end it will initiate the appropriate constitutional steps.
I reiterate [etc.]
RUFINO T. DOMINGUEZ
77 Not printed.

[Document 177]
The Chargé in Siam (Bay) to the Secretary of State
BANGKOK, September 19, 1928.
[Received October 29.]
No. 100
informing the Department of the receipt of a note from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, dated September 18th, communicating the decision of the
Government of Siam to adhere without reservations to the multilateral
Treaty renouncing war, signed in Paris on August 27th last, and stating that
the formal instrument of adherence will be deposited at Washington by the
Siamese Minister there, in accordance with Article 3 of the Treaty.
There are now transmitted, for the information of the Department, a copy of
the note of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, dated September 18, 1928, and
a copy of the Legation’s acknowledgment thereof.79
I have [etc.]
CHARLES A. BAY
[Enclosure]
The Siamese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Traidos) to the American Chargé (Bay)
SARANROMYA PALACE, 18 September, 1928.
MONSIEUR LE CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of 27th August last, communicating for the consideration and
approval of my Government the text of the multilateral Treaty Renouncing

War, signed in Paris on 27th August last by the Government of the United
States of America and the Governments of Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Great Britain, India, The Irish Free
State, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Poland and South Africa.
In reply, I have much pleasure in informing you that His Majesty’s
Government is in full agreement with the high object of this treaty and will
adhere thereto without reservations and I shall in due course transmit, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3, for deposit at Washington,
through His Majesty’s Minister there, the formal instrument of adherence.
In asking you to be good enough to inform your Government of this
decision of His Majesty’s Government, I also request you to express its
appreciation of the opportunity to participate in this new movement for
world peace.
I avail myself [etc.]
TRAIDOS
78 Not printed.
79 Acknowledgment not printed.

[Document 178]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)
WASHINGTON, September 22, 1928.
No. 2908
SIR: With reference to the Department’s No. 272 of August 16, midnight,
please send to the Minister of Afghanistan at Paris a note as follows:
“I am instructed by my Government to send to you, for
transmission to your Government, two authenticated copies of the
Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War, signed at Paris on
August 27, last, one copy being for the archives of your
Government and the other for its use should it so desire, in its
formal adherence.
“I am also instructed by my Government to furnish, for the
information of your Government, a copy of a circular instruction
to the diplomatic agents of the United States accredited to
Governments other than the original signatories of the Treaty,
dated September 17, 1928.”
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 179]
The Haitian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Leon) to the American
Chargé in Haiti (Gross)80
[Translation]
PORT AU PRINCE, 22 September, 1928.
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of
August 27th last, under cover of which you communicated to me the text in
French and English of the Treaty signed at Paris on the 27th of last month,
whereby the High Contracting Parties solemnly declare in the name of their
respective peoples that they condemn recourse to war for the settlement of
international differences and renounce it as an instrument of national policy
in their mutual relations.
In the name of the Government of the United States and conformably to the
Treaty, you ask the Haitian Government in giving its adherence to the
Treaty to participate in the highly humanitarian work undertaken by the
signatory Powers for the perpetuation of peace in the world.
The Haitian Government has followed with interest the negotiations which
have resulted in the signing of this Treaty. In 1925 the Government of Haiti
hastened to sign the so-called Geneva Protocol for the pacific settlement of
differences between nations, thus manifesting its sincere attachment to the
cause of peace. The Government of the Republic, happy again to contribute
to the efforts made to outlaw war in international relations expresses the
most lively satisfaction in adhering to the Treaty of Paris the high moral and
Christian scope of which can not but be a title of honor for its signatories.
Accept [etc.]
CAMILLE J. LÉON

80 Copy transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch No.

[Document 180]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 25, 1928.
[Received November 12.]
No. 1676
P.M., and with reference to the Legation’s despatch No. 1635, of August 29,
1928,81 regarding the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war signed
in Paris on August 27, 1928, I have the honor to enclose a copy of the note
of September 13, 1928, in which the Nationalist Minister for Foreign
Affairs states that his Government has decided to adhere to the treaty
without delay.
The note was received by the Legation in English and in Chinese, both
versions being signed by Dr. Wang. The Chinese text, however, bears the
date of September 14th, which suggests that the English version was
composed first and subsequently rendered into Chinese.
As the Department will observe, Dr. Wang has seized the opportunity, in
concluding the note, to give further expression to sentiments which are very
familiar under present circumstances. He stated that his Government felt
that the signatory powers of the treaty would abide by its spirit and
“remove, at the earliest opportunity, all of China’s unequal treaties and
encroachments upon her sovereignty, as, for instance, the stationing of large
numbers of alien troops on her soil.”
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure]

The Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Wang) to the American Chargé (Perkins)
NANKING, September 13, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication
dated August 27 in which the Government of the United States of America
presents for my consideration and for the approval of my Government the
text of a treaty that was signed on the same day in Paris by the
Governments of Germany, the United States of America, Belgium, France,
Great Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, The Irish
Free State, India, Italy, Japan, Poland, and Czecho-Slovakia binding them to
renounce war as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one
another and to seek only by pacific means the settlement or solution of all
disputes which may arise among them.
The ideals which are embodied in this treaty of extraordinary significance
are the foundation on which the national life of the Chinese people is
constructed, and I wish, therefore, immediately to avail myself of this
opportunity to inform you that this impressive movement for the
perpetuation of universal peace and for the advancement of world
civilization, aroused our sympathetic interest from the very beginning and
that, in the present form as a definitive treaty, my Government has decided
to adhere to it without delay.
The Chinese Government and people feel deeply confident that the
interdependence of the different nations of the world is making it
increasingly manifest to all thinking minds that the renunciation of war and
a frank avowal of the need of friendly relations is the only means to save
civilization from the danger of destruction. We are, indeed, brought before
the supreme test whether, after those painful experiences of a few years ago
which still linger in our memory, we are not yet convinced of the absolute
necessity of a real spirit of mutual co-operation to guide us in our national
policies towards one another. It is therefore a source of profound
satisfaction to see that this action of momentous importance, so ably
sponsored by the United States of America, is receiving universal response.
As you are aware, the whole conception of life among my people centres
round the ideal of harmony. It is indeed difficult, if not impossible, to find

in all our thinkers a view of life which justifies conflict in any form as the
basis of a national policy; and I venture to think that it is this idea of
harmony and peace which accounts for the stability of our civilization and
the extraordinary length of our history. The present treaty to renounce war
is, in fact, a vindication of the teachings of our revered ancestors, and
especially as these teachings, which have been amplified by our late leader
Dr. Sun Yat-sen, so clearly embodied in such noble principles as “Universal
Justice” and “The Brotherhood of nations”, are also at the present moment
being applied in the building up of a new China, the Chinese people are
prepared to join with America and the other signatory Powers with more
than the usual enthusiasm in endeavoring to attain the noble ends of peace.
We are deeply sensible, however, that in order to make war really
impossible, it is necessary to eliminate all causes which are likely to give
rise to any international dispute, and to rigidly uphold the principle of
equality and mutual respect for territorial sovereignty among all nations.
My Government, therefore, firmly believes that the signatory powers will
abide by the spirit of the present treaty and remove, at the earliest
opportunity, all of China’s unequal treaties and encroachments upon her
sovereignty, as, for instance, the stationing of large numbers of alien troops
on her soil. For it is clear that a free and independent China is one of the
most vital factors, whereby permanent world peace may be promoted and
strengthened.
I avail myself [etc.]
CHENGTING T. WANG
81 Neither printed.

[Document 181]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs:
“I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I did not fail to
communicate to my Government the substance of your note of
September 14, 1928,83 in which you informed me that the
Mexican Government awaited the announcement of the coming
into effect of the general treaty for the Renunciation of War in
order to take the necessary steps formally to establish its
adherence. I am now instructed by my Government to express its
high appreciation of the gracious sentiments of Your Excellency
in regard to the Treaty.
“Adherence to this treaty may properly be completed by the
deposit with the Government of the United States of an
instrument of adherence in accordance with the constitutional
requirement of the adhering state in becoming party to treaties.
This procedure may be followed as soon as the Government of
Mexico desires. There is no need to await ratification by the
Powers which signed the Treaty on August 27. Adherences
completed prior to the instant when the treaty becomes effective
will automatically make adhering powers parties to the treaty at
that instant.
[“]My Government has instructed me to express its cordial hope
that the Government of Mexico will be among the first of the
countries which complete the process of adherence, thus
contributing to the prompt and universal acceptance of a treaty

which signalizes the deep and abiding friendship between our two
countries.”
KELLOGG
82 Not printed.

[Document 182]
The Chargé in Persia (Treat) to the Secretary of State
translator’s translation from the French has just been received from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“October 3rd, 1928.
Monsieur le Chargé d’Affaires: I have the honor to acknowledge
receipt of the note which his Excellency Mr. Hoffman Philip was
good enough to transmit to me on August 27th last and with
which was enclosed the text of the multilateral treaty against war
proposed by His Excellency Mr. Kellogg.
My Government, considering that the multilateral treaty signed at
Paris is in harmony with its constantly pacific policy and the
obligations imposed by the pact of the League of Nations on the
members thereof; assured on the other hand that the text of the
treaty does not contravene its right of legitimate defense; it being
understood moreover that the reservations made by certain
powers cannot under any circumstances or at any time create on
the part of Persia any obligation whatsoever to recognize anything
possible susceptible of contravening its territorial and maritime
rights and possessions, gives its cordial adhesion to the
international pact for the outlawry of war.
Please accept, et cetera. F. Pakrevan, Gérant of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.”
TREAT

82 Not printed.

[Document 183]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, October 8, 1928.
[Received October 27.]
No. 977
SIR: Supplementing the Embassy’s despatch No. 961, of September 24,
1928,84 I have the honor to enclose a translation from the Jiji Shimpo of an
article purporting to describe the attitude of the Privy Council with respect
to the Treaty to Outlaw War.84
The more moderate element in the Privy Council, it states, attach more
importance to the connotation of the word “peoples” than to the
interpretation of the phrase “in the names”, and they are satisfied that, in the
case under discussion, it can be construed to mean “states”. They are said,
however, to be of the belief that the construction placed by the Japanese
Government on this phrase should have been set forth publicly by Count
Uchida when he signed the Treaty. The article points out that some of the
Privy Councillors have taken a more uncompromising attitude and contend
that the Treaty as it stands should not be ratified. The present consensus of
opinion among the press, in the Foreign Office, and in non-official quarters
is that the failure of the Government to obtain a formal and open
understanding with respect to its interpretation of Article 1 of the Treaty,
and perhaps the Treaty itself, will be subjected to a severe attack when the
Treaty is submitted to the Privy Council, but that the Privy Council will
eventually recommend its ratification but attach a vote of censure of the
Government.
According to the Tokyo Hochi, the organ of the principal opposition party,
the members of the Privy Council are also exercised over the possibility
that China’s adherence to the Treaty to Outlaw War may be construed as
implying Japan’s recognition of the Nationalist Government as the

Government of China, the reports that the law officers of the Department of
State were of the opinion that the conclusion of the Customs Treaty
constituted recognition of the Nationalist Government, and that Senator
Borah had stated that adherence to the Treaty to Outlaw War by Russia
implied recognition by the United States of the Soviet Government as the
Government of Russia, having apparently drawn attention to this question.
The Foreign Office is reported to have admitted that the adoption by the
United States, Great Britain and France of the doctrine that, adherence to a
multi-lateral treaty of Governments to which previous recognition had not
been accorded constituted recognition, would have to be considered by
Japan. “However,” an official in the Foreign Office is quoted as saying,
“Japan’s diplomatic relations with China occupy a most important place in
the formulation of her foreign policies, and in view of her particular
interests in China Japan must adopt some appropriate measure which will
fit in with the complicated relations existing between the two countries. The
following questions must be answered: Should Japan, in the present
circumstances, ratify a treaty to which China has adhered? Would it be
possible to ratify the Treaty with the reservation that the obligations created
by the Treaty shall not exist in respect of China so long as Japan withholds
recognition from the Nationalist Government?”
No opportunity has as yet been offered to ascertain the correctness of the
report, and I do not wish, therefore, to comment upon it at length. However,
if it has any basis in fact, it should be examined, in my opinion, in the light
of the controversies between the Japanese and Nationalist Governments
over the abrogation by the Chinese of the Sino-Japanese Commercial Treaty
and the Tsinan Incident, and of the numerous other issues which combine to
complicate the relations between the two countries. The Nationalist
Government would undoubtedly draw great satisfaction from its recognition
by the Japanese Government, as it apparently did from its recognition by a
country of so little importance as Cuba. It is, therefore, reasonable to
suppose that the Japanese Government is counting upon the recognition
hitherto withheld as one of the means of inducing the Nationalists to
assume a more concessive attitude, and that it would be loath, particularly
at the present conjuncture, when signs are evident of a resumption of
negotiations over the Commercial Treaty, to give any evidence of
acceptance of the present Nationalist regime.

Eown L. Nevite

84 Not printed.
84 Not printed.

[Document 184]
The Minister in Hungary (Wright) to the Secretary of State
BUDAPEST, October 9, 1928.
[Received October 23.]
No. 276
transmitted verbatim the principal portions of the English translation
furnished by the Hungarian Foreign Office accompanying the note in
French of the Minister for Foreign Affairs dated October 6 and received on
October 8, notifying me of the adherence of the Hungarian Government to
the Treaty for the Renunciation of War, I have the honor to transmit
herewith copies of the signed French text as well as of the aforesaid English
translation furnished by the Foreign Office.
As reported in my aforesaid telegram the English translation, with the
exception of the phrases to which I called attention in my telegram, is a fair
translation of the French text, although its text evidences, perhaps,
unfamiliarity with the finer expressions of English phraseology: I have
deemed it wiser, however, not to amend or alter the translation except for
the two insertions in the ante-penultimate paragraph.
Minister for Foreign Affairs, requested several days ago that I call upon him
on the afternoon of October 5 in order that he might speak to me before the
meeting of the Council of Ministers to be held later on that day. It transpired
at that time that the subject of the conversation was the treaty. He began by
stating that he desired to apologize for the delay that had ensued in replying
to my note of August 27th last, inviting Hungary’s adherence to the
Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War which he said was due—as
he had implied in our conversation on August 25th last—to his prolonged
absence in Geneva and the absence from Budapest of the Regent, the Prime

Minister, and many of the Cabinet. He then stated that the text of a note
communicating to me Hungary’s adherence to the Pact had been prepared,
had been approved by the Regent and would be discussed at the Council of
Ministers that afternoon; that he desired informally to advise me of the
general tenor of that note and offered to read me that text which he said was
both in French and English. I stated that I would much prefer to avoid the
possible embarrassment of reading a note which might be slightly changed
by the Council—an attitude which he appeared to appreciate—and he
thereupon informed me as follows:
The Hungarian Government was entirely in sympathy with this great
accomplishment of the Secretary of State in procuring an official statement
of the desire of all signatory nations to renounce war; he emphasized the
point that the Government of Hungary had no thought of war but that they
were constrained to assume that the principle of the disavowal of war would
be followed by the signatory Powers in the fullest conception of the
principle. He observed that the present situation in this portion of Europe,
however, was such as to render it incumbent upon the Hungarian
Government to make “certain observations” concerning events and
conditions which vitally affect Hungary and which, if the present
“unbearable” conditions continue, cannot but lead to increased friction. He
particularly emphasized the fact, however, that the Hungarian Government
was not thinking of war, nor did these “observations” amount to
“reservations”: in fact he clearly intimated that the Government was making
every effort to avoid either a tone of belligerency or an inference of
reservations in its observations concerning a situation which it deemed
unbearable.
He stated that the note would hardly be ready for signature before late on
Saturday—a semi-holiday—and it was therefore determined that it would
be delivered to me on the morning of Monday, October 8th, and that if
agreeable to me the text thereof would be given to the Hungarian press for
publication on the morning of Tuesday, October 9th.
I inquired whether I might at once inform my Government that the note
expressing Hungary’s adherence would be forthcoming on that date, with
the understanding that announcement of Hungary’s adherence would not be

made by us before that time. He said that I was quite at liberty to do so, and
my telegram of October 6 was based upon this conversation.
In order that the Department may be in possession of these texts at the
earliest possible moment I transmit them immediately by open mail. The
press comments upon this note, the text of which appeared in all Hungarian
papers this morning, according to the arrangement, will be transmitted in
due course.
I have [etc.]
J. BUTLER WRIGHT
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Hungarian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Walko) to the American Minister (Wright)
BUDAPEST, October 6, 1928.
MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: In reply to your Excellency’s kind note Nr. 88 of August 27,
a. c. and in connection with my note of September 1, I have the honor to
inform Your Excellency of the following:
The Government of the United States is aware of the fact, that after the
World War Hungary was forced to sign a peace treaty which had not been
preceded by the negotiations customary on such occasion and which, being
the issue of erroneous presuppositions, created an unjust situation.
The situation arisen in consequence of this treaty of peace has not been able
to assure the tranquillity, and is impeding the development, of the different
nations in this part of Europe. The events of the ten years which have
elapsed since the end of the War furnish evident proof that this peace treaty
cannot be a suitable basis for natural and peaceful development.
It follows from the teaching of History that where ever in the past the
relations between nations were not determined by the exigencies of justice
and reason, sooner or later forcible clashes occurred. The generous and

humanitarian intentions of the policy of the United States, which are
evidenced by its proposal to renounce war, elicit the highest appreciation of
the Hungarian Government, because that policy purports the elimination of
such clashes and of the horrors of war from the lives of nations. However, it
is natural that this endeavour can not lead to satisfactory results unless, war
being eliminated, the nations could dispose of some different yet efficacious
means for the solution of crises evolved from unjust and unnatural
conditions.
The Hungarian Government adheres to the proposal of the Government of
the United States under the supposition that the Government of the United
States as well as the Governments of the other signatory Powers, will seek
to find the means (of) rendering (it) possible that in the future injustices
may be remedied by peaceful means.
The Hungarian Government will in due time take the necessary measures to
assure that its adherence attain full legal validity in accordance with the
rules of the Hungarian Constitution.
Pray accept [etc.]
WALKO
86 Not printed.
86 Not printed.

[Document 185]
The Chargé in Bolivia (Horn) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, October 12, 1928.
[Received October 30.]
No. 58
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction of September
17, 1928, (no file number), and to transmit herewith an authenticated copy
of the Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War containing the
instrument of adherence of the Republic of Bolivia. The Department will be
notified by cable as soon as the Bolivian Congress has taken action upon
the ratification of this treaty.
This despatch is in confirmation of this Legation’s telegram No. 46 of
I have [etc.]
THOMAS S. HORN
[Enclosure—Translation]
Declaration of Adherence by the Cabinet Council of Bolivia to the Treaty for the Renunciation of War
LA PAZ, October 11, 1928.
The Cabinet Council, upon examination of the text of the Treaty signed in
Paris August 27 of this year by the Governments of Germany, the United
States, Belgium, France, Great Britain, Ireland, and the British territories,
Italy, Japan, and Czechoslovakia, the said States obligating themselves to
renounce war as an instrument of their national policy in their reciprocal
relations of any origin and solemnly engaging to seek by pacific means,
without resorting to war, the solution or settlement of all the disputes that

may arise between them, and the invitation which, through his Excellency
David E. Kaufman, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
the United States of North America was received by the Government of
Bolivia from the Government of North America to adhere to the said Treaty,
considering:
That Bolivia finds that the formula fully agrees with the yearnings for peace
and fraternity which it has always upheld, and that the tendencies, ideas and
guarantees harmonize with the traditional policy of peace and friendship
pursued by the Government of Bolivia;
That under Article 38 [3] of the Multilateral Treaty, it will remain open,
immediately upon going into effect, for such time as may be deemed
necessary for the adhesion of the other nations of the world;
RESOLVES: The Republic adheres to the Treaty signed in Paris by the
Governments of Germany, the United States, Belgium, France, Great
Britain, Ireland, the British Territories, Italy, Japan and Czechoslovakia,
renouncing war as an instrument of their national policy in their mutual
relations, and engaging to seek through pacific means the solution or
settlement of all the disputes that may arise between them, and it shall be
referred to the National Congress for its constitutional approval.88
H. SILES
A. PALACIOS
MARIANO ZAMBRANA
A. SOLARES
DAMIAN Z. REJAS
HÉCTOR SUÁREZ R.
88 The adherence was not ratified by the Bolivian Congress.

[Document 186]
The Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:35 p.m.]
September 26, 4 p.m.
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Estrada brought up in a conversation
with Schoenfeld and myself last Friday evening what seemed to him an
inconsistency between article 3 of the multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war and the notes which we had sent him on September 24
and September 28 with reference to the method of adherence to be adopted
by parties other than the original signatories.
The Acting Minister stated that from the language of the treaty itself it
appeared that it was to go into force as between the contracting parties as
soon as their several instruments of ratification shall have been deposited in
Washington and that the treaty “when it has come into effect as prescribed”
shall remain open for adherence by other powers. Acting Minister Estrada
seemed to be of the opinion that the procedure we had invited the Mexican
Government to follow in our two notes of September 24 and 28,
respectively, is in conflict with this provision of the treaty regarding
adherence. The Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs pointed out to us that in
his note of September 14 accepting the invitation of the United States
Government to adhere to the treaty, copy of which note was transmitted to
the Department within the Embassy’s despatch number 970 of September
14, he had deliberately used the language of article 3 on the subject of
procedure to be followed in adhering thereto. He asked us if it was desired
that he should answer our notes of September 24 and 28, respectively. He
stated that he was willing to do this if we desired but if he answered such
notes he feared it might involve an academic discussion which might be
interpreted as having a significance it would not possess. If we agreed with

him in this respect he suggested that the notes of September 24 and 28 be
withdrawn allowing the Mexican Government to send its instrument of
adherence to Washington without further delay. We advised him that we
would submit the matter to the Department for instructions.
MORROW
to the Mexican Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs in accordance with

[Document 187]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
46. I received your despatch of September 10th enclosing a copy of a
speech of Senator Molinari. The speech is a very able and interesting one. I
think the Senator has some misapprehensions about the negotiations and
effect of the Treaty.
I fully appreciate what he says about the pacific intentions of Argentina. I
know, of course, that the Government and the people of Argentina are
devoted to the principle of world peace and that it is not necessary for
Argentina to sign a treaty not to go to war in order that its influence may be
cast on the side of peace and justice. No country has gone further to
demonstrate this than has Argentina in her past history. She has gone further
than most countries in making arbitration treaties which are intended to
settle difficulties between nations without resort to war. Argentina can
undoubtedly add great weight to the Multilateral Treaty by signing it. She is
one of the great nations of the Western Hemisphere and influential in world
affairs.
There are some suggestions in his speech which I think I can demonstrate
spring from a want of knowledge of our local conditions. The Treaty was
not proposed or signed with any idea of affecting our local political
conditions or the elections of 1928. M. Briand proposed a bilateral treaty in
exactly this same language in 1927 and the negotiations have been going on
ever since until shortly before the signing. I am sending you some copies of
the pamphlet which contain all the negotiations between the countries on
the subject of this Treaty. There were no secret papers or conversations.
Everything was made public as we proceeded. The principles of the Anti-
War Treaty were endorsed both by the Democratic and by the Republican
National Conventions and it is not an issue in this campaign nor has it been
mentioned by either party as it is generally understood to meet the approval

of all political parties. It is true the United States did not ratify the Versailles
Treaty and the League of Nations. It is unnecessary for me to review the
history of this struggle which did to some extent become a political issue.
One thing might be said in passing—that the United States was unwilling to
commit itself to the application of sanctions or to use force against any
belligerent country, that is, it cannot pledge its armed forces in advance.
There were other objections to the Treaty which do not in my judgment
bear upon the present Treaty at all.
A brief history of these negotiations might be useful to you although I
présumé you are very familiar with them. As you know, M. Briand made a
public speech in April, 1927 in which he announced that France would be
willing to enter into a treaty agreeing that the two countries should never go
to war with each other. On June 27, 1927, he sent me a note containing the
form of a treaty proposed which is exactly in the language of the present
Treaty with the exception of the preamble and such changes as were
necessary to make it applicable to all the nations of the world. This
proposition was given the most careful consideration not only by myself but
by the President and many Senators, especially those of the Foreign
Relations Committee, and on the twenty-seventh of December, 1927, I
replied to Briand’s note accepting the principle but suggesting that it be
applied to other nations. The intention then was and always has been that
the Treaty should ultimately, if possible, be signed by all countries in the
world thus making a notable declaration against war as a means of settling
international disputes. I think some misunderstanding has occurred by
reason of the fact that negotiations were not opened with all the countries in
the world and especially with the leading nations of South America. There
were no secret communications between the French Government and the
United States or between the United States and any Government pertaining
to this Treaty. I did not then believe, and do not now, that there was the
necessity for such a treaty in Central and South America as in Europe. That
was the seat of the last great war and the seeds of war were existent in
Central Europe to a greater extent than in any other place in the world. I
think it is an acknowledged fact that there is little danger of war in South
America or anywhere in the Western Hemisphere. Nevertheless, it was my
opinion then, and still is, that a declaration signed by all the countries in the
world would have a greater influence, especially a greater moral influence,

than one signed only by European countries. I did not think it was practical
to undertake a negotiation with sixty-five nations. The time consumed in
correspondence and discussion of various points would have made the
project difficult if not impossible of solution within a reasonable time. I
believed that if a treaty could be entered into between the principal Powers
of Europe which was simple and did not involve any complicated system of
sanctions or agreement to punish violators, that it would be readily accepted
as a principle of international law by all the world. It was, therefore,
thought wise to select six of the Powers involved in the last war—to wit,
Japan, Great Britain, Germany, France, Italy, and the United States—and
accordingly negotiations were carried on with these countries. It is not a
fact that Great Britain was the country which suggested that the Treaty be
open to adhesion by all countries. That was my proposition originally and
acquiesced in by France before Great Britain was called into the
negotiations.
The only suggestion of extending the original signatories came from Great
Britain and France in this way. Great Britain, as you will see, informed the
United States that it could not sign for its Dominions and requested the
United States to invite the Dominions directly sending the invitations to
Canada and Ireland which countries had Ministers in the United States, and
the other invitations to go through the British Government to the various
Dominions. I realized that under the British Dominion system this was
necessary and readily assented. I think, as I have explained to you before,
France and Great Britain also raised the question as to whether the Treaty
would be inconsistent with the obligations of the treaties entered into by
Great
Britain,
Belgium,
Germany,
France,
Italy,
Poland,
and
Czechoslovakia, known as the Locarno Treaties. Under these Treaties the
countries agree not to go to war but if any one of the Powers should violate
the Locarno Treaties, the other Powers agreed to come to the assistance of
the aggrieved State and as this was construed by some of the countries to
include armed assistance, a question was raised as to whether an absolute
agreement not to go to war would be inconsistent with this obligation. In
substance my reply was that if all the Locarno Powers signed this Treaty
and they break the Locarno Treaty, they would necessarily break this Treaty
and the other Powers would be released as to the belligerent country and

would thereby retain their freedom of action. For that reason and no other,
Belgium, Poland and Czechoslovakia were asked to sign and readily did so.
Senator Molinari suggested that the notes indicated that the Treaty was not
inconsistent with the various treaties of neutrality and other secret treaties in
Europe. I know of no secret treaties on this subject at all. All of the League
Powers agree to file their treaties with the League and I believe we have all
treaties bearing on this subject. The European Powers abandoned any idea
that there was any inconsistency between their treaties guaranteeing
neutrality and the Multilateral Treaty. Of course, all these Powers having
signed the present Treaty, there could be no inconsistency because it is
perfectly true that if any one violates the Locarno Treaties or any treaty
guaranteeing neutrality, they would violate this Treaty also and the nations
would be free to exercise their own volition as to the belligerent Power.
Certainly this Treaty does not guarantee any other treaty in the world. It
supplements the efforts made by other countries to maintain peace by a
pledge of the nations of the world to this effect.
There are those who will undoubtedly claim that the best way to maintain
peace is by military alliances, agreements between countries to punish a
violator of the treaty, to apply sanctions or to use military force to put down
any conflict between nations. That is not my opinion. I do not think military
alliances have conduced to the peace of Europe. I do not believe
independent nations will delegate to any authority the power to call for
military forces or to require a nation to go to war for any purpose.
[Paraphrase.] I realize that this is an important step which should be
carefully considered by the Argentine Government, and I do not wish to
press Argentina in the matter. I would be very much pleased if all Central
and South American countries adhered to the treaty. It would, I think, add
greatly to its influence in the world, although I know the present world
opinion is that South America is, as a whole, inclined to peace and not so
likely to engage in war as other parts of the world. There is no objection to
your conveying to Señor Molinari the substance of this message should you
consider it wise, but I should not care to have it left as a memorandum.
[End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 188]
The Minister in Ethiopia (Southard) to the Secretary of State
ADDIS ABABA, October 29, 1928.
[Received November 28.]
No. 86
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s circular instruction of
September 17th, 1928, enclosing two authenticated copies of the
multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war, and indicating that the
instrument of adherence might be executed immediately in accordance with
the legal procedure of the Ethiopian Government.
Promptly upon receipt of these copies a few days ago I took up with the
Ethiopian Government the matter of adherence and ratification.
As reported by telegraph to the Department on October 28th, 1928,91 His
Majesty, King Tafari, on that date sealed, signed and ratified the treaty. The
act of sealing and signing by His Majesty constitutes also complete and
final ratification in accordance with existing legal procedure of the
Ethiopian Government.
One copy of the sealed, signed, and ratified treaty is forwarded herewith.
The Amharic inscription on the seal reads in English:
“King Tafari, Heir to the Throne and Regent Plenipotentiary of
the Empire of Ethiopia.”
Translation of the Amharic inscription or writing under the seal is as
follows:
“Seal affixed, signed, and approved (adhered to), Tekemt 18th,

behalf of the Government of the Empire of Ethiopia. (Signed).
Tafari Makonnen.”
The three parenthetical words or phrases above are my own, added to make
clearer the translation from the Amharic. There is no exact term in Amharic
for “adhere” or “act of adherence”. Approved, accepted, and similar words,
have the same meaning in Amharic as does adhere in English. The seal also
legally establishes adherence. By the Ethiopian calendar the current year is
1921 A. D. The corresponding date by our own calendar is given in
parentheses immediately following the Ethiopian date.
Each Ethiopian official has his own special seal for legalizing and
authenticating his signature. Only the Empress, the King, and the Abouna
(head of the state church) may place their seals above or before the
inscription or signature. All others place the seal below and after the
inscription and signature.
I have [etc.]
ADDISON E. SOUTHARD
91 Not printed.

[Document 189]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Gunther)
WASHINGTON, October 30, 1928.
No. 14
enclosing a copy and a translation of a note from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs dated September 3, 1928, in which the statement is made that the
Egyptian Government declares fully to adhere to the treaty for the
renunciation of war, just as it was signed at Paris without the adherence
being at any time construed as an admission of any reserve whatever made
on the subject of this pact. It is desired that you hand the following note to
the Minister of Foreign Affairs:
“I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I did not fail to
communicate to my Government the text of your note in which
you informed me that the Egyptian Government has decided to
adhere to the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war. I have
now been directed by my Government to express its pleasure in
this decision and its appreciation for the friendly sentiments of
Your Excellency in regard to the treaty.”
For your information and use if occasion require, it may be stated that
complete adherence to this treaty may, as provided in Article III thereof,
properly be evidenced by the deposit with the Government of the United
States of an Act of adherence in accordance with the legal requirements of
Egypt. To this end, an authenticated copy of the treaty was sent to you on
September 17, 1928, for delivery to the Egyptian Government for that
Government’s convenience in preparing its Act of adherence. Another
authenticated copy was at the same time sent to you for the archives of the
Egyptian Government. There is no need to await ratification by the Powers
which signed the Treaty on August 27. The deposit of Acts of adherence

with the Government of the United States prior thereto will automatically
make adhering powers parties to the treaty at the instant the treaty becomes
effective.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 190]
The Minister in Denmark (Dodge) to the Secretary of State
COPENHAGEN, October 30, 1928.
[Received November 21.]
No. 647
the date of the receipt of your Circular Instruction, dated September 17th
last, File No. —, namely on the 5th instant, I addressed a note to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs enclosing the two authenticated copies of the
Multilateral Treaty for the Renunciation of War for the Government of
Iceland and embodying the substance of your Instruction, I now have the
honor to enclose herewith a copy and translation of a note from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, dated the 29th instant, which I have received to-day in
reply.
It will be observed that this note states that a formal declaration of adhesion
of Iceland to the Treaty, while reserving its ratification, has been endorsed
upon one of the authenticated copies which was forwarded on the 29th
instant to the Danish Minister in Washington with instructions to transmit it
to the Department for deposit, in accordance with Article 3 of the said
Treaty.93
I have [etc.]
H. PERCIVAL DODGE
[Enclosure—Translation94 ]
The Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Moltesen) to the American Minister (Dodge)
COPENHAGEN, October 29, 1928.

MR. MINISTER: Referring to your note dated the 5th of this month relative to the
multilateral treaty to renounce war, I have the honor to inform you that in
order to conform to the desire expressed in your note, I have placed today in
the name of Iceland on one of the certified copies which accompanied your
note the following declaration:
“In the name of Iceland, the undersigned Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Denmark, who is charged with the management of the
foreign affairs of Iceland, in accordance with the Danish-
Icelandic Act of Union, while reserving its ratification, has
adhered to the treaty of which a certified copy precedes.”
This act has been forwarded today to the Danish Minister in Washington
with instructions to transmit it to the Department of State with a view to its
deposit in conformity with article 3 of the said treaty.
The Minister of Denmark has also been instructed to draw the attention of
the Department of State to the declaration of permanent neutrality in article
the Government of the United States was notified by the note of the
Pray accept [etc.]
L. MOLTESEN
92 Not printed.
printed.
94 File translation revised.
95 Not printed.

[Document 191]
The Chargé in Colombia (Matthews) to the Secretary of State
BOGOTÁ, November 2, 1928.
[Received November 24.]
No. 1450
previous correspondence concerning the multilateral treaty for the
renunciation of war I have the honor to transmit herewith in order that the
Department’s records may be complete a copy and translation of a Note
from the Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs dated October 25th
informing me that he had submitted the aforesaid treaty to the Colombian
Congress, and a copy of my acknowledgment thereof dated October 31st. I
shall inform the Department by telegraph if, and when, the Colombian
Congress authorizes adherence to the treaty.
I have [etc.]
H. FREEMAN MATTHEWS
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Uribe) to the American Chargé (Matthews)
BOGOTÁ, October 25, 1928.
MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: With reference to the esteemed note of His Excellency,
20th of the present month with which you sent me copies of the multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war, I have the honor to inform you that in
accordance with what I had the pleasure of advising the Honorable Legation
in my communication of August 28th, I have today presented to the

National Congress a bill, to which this Ministry attaches the greatest
importance, authorizing the Government to adhere to the pact in question.
In accordance with the constitutional provisions of Colombia, once this law
has been approved by the Congress in the regulatory debates, the
Government will be able to proceed formally to adhere to the pact in the
manner established in Article 3 thereof, and indicated in the notes of the
Honorable Legation.
I avail myself [etc.]
CARLOS URIBE
95 Not printed.

[Document 192]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)
your notes of September 24 and 28 were based, are to be interpreted as
follows:
1. The giving by a Government of a notice of adherence to the
Multilateral Peace Pact, subject to ratification according to its
own constitutional or legal requirements, will be regarded as
corresponding to the signature of the Pact by the signatory States
and as placing the notifying State on the same basis as signatory
States, requiring of the notifying State ratification of the
adherence in accordance with its constitutional or legal
requirements the same as signatory States are required to ratify.
2. It is not necessary for adhering States to await going into force
of the treaty in order to give such notice, or to withhold until then
deposit of the final formal act of adherence, which is the
equivalent of ratification by a signatory State, any more than it
would be necessary for a signatory Government to withhold
deposit of its act of ratification until all signatories are prepared to
deposit.
3. Act of ratification by a signatory Government may be
deposited at Washington at any time, and will become effective
when the treaty comes into force by ratification; of all the
signatory Governments. So, in the same manner, formal acts of
adherence
by
non-signatory
Governments,
perfected
in
accordance with their respective constitutional or legal
requirements, may be deposited at any time, and if they are

deposited before the date the treaty comes into force they also
will become effective on that date.
4. Department regarded the Mexican Government’s note of
September 14 as notice of adherence of the character referred to
in paragraph 1 above. If, as would appear to be the case by your
cablegram, the Mexican Government desires to deposit its
perfected
instrument
of
adherence
at
Washington,
the
Government of the United States will be happy now to receive it
in accordance with the foregoing statement.
5. This Government regards the procedure whereby a notice of
adherence is given and ratification deposited by a non-signatory
power before the treaty comes into force as an alternative to and
as consistent with the procedure whereby such formal acts of
adherence are deposited after the treaty comes into force between
the signatory powers, in view of which interpretation no reason is
seen for withdrawal of your notes of September 24 and 28 which,
if Mexican Government so desires, may be merely acknowledged
by that Government.
KELLOGG

[Document 193]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
79. This afternoon during a call on President Irigoyen to bid him good-bye I
brought up the subject of the anti-war treaty. He distinctly gave me to
understand that his mind was made up; that the treaty was not one which
appealed to him as a means of bringing about universal peace. He dwelt for
some time on President Wilson’s aspiration to create a League of Nations as
a means for the prevention of war, and said that he had gladly responded to
it but that when he realized the League was incapable of accomplishing
President Wilson’s idea he had withdrawn from it. As President of
Argentina, he said further, he would welcome any suggestion from the
United States which might be made for a meeting of the powers for
establishment of peace; his feelings toward the United States were most
friendly but he felt that, although he was quite sympathetic to the theory
presented by the anti-war treaty, it did not offer the possibilities for
realizing universal peace which had always been the ideal and the policy of
Argentina.
The foregoing is, in brief, the position the President took, and although I
endeavored to controvert it I do not feel that I made any impression which
would cause a change in his attitude.
After the interview, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was also present,
insisted that the President’s attitude should not in any way be interpreted as
a lack of consideration for the United States. Both President Irigoyen and he
were most amicably disposed toward the United States, but they did not
wish to be parties to a movement which in their view would not realize the
ideals which Argentina has always held.

This morning I also had a talk with Senator Molinari and gathered that his
objection to Argentina’s adhering to the anti-war treaty is based on United
States policy of intervention in the Caribbean republics. I set forth the
him for over an hour, but his attitude appears to be dominated by sentiment
that our position is equivocal as long as United States troops remain in
Nicaragua.
To make this unfavorable report is a deep disappointment to me, but I am
satisfied that in view of President Irigoyen’s well-known tenacity no further
representations on my part in the immediate future would cause him to
change his mind. I pee no reason, therefore, why I should delay my sailing
longer. As I expect to reach Washington about the middle of December I
shall report the matter in more detail then.
BLISS

[Document 194]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, November 17, 1928.
[Received December 19.]
No. 666
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith, in copy and translation,
Paraguay’s official acceptance of the Multilateral Treaty for the
Renunciation of War. Advice of the adhesion had been telegraphed to the
Department on November 12,97 at which time the President of the Republic,
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs informed the American Minister of their
acceptance.
Among my colleagues the Paraguayan adhesion is considered a diplomatic
triumph. Chile did not desire acceptance to be given and its Minister must
be greatly disappointed.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs believes that with the proper approach
Brazil will accept and likewise withdraw from the entente against the pact.
The writer is pleased to render such a report, and also to advise that
President Guggiari stated there would be no question of its ratification at
the coming session of Congress in April.
I have [etc.]
GEO. L. KREECK
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zubizarreta) to the American Minister (Kreeck)
ASUNCIÓN, November 17, 1928.

No. 904
MR. MINISTER: Referring to my note No. 618 of August 29 last, it is my duty to
inform you that my Government accepts the treaty signed in Paris the 27th
of August of this year, and by which the signatory Governments oblige
themselves to renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their
relations among themselves, and to seek only by pacific means the
arrangement or solution of every dispute that may arise among them, and
that the project of adhesion of Paraguay to the said treaty will be submitted
to the approval of the National Congress at an opportune time.
I avail myself [etc.]
G. ZUBIZARRETA
97 Telegram not printed.

[Document 195]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Neville)
[Paraphrase]
1. In your despatch under reference, the Department has noticed
the statement that law officers of the Department of State are
reported as being of opinion that conclusion of the customs treaty
with the Nationalist Government in China constituted recognition
of that Government.
2. The Government of the United States considers that the signing
by the United States of a bilateral treaty, such as was signed by
the Government of the United States and the Nationalist
Government in China, implies recognition. This Government does
not consider that adherence by an unrecognized Government to a
multilateral treaty of which the Government of the United States
is a signatory or to which it is a party entails recognition by this
Government. To attribute to the Government of the United States
the “doctrine” in the third paragraph of your despatch under
reference is erroneous. The adherence of the other Government is
its unilateral act. Recognition is a matter primarily of intention,
and intention on the part of the Government of the United States
to recognize such other Government can not be imputed to this
Government by an act of the other Government.
3. It is for the Japanese Government, of course, to decide what the
action would be on its part that would constitute recognition of
the Chinese Nationalist Government, and also whether ratification
by Japan of the treaty for the renunciation of war to which China

has adhered would constitute recognition of the Nationalist
Government in China.
4. The Department is sending you this statement of the position of
this Government for your information and discreet use.
5. With reference to the suggested reservation, the Department
desires you to telegraph promptly if there is any likelihood that it
will be seriously considered.
KELLOGG

[Document 196]
The Chargé in Salvador (Dickson) to the Secretary of State
SAN SALVADOR, November 19, 1928.
[Received December 6.]
No. 1402
Department that the Government of El Salvador “is disposed to adhere” to
the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war, I have the honor to report
that in accordance with the Department’s unnumbered and undated circular
instruction, two authenticated copies of the treaty in question were duly
transmitted to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador.
I have now received a reply, copy and translation of which are hereto
attached,99 stating that this “Government will, at an opportune time, issue
the respective resolution on this so important matter”.
The Department will, of course, be kept informed of developments.
I have [etc.]
SAMUEL S. DICKSON
98 Not printed.
99 For the Afghan text and the French translation with the French
observations thereon, see Department of State, Treaty for the Renunciation
of War, pp. 114–117.

[Document 197]
The French Ambassador (Claudel) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, November 27, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: My Government has just sent me, with a request that I
transmit it to Your Excellency, the instrument by which the Government of
Afghanistan declares its adhesion to the pact against war, signed in Paris
August 27, last, the text of which had been communicated to it by the
Minister of France at Kabul.
I have the honor to send herewith to Your Excellency the original document
drawn up in the Afghan language, together with the translation that was
delivered to the Minister of France. As the Legation of France at Kabul,
however, could not certify that the French text was in absolute conformity
with the Afghan text, my Government took pains to have the translation
verified and Your Excellency will please find herewith also the minor
remarks of mere form for which the said verification gave occasion.”
Be pleased [etc.]
P. CLAUDEL
[Enclosure—Translation1 ]
The Afghan Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mohammed Vali Khan) to the French Minister in Afghanistan (Feit)
[KABUL, October 3, 1928.]
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s
note No. 141 of August 27 with which you were pleased to send us,
according to the instructions of the French Government and in the name of
the Government of the United States of America not represented at Kabul,

the pact for renunciation of war signed at Paris August 27, in order to
ascertain whether the Afghan Government also would adhere to that pact.
The Afghan Government, animated by pacific sentiments, desiring that the
bases of perpetual peace be established among the nations of the whole
world and convinced that only a mutual and intimate association of all
peoples, based on the principles of peace, and free from all ambition, could
ward off the scourge of war and establish universal peace, is ready to adhere
to and earnestly participate in the pact signed at Paris on August 27 last.
It is obvious that the pact is likely to bring forth effective improvements in
international relations and open new horizons to universal peace.
Consequently the Afghan Government declares, by means of this letter,
officially and for all pertinent purposes, its adhesion to the pact for
renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy in reciprocal
relations and sincerely and fully accepts the three articles which constitute
the said pact.
It is understood that this full adhesion of the Afghan Government refers
only to the text of the treaty in the same form as that kindly communicated
by Your Excellency to me in your note No. 141 of August 27.
The adherence of Afghanistan does not relate to the other protocols,
documents, notes, modifications, or comments that may have been drawn
up or exchanged in behalf of one or more states on the subject of the said
pact.
I beg Your Excellency kindly to make the decision of the Afghan
Government officially known to the Government of the United States of
America in the same way that you acted in the name of the lastnamed
Government in transmitting to my Government the text of the Kellogg Pact
and inquiring how it would be received.
MOHAMMED VALI KHAN

1 Rendered into English from the French translation of the Afghan text as
verified by the French Government.

Participation of the United States in
the work of the fifth session of the
Preparatory
Commission
for
the
Disarmament Conference2
2 For correspondence concerning previous sessions of the Preparatory
printed in League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission
for the Disarmament Conference Entrusted with the Preparation for the
Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments, Series VI
[198] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[199] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[200] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State

[201] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[202] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[203] The British Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , March 9, 1928.
[204] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[205] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[206] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[207] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[208] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[209] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[210] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[211] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
Washington, March 20, 1928—noon.

[212] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[213] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[214] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[215] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[216] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[217] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[218] The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[219] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[220] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)
[221] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[222] The Consul at Geneva (Rand) to the Secretary of State

[223] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[224] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[225] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[226] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[227] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[228] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

[229] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 198]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 16, 1927.
[Received January 7, 1928.]
No. 209
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my previous despatches and telegrams
relative to the fourth session of the Preparatory Commission for
Disarmament, and to submit herewith certain reflections with which it
seems desirable to occupy our thoughts in anticipation of the next session
which will take place on March 15th. Certain new elements have entered
into the situation,—that is to say the presence of the Russian delegation and
the existence of the Security Committee. These elements and the point to
which the discussion has progressed, have to a certain extent changed the
problem and make it necessary again to take stock of where we stand and
what line of policy we should follow in the future.
It is of course of secondary importance from the point of substance, but
undoubtedly the Russian resolution3 will come up for “debate in the next
meeting of the Preparatory Commission, and in anticipation of this it would
be well that our delegation should receive careful instructions from the
Government as to what attitude should be taken. You will desire to give a
judgment, I think, upon the advisability from the American point of view of
entering the arena definitely against this resolution. If you consider it
advisable that we should play a minor role in this debate, I believe it would
be quite possible for us to take the position that whatever might have been
said as to the value of the idea, the form of the resolution is such in itself
that we could not discuss it or even cast a vote on it. In this case we need
have no fear that we will be left alone, since it is certain that many other
nations will wage the battle against the Russians, which in its essence more

nearly concerns them than us. If, on the other hand, you are of the opinion
that the moment is ripe in the United States for certain definite
pronouncements relative to this proposal, the debate would offer us the best
sort of sounding board for the expression of any views which we might care
to put out. If the Department does think it might be advisable to follow the
latter course, the nature of the statement might well be reserved for future
discussion, since there are various forms in which such a pronouncement
could be made.
In regard to the real work of the Preparatory Commission, it appears
problematical whether the Commission will begin a prolonged session as
scheduled on March 15. As I have reported previously, the Security
Committee will meet on February 20; even if they continue their debates
through the March meeting of the Council they will have had barely three
weeks in which to discuss a question of which no one can foresee the
complexity and extent. It seems highly improbable, therefore, that on March
15 the Security Committee will be able to report any definite achievement
to the Preparatory Commission, which situation will leave the delegates in
the same state of mind in which they undertook the first reading of the
convention in the third session; in other words, that feeling of security
which the Security Committee has been summoned to create will hardly be
present in the minds of the participating States as early as March 15. On the
other hand, it seems unlikely that a further postponement of the gesture of
the meeting of the Preparatory Commission will be made. Whatever the
desires of the majority of the States, and whatever feeling of insecurity still
remains, undoubtedly the German delegation, aided by or aiding the
Russians, will press for an immediate second reading of the convention.4
The efforts of these delegations will be strengthened in the minds of the
other delegates by the insistence in the Assembly on the part of all the small
powers for further efforts to reach prompt and tangible results on the
disarmament question. The resultant of these two forces may well take the
form of a perfunctory meeting of the Preparatory Commission which will
from time to time and on varied excuses resolve itself into meetings of the
Security Committee; it must be constantly borne in mind that aside from the
American delegation, all the members of the Preparatory Commission are
also members of the Security Committee, with the exception of the
Russians, who act as observers when the Security Committee is sitting.

I turn now to the more important question of what the attitude of the
American delegation should be in the event that the debate becomes more
than perfunctory. As I said in the preceding paragraph, the technical phase
of the Preparatory Commission is ended, and the views of the various
governments are pretty thoroughly known. If we have no concessions to
make, no modification of the position previously taken by us, it would seem
clear that we have no chance of contributing in a constructive manner to the
labors of the Commission. In this connection I venture to recall to the
Department the difficulties attendant upon our making our position as to
control and organization in the proposed draft disarmament convention so
clearly known at the third session, that we were able to escape from the
concentrated convergent movement to hold us up to world public opinion as
the chief obstructionist necessarily rendering the labors of the Commission
abortive. I am referring specifically to the situation which culminated, so
fortunately for us, in Mr. Gibson’s speech of April 13 last5 and the reception
accorded it by the rest of the Commission—a reception which, as the
Department will recall, was only brought about after very arduous
preparation outside of the conference room. Although we weathered that
storm, the various delegations still have it in mind that on a fundamental
point we were the leaders in taking a position which rendered agreement on
any draft convention vastly more difficult. If in the forthcoming stage of the
Commission we must adopt a similar uncompromising attitude on various
points both of substance and of procedure, we shall lay ourselves peculiarly
open to a natural attempt of the other delegations to shift onto us the onus of
their, as well as our, failure to reach agreement. It therefore now becomes
necessary to examine in some detail the record of the third session, and see
on what points the Government may find it possible to offer some
concession.
Without now going into detail on the various questions which were raised in
the first reading of the third session, I submit for your consideration a
possible procedure which might enable us to escape the reproach of
obstructionism and at the same time retain for ourselves an active
participation in those problems of primary importance to us. You may care
to consider the advisability of allowing the delegation to state at some early

stage in the proceedings that the American Government has given careful
thought to the manner in which it could best be helpful in securing an
accord which will be of real benefit; that we believe our army is so small
and is reduced to such a point that any plan adopted would leave us a
considerable margin beyond our present strength; that therefore unless our
views are asked for or unless unforeseen circumstances arise, we propose,
subject to the limitations expressed in Mr. Gibson’s speech of April 13th on
the subject of control, to abstain from debate on questions affecting the
army in the hope that those nations with large armies will be able to work
out for themselves some satisfactory basis of limitation; that our
Government will then give most sympathetic consideration to the question
of whether we can fall in with this plan, and in view of the already reduced
army of the United States we hope and believe that our participation will be
practicable. We have thus left to the military powers the solution of the
question which primarily concerns them, as we believe that it can be most
readily and effectively handled by them. On the other hand, we believe that
as regards naval problems the greatest hope lies in having them handled by
nations possessing large navies, and we suggest that the same procedure of
courteous abstention on the part of non-navy powers which we propose to
follow relative to armies might also carry the restriction of navies to a
successful conclusion.
If the Department thinks well of this general policy in principle, I should be
glad to submit more detailed suggestions. However, there is one point of
substance which is so immediately important that I believe it should be
submitted now, in order that the Department may have the longest possible
time in which to give it consideration. Our attitude as to the limitation of
navies may bring us into a position where we stand alone against the entire
Conference. Recollection of the Conference for the Limitation of Naval
Armament this summer brings clearly to my mind the fact that the Japanese
delegation was ready and anxious to fall in with practically any plan which
would enable them to maintain roughly the 3–5 ratio and at the same time
not spend another dollar on building; furthermore, the British building
program appeared from behind every proposal the British made; they came
back again and again with what they called proposals, and in each case
when the non-essentials were stripped away the framework of the building
program emerged unchanged. This would seem to show that the British are

at present laying more emphasis on the necessity for the maintenance of this
program that [than] they are on limitation by tonnage,—a state of mind in
which they are not far removed from the final compromise proposal offered
by Paul Boncour toward the end of the first reading (see pages 225 et seq.6
). It would not be any great jump for the British to accept the Boncour
proposal as a basis for discussion in the next session, and it requires even
less a stretch of the imagination to believe that the Japanese would
acquiesce therein. Such a situation would leave us absolutely alone if we
maintain rigidly our present thesis.
I am convinced of the essential soundness of our stand in regard to methods
of naval limitation; it is in fact the only one which I believe will constitute a
reasonable limitation in which we can regard the building programs of other
nations without misgiving. It is to be borne in mind, however, that if the
British abandon the stand which they took by our side during the work of
the earlier sessions of the Preparatory Commission, and the Japanese take
similar steps from different motives, we may readily find ourselves in an
entirely isolated and distinctly uncomfortable position, regardless of the
merits of our program. I feel that this situation may very readily arise, and
that it is desirable that the Department give its most serious consideration at
this early date to the course which should be followed by our representative
at the next meeting of the Preparatory Commission; that it should consider
whether there is any method by which our position can be maintained
without laying us open to the charge of obstruction and without standing
inconclusively for a lost cause. I confess that this seems almost impossible
of achievement, and that it may be necessary for the Department, in view of
the broader issues involved, to consider whether there is any measure of
concession which can be made in return for a reciprocal concession which
will secure the results we seek without jeopardizing our essential principles
or compromising the position which we will probably have to maintain in
the conference which will be called in 1931.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON

working out in detail of a draft Convention for complete and general
disarmament …” See League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory
4 For draft texts drawn up to serve as a basis for discussion at the second
reading, see League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission,
Relations, 1927, vol.  I, p. 200.
6 i. e., League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission,
Series IV.

[Document 199]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
12. Secretariat announces officially provisional agenda for Preparatory
Commission, March 15th, as follows:
1. Progress of the work of the Committee on Arbitration and
Security;
2. Russian resolution; and
3. Progress of the work of the Preparatory Commission.
Under point 3 will [be] full discussion of whether or not the second reading
of draft of convention is to take place this session.
Gibson notified.7
WILSON
7 Hugh Gibson, Ambassador in Belgium. The Acting Secretary of State
Geneva as head of the American representation at the forthcoming session

[Document 200]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
[Received 12:25 p.m.]
draft convention of immediate and complete disarmament submitted by the
Soviet delegation. Draft convention which begins with a brief preamble
Chapter 1. Effectives of armed forces. This chapter contains principles of
disarmament relating to effectives. Article 1 reads textually as follows:
“All military units and formations as well as [the effectives of
the] land, sea and air forces, whether of the home country or of its
oversea possessions, shall be disbanded within 4 years as from
entry into force of the present convention and shall not in future
be allowed in any way whether open or secret. Disbandment [of
the] effectives shall be done in four successive stages:
(a) In the first year as from entry into force of the
present convention to [sic] one-half effectives in service
whether officials, officers or other ranks shall be
disbanded and
(b) In the following year[s] remaining effectives in
equal parts.”
Remainder chapter 1 develops in detail proposal to [sic] put forward by the
Soviet delegation at the Fourth Preparatory Commission appearing in pages
16 and 17 provisional minutes first meeting.

Chapter 2. Material. Contains provisions regarding destruction material
land, naval, air, armaments, fortifications, bases and military industries.
As regards naval armaments it provides for destruction capital ships,
convoys, aircraft carriers, submarines. It allows use of disarmed war vessels
as merchant vessels. All other smaller naval vessels including coast guard
ships to be disarmed.
Disarmament of military air forces involves destruction heavy aircraft,
otherwise military aeroplanes when disarmed can be used by civil
organizations.
Chapter 3. Organization of protection on land and at sea. Protection on land
provides that establishment of police forces or militia must be maintained
within present limits for period of 4 years.
Protection at sea provides for organization of maritime police service and
for this purpose waters of the globe are divided into 16 zones. Zones that
would affect United States are number 7 (northwestern section of the
Atlantic Ocean) and number 7 [14?] (northeastern section of the Pacific
Ocean).
Chapter 4. Control. First article of this chapter provides that within 3
months of the coming into effect of the convention there shall be organized
a permanent international commission of control, committees of control in
each of the contracting states and local commissions. Functions,
composition and duties of these bodies described in detail.
Paragraph
[Chapter]
contains
suggestions
for
conclusion
of
supplementary conventions and indicates procedure for ratifying
conventions and settling questions arising out of violations. Articles 58 and
60 are quoted verbatim.
Article 58. Within one year of the coming into effect of the convention all
the contracting powers shall enact legislation providing that a breach of any
of the stipulations of the convention shall be regarded as a great [grave]
offense against the state. At the same time all acts of national or

international importance which are contrary to the above-mentioned clauses
shall be repealed or amended.
Article 60. In the case of a direct breach of the present convention by one of
the contracting powers [states], an extraordinary assembly of the
representatives of contracting powers [states] participating in present
convention [shall be summoned as expeditiously as possible] by the
Permanent International Commission of Control to decide upon steps to be
taken. Steps to be taken [the steps taken] to exercise pressure must not be of
a military character. All disputes between States shall be settled by the
Permanent International Commission of Control.
TUCK
8 Not printed.
League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission, Series VI,

[Document 201]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
14. I conferred today with Gibson at Geneva. Both of us consider it
important to receive early telegraphic instructions regarding subjects
unable to make preparation for forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory
Commission until the Department’s views are known to us. The advisability
of proceeding with the second reading of the draft and the American
attitude on the Russian resolution are questions we have particularly in
mind.
Regarding the reading of the draft, if you do not wish us to follow some
other course we should be inclined to refrain from comment unless it
appears necessary and to leave the discussion of the question to delegations
of other powers; in this case we should state that if the others are agreed we
are prepared to proceed with the second reading but that we do not feel
justified in making any proposal at this time.
WILSON

[Document 202]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
course to be followed by the American delegation at the forthcoming
meeting of the Preparatory Commission have been carefully considered by
me with the result that it appears wiser, by reason of developments which
have taken place since the writing of the letters above mentioned, with
special reference to the changes recommended by the House Committee on
Naval Affairs in the naval program, not to assume the offensive at the
opening of the meeting, either with a statement issued in the United States,
which you might find it necessary to defend, or by an opening statement in
any form to be made by you at the first meeting. The Preparatory
Commission has met four times previously with practically the same
personnel at every meeting and is a continuing body; preliminary
statements of policy do not therefore appear necessary. Any such effort on
our part moreover would, in my opinion, be likely to give the impression
that this Government felt it necessary to apologize for its past attitude or to
defend itself against attacks on the subject of disarmament. It seems to me,
furthermore, that there is not the slightest danger of a gratuitous attack on
the naval question by Great Britain, and the opportunity for making such an
attack would not be offered to any power before the Commission reaches
the naval sections of the second reading of the draft convention.
In considering the Russian proposal, the whole idea is so impractical that no
detailed discussion appears to be called for, and you might well content
yourself, in my opinion, with agreeing with the delegates of those powers
more immediately interested that a better ground for some hope of tangible
and concrete results in disarmament is offered by the methods embodied in

the draft conventions and partially agreed upon by the powers thus far
represented on the Commission than by the Soviet Government’s drastic
scheme, although the latter may have been proposed in an earnest endeavor
to be of assistance.
While, of course, it would seem of little use to proceed with the second
reading of the draft convention if no report shall have been received from
the Security Commission, nevertheless, the United States is not opposed to
any procedure which other powers might find agreeable. Should a report
have been forthcoming from the Security Commission the American
attitude on this subject has been clearly evidenced by the exchange of notes
with France on the proposal made by M. Briand,11 in the attitude of the
American delegation at the Havana Conference,12 and in the position taken
by the United States on the extension of the arbitration treaties.12a The
documents pertinent to these subjects will be transmitted to you by
members of the American representation who are sailing on March 3, and I
believe that these documents will enable you to show the eagerness of the
United States to contribute to the security of the world so far as it can by the
development of the resources of inquiry, conciliation and arbitration, not
only in the Western hemisphere, the region of its primary interests, but
throughout the world, as indicated by its manifest desire to conclude
bilateral arbitration pacts with specific countries, and “likewise a
multilateral treaty open to subsequent adherence by any and all other
Governments, binding the parties thereto not to resort to war with one
another”.
Should the policies of this country be attacked on specific points you
should, of course, vigorously state our position. Adequate material for such
defense will be found in the proceedings at the Geneva Naval Conference13
and in our revised naval program. There will be sent to you among other
documents, all pertinent papers on the naval program of 23 cruisers and 1
aircraft carrier, to be completed in 6 years and to be laid down within 3
years, as well as the House Committee’s recommendations. It would be
most desirable, in case of attack, to speak frankly. It seems best, however, to
leave to your discretion the question of such replies, which can be made
when you feel that the appropriate occasion has arisen and after you have
sounded out the sentiment of the meeting.

The French naval attaché has informed Admiral Jones of conversations in
Paris between Vice Admiral Kelly, who will be the naval adviser to the
British Delegation to the Preparatory Commission, and the Chief of the
French Naval Staff. These conversations indicate that the French, while
maintaining their thesis of total tonnage in principle, are willing to alter the
Boncour proposal. For the life of any treaty to be concluded, a division of
tonnage would be made into five groups, namely: Capital ships, aircraft
carriers, service auxiliary vessels between 2,000 and 10,000 tons, service
auxiliary vessels under 2,000 tons, and submarines. Since the first two
categories of this division are presumably fixed until 1936 (or for the life of
the treaty) by the Washington Agreement,14 only discussion of the
remaining three classes is left open. The French would desire, furthermore,
as a qualification to the division above mentioned, that any one of the
categories might be increased by a percentage to be agreed upon but that
such percentage, of course, would have to be deducted from one or both of
the other columns; and, moreover, that six months, or preferably a year’s
notice, should be given of any changes in the subgroupings. Some such
scheme, according to the Navy, would be acceptable to this country in
principle and might result in substantial progress toward ultimate agreement
between the naval powers. The pertinent documents on this subject will be
taken to Geneva by Admiral Jones.
Since the third session of the Commission there appear to have been no
developments which would necessitate a departure from the stand we have
previously taken on air and land armaments or any modification of the
instructions in the premises.
KELLOGG
10 J. Theodore Marriner, Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs.
Letters not found in Department files.

[Document 203]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador has the honour to make, by
instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs contained in a despatch dated the 24th of February last, the
following communication to the Secretary of State:
Among the most important of the British proposals at the Geneva Naval
Conference were those which aimed at a reduction of the maximum
displacement and armament, and an extension of the life, of capital ships as
fixed by the Washington Conference. They were never more than
superficially considered owing to the instructions received by the United
States and Japanese delegations to defer any discussion of them until
complete agreement had been reached on the limitation of auxiliary vessels
for which the conference had primarily been called. There were indications
however that, if such agreement had materialised, these capital ship
proposals would have received, at the least, a considerable measure of
support.
His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain attach great importance to this
question, from the point of view both of limitation and of economy. They
therefore propose to revert to it at the next session of the Preparatory
Committee on Disarmament, but it is not their intention in the committee
itself to do more than allude to their proposals, in broad terms, as
representing an important contribution to the reduction of armaments
generally.
WASHINGTON , March 9, 1928.

[Document 204]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
32. For Gibson and Wilson. The following aide-mémoire was left by the
British Ambassador, who called on me this morning;
[Here follows the text of the aide-mémoire printed supra.]
Inquiry was made by Sir Esme regarding the attitude of this Government on
the question of the reduction in size of battleships and the extension of the
life of such ships. In reply I informed him that there was no difference in
the present attitude of this Government and its attitude last summer, and
that, in view of the fact that until after 1931 no battleships could be
replaced, no agreement at this time seemed necessary, especially in view of
the fact that Italy and France were under no obligation to attend a
conference until that year, and since they had not been represented at the
Naval Conference at Geneva. The Ambassador’s attention was recalled to
the fact that you had been authorized by me last summer to state that a
conference would be called by the United States on the first of January
1931, so that ample time would be given for any contemplated plans for
changes. The Ambassador asked whether any hostility to the general idea
would be felt by this Government and was told that while I could not
commit the Government in this matter I did recall that the Secretary of the
Navy had felt that a substantial saving might be made by the extension of
the life of battleships, although the saving brought about by such means
would not be as great as stated. In my opinion, the Ambassador understood
that no such proposition would be considered without the inclusion of some
compensations intended to bring about absolute equality. The Ambassador
further stated that his Government desired to ascertain whether other
signatories to the Washington Treaty would give sympathetic consideration

to this subject in order that plans, based on a reasonable prospect of the
acceptance of the proposition, might be made before 1931. In reply I said
that, of course, if the British decided to sound out other governments on this
question it was their affair but that since it did not concern the Preparatory
Conference I saw no reason why it should be taken up during the sessions
of that body. On this point the Ambassador concurred. In my opinion, the
considerations set forth in your instructions during the Naval Conference
and those indicated in this conversation will adequately cover any
contingencies likely to arise on this subject.
KELLOGG

[Document 205]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:45 p.m.]
2. Wilson and I called this afternoon on Colban, chief of the
Disarmament Section Secretariat. He is of course unable to
foresee duration of forthcoming meeting.
Point 1 of agenda will probably result in formal
adoption of Security Committee’s report since it was
drawn up by practically the same membership as that of
the Preparatory Commission and they can probably
have little to add.
Point 2. Feeling in regard to the Russian proposal is
divided. While there is an element in favor of
dismissing the proposal as unworthy of serious
consideration it seems probable that they will either be
given a full discussion immediately with a view to
convincing public opinion of their futility or referred to
a subcommittee for careful study with a view not only
to demonstrating their futility but also to deferring the
second reading of draft convention as this obviously
could not be undertaken prior to debate on Russian
proposal since the latter is a radical amendment to our
whole scheme and has precedence under our method of
procedure.
3. There is a nearly unanimous feeling more harm than good
would result by embarking upon the second reading before
making a determined effort to reach a larger measure of

agreement by direct relations between various governments.
Colban’s impression was that while the Germans will protest
against delay they will not be unduly insistent and that possibly
they would be satisfied by a proposal to have the third
commission of the Assembly, which is made up of the
representatives of all member states, examine the progress of the
work next September. To this body certain nonmember states such
as the United States, Russia and Turkey would be invited.
GIBSON

[Document 206]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:30 p.m.]
5. Remarks which I propose to make in opening session may or may not
lead to debate. Should they do so, I may be questioned on certain points. I
now foresee some of the questions which may be asked, and I should be
pleased to have your instructions in order that my own understanding may
be quite clear.
1. Question may be raised that for complete renunciation of war it
would have been sufficient to have said that the parties renounce
all war as between themselves; that use of expression “renounce
war as an instrument of national policy” [apparent omission] for a
certain limitation or modification of a complete renunciation of
war.
2. Questions may be asked in regard to joint or reciprocal nature
of the obligation in a treaty which is multilateral; in other words,
should nation A violate treaty with relation to nation B, have the
right of nations C and D been violated thereby? Should violation
of A towards B take place, does any obligation still rest on C and
D, or does A’s aggression against B result in automatically
relieving them of all obligation under the treaty?
GIBSON

[Document 207]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
you take an opportunity to discuss, in an address before the Commission,
our pending negotiations in regard to arbitration, conciliation, and the
Briand proposal for the renunciation of war. Such was not my intention at
all. Your proposed speech, and indeed any statement of such a nature,
would without doubt be interpreted as an invitation from the United States
virtually to transfer to Geneva our pending negotiations and open them to
detailed discussion before the Conference. The agenda of the Conference
does not include these matters, and I shall not assent to their being placed
on the agenda or to their being brought into the Conference indirectly. If
others should mention this Government’s attitude in regard to arbitration,
conciliation, or renunciation of war, it would be necessary for you to do
nothing more than make a declaration that this Government’s attitude has
been set forth clearly in the published correspondence in the pending
negotiations. The documents were transmitted to you for your information
and, if desirable for Commission’s information, to be furnished to it. You
are directed, therefore, not to make the proposed speech, or any speech,
regarding the subject.
An address which is to be delivered by me in New York on the evening of
March 15 will contain a further public declaration of the policy of the
United States in regard to war prevention.16 Paris has been supplied by
cable with the text of this address, and has been instructed to forward it to
the principal missions in Europe, including Geneva, and by this time you
should have it.

KELLOGG
16 For text, see The War Prevention Policy of the United States: An Address
by Honorable Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States,
Delivered before the Council on Foreign Relations at New York City, March

[Document 208]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
you suggest should not be answered in Geneva. These are questions which
have place only as between the parties concerned in direct negotiations for
the concluding of a treaty. There is no reason why the nations represented in
the Preparatory Commission should inquire into the meaning or language of
a treaty proposed by France to the United States, and which is still being
discussed. If you are asked any such questions, you should state that the
party in question should take up negotiations on the matter in Washington.
KELLOGG

[Document 209]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
10. At this afternoon’s session Commission reached discussion of Russian
proposals. An able presentation by Litvinoff concluded with the assumption
that the country which had presented to the world the idea of the
multilateral pact outlawing war would from the logic of events feel obliged
to support Russian proposals.
Bernstorff17 spoke at some length supporting to a rather surprising extent
the fundamental ideas of the Russian proposals and said he felt they should
be discussed in detail in connection with second reading of the draft
protocol which must take place at this session.
Turkish delegate completing group which is evidently agreed to work
together also called for careful consideration in plenary meeting.
After this there was a long and embarrassing silence, following which the
chairman said as no one appeared anxious to speak he would adjourn the
meeting until four o’clock tomorrow afternoon when certain delegates had
expressed a desire to speak.
[Paraphrase.] All of the delegations, as far as I know, are anxious that there
should be a prompt disposal of the Russian proposals and an early
adjournment of the second reading, but it appears that no one has the
courage to stand up against the attacks of the Russians. It is my belief that if
we assumed a leadership in this matter, enough courage would be
summoned up by other delegations to deal with the situation, but I cannot
perceive why this task should be undertaken by us for the benefit of other
more immediately concerned countries. It is my intention, therefore, as far

as possible, to keep free of the debates, and this course will be followed
unless the circumstances are so altered that intervention in harmony with
the Department’s previous instructions becomes essential. [End paraphrase.]
GIBSON
17 Head of the German delegation.

[Document 210]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:28 p.m.]
11. No decision has as yet been reached as to how to deal with Soviet
proposals despite repeated consultations among the interested delegations.
Several courses are under discussion:
1. Full discussion immediately.
2. Reference of the matter to a small committee on which the
leading delegates have already informally all refused to serve.
3. Placing the Russian proposals in column clause by clause
opposite draft of first reading. This draft already has parallel
columns on most points giving divergent views.
If the third course is adopted the result will be that in the second reading
each clause will give rise to a new debate upon the fundamental differences
between complete disarmament and the limitation of armament. This would
inevitably involve us in debate on practically every point with the Soviet
representative.
I cannot help feeling that this procedure would not only be futile but
intolerable and that we should consider seriously whether it would be worth
while for us to continue should it be adopted. I feel certain that the states
bordering on Russia would take this view and that some others would also
if they realized what are the implications of such procedure.

If the above course seems about to be adopted, you may feel that you can
allow me to point out that the two ideas are fundamentally irreconcilable;
that, therefore, it is useless to try to assimilate the details of the Soviet
proposals with those of our first reading draft; that such a procedure would
lead us away from the work entrusted to us on an endless discussion as to
provisions for limitation of armament versus complete disarmament; that if
this course is adopted we would have to consider, perhaps with other
governments, whether we could continue with any profit to participate in
the work of the Preparatory Commission.
Such a statement would be, I think, entirely effective.
I venture to ask for immediate instructions, as this situation may arise at any
moment. It may come up tomorrow afternoon.
GIBSON

[Document 211]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 20, 1928—noon.
would be most desirable to abstain as far as possible from participation in
debate on the Russian proposals is heartily endorsed. The proposals are not
of primary interest to this Government and we should not assume a leading
role in the discussions under any circumstances.
KELLOGG

[Document 212]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
not be advisable if it means a complete withdrawal from the Preparatory
Commission. From your reports I judge that there is slight hope for the
Conference now continuing or accomplishing anything, and if we should
withdraw it would give them just the chance they are looking for to step out
from under and put the blame on us. As far as possible we should avoid any
action which it is clearly foreseen would give an opportunity to other
powers to place the blame on the United States.
I am in sympathy with your ideas, and I think that you should, of course,
make every effort to avoid taking part in such a useless discussion. If a
sufficient number of countries are willing to join, it might have some effect
to issue a statement that such a procedure is useless and to intimate that
there is no use of continuing to participate on such a basis, but care should
be taken that the Conference be given no opportunity to blame our
Government.
You may wish to consider suggesting to one of your colleagues that the
Preparatory Commission might very properly ask the Council of the League
for instructions as to the competence of the Commission to consider a plan
for total disarmament when it was called by a resolution to prepare the way
for a conference to reduce and limit armament. This Government would not
care to make such a proposal, as we are not a member of the League. If
made, the suggestion should be to the representative of a state which is in
the League and preferably represented on the Council.

It would not be sufficient reason for us to withdraw should the proceedings
be reduced to futility by the amalgamation of the Soviet proposal with draft
treaties already under consideration, in case the interested countries are
unable to find other means of dealing with the Soviet plan. I see no reason
why, in conjunction with your colleagues from the great powers, a
resolution could not be drafted stating that the Utopian idea of total
disarmament could not be discussed with profit until a degree of limitation
and reduction had been attained which would prove the sincerity of the
desire of the peoples of the world to work for disarmament as the ultimate
goal, and that the Preparatory Commission should therefore proceed in
accordance with its original program.
KELLOGG

[Document 213]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:15 p.m.]
12. As you will have seen from the press, speeches were made in direct
opposition to the Soviet proposals in yesterday’s meeting, notably by the
British delegate but also by Italian, French and Japanese. Again this
morning the proposals were attacked by the Netherlands and Swedish
delegates.
Since all the great powers except ourselves had expressed their opinions in
open session, since continued silence on my part was becoming more
conspicuous than a speech—as I was constantly questioned informally as to
America’s attitude—and since the Soviet representative had made direct
reference to the United States (see my telegram March 19, 7 p.m.), I
thought it well to speak in this morning’s meeting.
I touched briefly on our belief in multilateral pact (mentioned by Litvinov)
and expressed belief in this method of approach and disbelief in the
proposal as impracticable and incapable of attaining avowed ends.
I then spoke in the sense of your instructions in No. 23 to Berne18 and
discouraged further expenditure of time by postponing immediate
consideration of drastic proposals.
GIBSON

[Document 214]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
“A considerable number of delegates have already stated their
views regarding the proposals now before us and have treated the
subject more or less exhaustively. I do not propose to deal with
the matter at length but feel that it may be desirable for me to
make a brief statement as to the views of the American
delegation.
To begin with, I should like to touch upon one remark which was
made in the course of debate on Monday to the effect that in the
opinion of one of the delegations, sincerity, consistency and logic
should impel the country which had proposed a multilateral pact
against war to support the proposals now before us for immediate
and complete disarmament.
I do not feel warranted in taking up the time of this Commission
with a lengthy statement on this point. However, in order that
there may be no room for misunderstanding I venture to trespass
upon your time to the extent of saying that it is precisely on
grounds of sincerity, consistency and logic that my Government
supports the idea of a multilateral pact renouncing war as an
instrument of national policy and at the same time finds itself
unable to support drastic proposals for immediate and complete
disarmament which we do not believe are calculated to achieve
their avowed purpose.

Any other attitude on the part of my Government would be
lacking in sincerity, consistency and logic, for my Government
believes in the one project and disbelieves in the other. We
believe that the idea behind the proposal of a pact for renouncing
war can be made effective as an articulate expression of an almost
universal will for peace; we believe that such an expression is
more effective at this time than any scheme, however drastic, for
doing away with weapons. We have always stated as our
conviction that as we build up the will for peace and confidence
in peaceful methods for settling international disputes through
regional agreements or otherwise our needs for armaments will
automatically decrease. We have never believed that the converse
was true and the suppression of armaments would alone and by
itself have the effect of creating the confidence which is essential
to the successful conclusion of our task.
To turn now to the aspect of the problem which is immediately
before us we have been told that one compelling reason for
adopting the project for complete disarmament is that public
opinion throughout the world is impatient of less drastic measures
and insists upon immediate and comprehensive action. I submit
that if public opinion were as clamorous as we have been told for
action upon drastic schemes such as the one now before us it is
inconceivable that this should not have become apparent to us and
to our governments. It is to be remembered that in most countries
the expression of public opinion is free and unfettered; that
governments are responsive to the will of the people and if the
people were convinced of the effectiveness of such drastic
schemes there is no doubt that they would make their wishes so
clearly and unmistakably known that no government could ignore
those wishes and survive.
In the course of debate a number of my colleagues have expressed
their belief that we need more time for a careful analysis and
consideration of the proposals now before the Commission
inasmuch as the draft convention was placed in our hands only
about a month ago. I venture to point out in this connection that

the essentials of the present scheme, of which the convention is
merely an elaboration, were placed before the Commission at its
November session and that we and our respective governments
have therefore had more than three months in which to consider.
To my mind however this is neither here nor there. So far as I can
recollect it has never been the practice of our Commission to
assign committees to study proposals or refer them back to
governments for examination if in the first general discussion it
became evident that they were not acceptable in principle. I see
no reason in the present instance for deviation from this sound
and time-saving practice.
For our present purpose it would seem sufficient to point out that
the proposals are not only a radical departure from the work we
have been engaged upon so far but that they are totally
irreconcilable with the draft which is the basis of our discussions.
We are engaged upon a study of how to effect a limitation and
reduction of armaments by agreement. We are now asked to scrap
this work which is the result of several years of negotiation and to
accept in its place the total and immediate abolition of
armaments. I will confess that the American delegation is unable
to see how the two can possibly be reconciled and discussed
simultaneously. The question before us is whether we shall
continue on the task entrusted to us according to the method
approved by our various governments or whether we shall
suddenly scrap what has been done and embark upon an entirely
different enterprise on the basis of proposals of a type which has
frequently been considered in the past and invariably rejected as
unworkable.
Incidentally if it is felt that some of the points suggested under
this convention would be of assistance in the preparation of our
draft, certainly it is to be expected that the representative of any
country will in the second reading introduce such amendments to
the clauses as they now stand as they may see fit. However, it
would certainly seem a cumbersome and unprecedented
procedure to give further exhaustive study to the whole of an

elaborate scheme presented by a single delegation in order to get
the possible benefits of certain clauses therein.
For the reasons I have stated, the American delegation would not
feel justified in asking for a delay in order that these proposals
might be given further detailed study. So far as we are concerned
we feel that we have only one problem—to find and follow the
path best calculated to lead us expeditiously to the conclusion of
our labors; we are convinced that that path is to be found in the
continuance of our previous endeavors, and that we are not
justified in abandoning or unduly delaying our efforts in order to
embark upon another task which we honestly believe cannot
facilitate the reduction and limitation of armaments.”
Comment follows.21
GIBSON
19 Telegram in two sections.
20 Not printed.
21 Not printed.

[Document 215]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
18. The question of date for our next meeting having arisen and it having
become evident that there was a disposition to choose an early fixed date
although it was generally recognized that we might not be able to undertake
serious work, I felt it desirable to point out that I had encountered persistent
reports that we were going to press for an immediate second reading and
that it was advisable that our position be made clear. While we were ready
to proceed with a second reading now if it was felt there was sufficient
measure of agreement to justify this course, we would on the other hand
accept the general verdict if it was decided that in the interest of the work
an adjournment should be taken. As to choosing a date I pointed out that, as
the United States in common with several other countries had to send its
technical staff long distances to attend these meetings, I hoped it would be
possible to choose in such a way as to obviate long and unsatisfactory
journeys; that we had already had two meetings on arbitrarily chosen dates;
and that in this instance I would suggest that the chairman be asked to keep
in touch with the progress of direct negotiations for the purpose of
harmonizing divergent views and that he be requested to convoke us as
soon as in his opinion it would be possible to proceed with a second reading
with reasonable prospect of success.
GIBSON

[Document 216]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
19. Morning and afternoon sessions entirely inconclusive.
Resolutions were introduced by the Bureau22 to take note of the fact that
most delegates declined to accept the principle of Russian proposals; that
some desired to refer them to their governments; that German resolution
concerning publicity of armaments be deferred to second reading; and that
second reading be left to president to summon at a date not later than next
Assembly. No definite action was taken regarding any of them although
they were discussed in the utmost confusion.
Russians stated their proposals having been rejected they would cooperate
in partial disarmament and to this end the Russian delegation was
introducing a new draft for which they demanded immediate first reading.23
The president ruled that this draft could not be discussed at this session.
Russians objected. President then reserved his ruling declaring it to have
been his personal opinion on a point which must be decided by the
Commission tomorrow.
There has not been such an entirely futile and unedifying session since the
Commission began.
GIBSON
22 The Bureau of the Preparatory Commission, composed of the president
and vice presidents of the Commission, together with officials of the
Disarmament Section of the League of Nations Secretariat.

23 For text of draft, see League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory
Commission, Series VI, p. 347.

[Document 217]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:25 p.m.]
20. Following letter just handed me by Cushendun24 who is communicating
its substance to the press:
“You may remember that in a speech which I made last Tuesday
in the Preparatory Committee on the scheme of the Soviet
Government for immediate and complete disarmament I was
impelled to refer to the great progress in disarmament which had
been achieved since the war, notably by the Washington
convention. I referred to a statement which had already been
made by the British delegation at the Naval Conference in
Geneva last year showing that my Government were prepared, if
the other signatories would agree, to carry even further certain of
the principles of that convention by reducing the maximum
displacement of capital ships and the caliber of their heaviest gun
and by extending the accepted life of vessels of that class.
Having referred in a somewhat incidental way, which the
character of my speech made unavoidable, and in indefinite terms
to these proposals, I should like to take this opportunity of
reminding you and my other colleagues representing powers
signatories to the Washington convention of their exact purport.
The proposals of my Government are:
First. To reduce the size of any battleship to be built in
the future from the present limit of 35,000 tons
displacement to something under 30,000 tons;

Secondly. To reduce the size of guns in battleships from
Thirdly. To extend the accepted life of the existing
capital ships from 20 to 26 years, this involving a
waiver by the powers of their full rights under the
replacement tables agreed upon at Washington. Such an
arrangement would naturally have to provide for some
little elasticity on each side of that figure.
It would obviously be of advantage if such a step were agreed
upon that should be taken in time to enable it to become effective
before the commencement of the capital ship replacement
program which is provided for by the Washington convention.”
GIBSON
24 Lord Cushendun, British representative on the Preparatory Commission.

[Document 218]
The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory
Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
afternoon session of Commission and came as complete surprise.
Cushendun and Admiral Kelly left immediately afterwards for London, so I
had no opportunity to discuss proposals or learn why they were presented
here.
We have declined to discuss matter with press and have taken the stand that
comment must come from Department.
GIBSON

[Document 219]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:55 p.m.]
60. Loudon,25 chairman of the Preparatory Commission, writes that
question of next meeting is under consideration and asks my opinion as to
the date. British against fixing date at present. Germans and French insistent
on early meeting (this insistence is due to internal political exigencies and
delegates admit privately no progress can be expected). Loudon expresses
opinion that it is unwise to fix date until United States “has defined its
attitude in regard to the Anglo-French compromise.”26 Request
Department’s instruction as to reply to be made.
Department might wish to consider an answer to the effect that, while we
think it is desirable to meet as soon as we can embark upon a second
session with reasonable hope of progress, we feel that to hold another
meeting like the last three merely to recognize deadlock and adjourn would
be most unfortunate and in the long run would be prejudicial to eventual
achievement.
He requests prompt reply.
GIBSON
25 J. Loudon of the Netherlands.

[Document 220]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
that you have referred his inquiry to me. As far as I can see, it cannot be
answered until I have an opportunity to confer with the President who is
leaving today for Vermont and does not expect to return to Washington until
Saturday.
A reply to the French and British notes on the naval agreement is now being
considered.27 In my opinion its acceptance is not possible. Should we,
however, state our objections the other powers will lay the blame for
breaking up the Conference at our door. They will probably do the same if
we send no reply. No answer has been sent by Italy. Any conference called
in order to put through a compromise would of course be impossible. What
course would you advise under the circumstances? In my opinion there is
no intention of making an agreement on limitation on the part of any of the
nations. The conference is insisted upon for political reasons.
KELLOGG

[Document 221]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
104. Eric Colban, chief of the League Secretariat Disarmament Section, is
leaving tonight to confer with Loudon in Paris. The Secretariat, according
to reliable information, considers that it is time to attempt to break the
deadlock on the question of naval disarmament, and Colban intends to
suggest that Loudon call together a group of naval experts of the naval
powers for informal discussions of the whole question in the hope that a
solution may be found.
The outcome of such a scheme does not appear to me very hopeful,
particularly if no new proposal has been worked out to submit to the
meeting. The failure of the naval agreement between England and France is
too recent for the willing acceptance by these Governments of new
technical discussions unless the broad outlines are previously agreed to by
the interested governments.
Have mailed copy to Brussels and Paris.
WILSON

[Document 222]
The Consul at Geneva (Rand) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:40 p.m.]
Colban, back from Paris where he has seen Loudon, tells me that there is no
intention on the part of Loudon of approaching the naval powers in regard
to conversations preliminary to the meeting of the Preparatory Commission,
because Loudon prefers to wait until the British Government replies to the
American note concerning the Franco–British naval agreement. Colban
added that to a certain extent the date of the next session of the Preparatory
Commission would depend upon whether or not there were to be
preliminary conversations and, therefore, upon the reply of the British
Government. Apparently the initiative in this subject belongs to Great
Britain rather than Loudon.
A source which is usually well posted informs me confidentially that the
French and British Governments are discussing the date of the next session
of the Preparatory Commission. The British favor January or early February
whether private conversations are held beforehand or not. Officials of the
French Government are in agreement except Paul-Boncour, who favors
leaving the date of the session unsettled until divergencies on naval
questions have been discussed, since he is afraid that the next session may
not be successful without preparation of this sort.
Both Loudon and the French Government appear to prefer that the British
take the initiative in approaching the American Government on the naval
question.
Copy to Gibson by mail.

Rayo

[Document 223]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
79. Yesterday I discussed the future work of the Preparatory Commission
with Loudon, the chairman of the Commission, who came from Paris in
order to see me.
In his opinion, to hold another meeting before some kind of agreement is
reached between Great Britain and the United States would be disastrous.
The French, he feels, now realize that further fruitless meetings are
dangerous as allowing the Soviet Government a chance to cause trouble. No
difficulty is expected by him in postponing meetings for about six months,
but at the end of that time pressure for some sort of meeting is feared.
In my opinion Loudon feels that by suggesting the resumption of
discussions on the naval question through the Preparatory Commission he
burnt his fingers, and he will now attempt to induce the governments
interested to agree to postpone more or less indefinitely the meeting of the
Commission on the theory that in an agreement between Great Britain and
the United States lies the only hope for future progress.
Loudon was informed by me that I could not give him the views of the
Department on this subject, but that, in my personal opinion, I agreed that if
it was obvious that no further progress was possible there was no purpose in
holding a meeting.
Wilson has been sent a copy.
GIBSON

[Document 224]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
considerably worried in a recent conversation lest the next session of the
Preparatory Commission should cause a wrangle between Great Britain and
the United States. Believing that the character of the resolution adopted in
the Assembly and the moral pledge to Germany necessitate an early
meeting of the Preparatory Commission, Drummond is of opinion that it
would be wise from a strategic point of view to call a short session in
February with a limited agenda from which an attempt should be made to
exclude naval questions. The date of future conference to cover all
questions including naval could be placed sufficiently far in the future to
allow the hope of some measure of agreement between the United States
and Great Britain.
For my part I concur in his fears of increased bitterness being given to the
disagreement between the British and ourselves in the Preparatory
Commission and believe that there is only a remote possibility that publicity
and debate on naval questions can be prevented in view of the presence, of
the Russians. Loudon’s program outlined in telegram 79 from Gibson
appears much better and he should be urged to maintain it if possible.
Nothing which may take place in the Preparatory Commission could be
more important than our relations with Great Britain are to both of us.
Gibson has been sent a copy.
WILSON

28 Latter not printed.
29 Sir Eric Drummond, Secretary General of the League of Nations.

[Document 225]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
purpose in seeking to convince Secretary General Drummond, although the
governments of all principal members of the League, except Germany, are
opposed to a meeting at an early date of the Preparatory Commission, if he
feels that the calling of an early session is necessary, or if more specific
instructions on this question are issued by the present meeting of the
Council. Furthermore, it is highly probable that Loudon will concur in the
view of the Secretary General.
A meeting at the present time, in my opinion, cannot be other than harmful,
and the value of the Secretary General’s suggestion of a limited agenda
from which naval matters are to be excluded is questionable; there has been
general disregard of the agenda at former sessions, and I doubt if the
stirring up of bad feeling by the Russians could be prevented, even if
British and American delegates did not enter into discussion in such an
eventuality; there would still be the danger that the cudgels would be taken
up by the press in such a manner as to aggravate the situation.
There might be, if there were any hope of general progress at the next
session, some reason for running risks as to our relations with Great Britain.
However, since as far as we can foresee now, there is no such hope, the
avoidance of a meeting appears important, as its only result will probably
be to embitter the relations of the two countries.
The decision, as far as I can ascertain, practically rests with Germany, the
sole League member now urging a meeting and doing so for the purposes of

internal politics, and with the Government of Italy. As a nonmember of the
League the United States obviously cannot take any initiative, but no
similar objection prevents action by the British Government, who in this
matter have interests similar to our own. I venture to suggest, in view of the
importance of the issues involved, the possibility of placing the entire
question frankly before the British, explaining the reluctance of the United
States toward a meeting which in all probability will be utilized for the
stirring up of dissension between the two countries, and inquiring if the
British feel justified in a serious discussion of the matter at Berlin, with a
view to convincing the Germans that since no hope of accomplishing
anything exists at the present time, they are not warranted in holding out for
a meeting distasteful to most of the other governments; and that Germany
will assist the movement toward disarmament better in the long run by
letting the Secretary General know her preference that the adjournment be
extended, in the belief that no reasonable hope of progress lies in an early
meeting. There is little doubt that, if this course is followed, the Secretary
General would be able to canvass Council members and secure the
authority of the Council for a generous breathing spell as in previous cases.
GIBSON

[Document 226]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
107. New York Times article by Carlyle Macdonald under Lugano date-line
December 8, states that French and League officials were informed by an
American Minister to a European country
“that it was the view of the present administration at Washington
that the grave subject of naval disarmament must be postponed
until President-elect Hoover and his advisers should have had an
opportunity of studying it or in other words after the inauguration.
After a careful discussion and some exchanges with Washington
it is understood the American Minister requested, and the others
agreed, that the meeting of the preliminary commission should be
postponed for one or two months, pending which time the
projected direct conversations between Great Britain and the
United States might have borne results.”
Also that suggestion “that M. Loudon be instructed to call a ‘consultative
parley of five naval powers’ was turned down by the American Minister as
being of no value in the face of the present complete disaccord between the
British and the Americans.” Later article of similar tenor of December 13
quotes you as the Minister concerned. In his press conference yesterday the
President said that he had noticed a press report to the effect that there was
some suggestion that this administration did not desire to take any further
part in the disarmament question which is being discussed under the
leadership of the League. He stated that this movement is under the League
and would of course have to be carried on by them irrespective of the
attitude of this Government. He added that this Government has never
indicated that it desired postponement of the discussions and that it is
always ready to cooperate with the League Committee.

[Paraphrase.] The Department knows, of course, that you did not make the
remarks which have been attributed to you, but it wished you to have
President’s statement immediately.
I am told by Assistant Secretary of State Castle that he has answered
questions of both British and French officials by saying that it would be
unfortunate in the general interest of cause of limitation of armaments for
meeting of the Preparatory Commission to be held in the immediate future
unless there was some prospect of accomplishment, and that cause would
be served better by frankly postponing such meeting until there could be at
least some measure of agreement. Without doubt this is true. It is clear, also,
that attempts will be made to put blame for delay on this Government, and
that we cannot, as a nonmember of the League, ask for a postponement.
While I should be glad, therefore, if view expressed by Loudon to Gibson in
favor of a postponement of meeting of the Preparatory Commission should
prevail, I feel that attitude expressed by President Coolidge should be
adhered to firmly. Repeat to Gibson. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 227]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 17, 1928—noon.
123. Drummond telephoned this morning that during Lugano session the
three powers mostly interested, namely Great Britain, France and Germany,
agreed to advise Loudon to call meeting of the Preparatory Commission
would agree). Drummond stated that the date was not made definite since
they recognized that the members of the American delegation coming from
the United States might desire to remain home over Easter which occurs
March 31. He asked me to obtain an unofficial expression of opinion from
you as to which time would be most convenient for the opening of the
session between these dates.
Copy to Gibson.
WILSON
30 Gustav Stresemann, German Minister of Foreign Affairs.

[Document 228]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
Government is prepared to send delegates at any time. The dates mentioned
are satisfactory but we should also be satisfied with an earlier date.
KELLOGG

[Document 229]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 28, 1928.
[Received January 30, 1929.]
No. 693
honor to transmit herewith eight copies of the communication received
from the League of Nations31 stating that Mr. Loudon had convened the
next session of the Preparatory Commission for April 15, at 11 a.m. A copy
has been forwarded to Mr. Gibson at Brussels.
I have [etc.]
(For the Minister)
PIERREPONT MOFFAT
Secretary of Legation
31 Not printed.
31 Not printed.

Rejection by the United States of the
Franco-British compromise plan for
naval limitation32
Governments, published by the French and British Governments, see
France, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Limitation des armements navals:
Trente-cinq pieces relatives aux travaux préparatoires du désarmament, etc.
(Paris, Imprimerie des Journaux Officiels, 1928), and Great Britain Cmd.
Naval Armaments.
[230] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[231] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, August 2, 1928.
[232] President Coolidge to the Secretary of State

[233] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
[234] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
[235] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, August 3, 1928.
[236] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
[237] President Coolidge to the Secretary of State
[238] The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 8, 1928.

[239] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[240] The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[241] The British Acting Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
(Cushendum) to the British Chargé in Washington (Chilton)
[London,] 10 August, 1928.
[242] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
[243] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[244] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State

[245] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[246] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[247] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[248] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armoury)
[249] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, September 26, 1928.
[250] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)

[Document 230]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
BEVERLY FARMS, MASS., July 31, 1928.
[Received August 1.]
No. 358
SIR: I have the honour to inform you, under instructions from His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that preliminary
conversations have proceeded between His Majesty’s Government and the
French Government in the hope of finding a basis for naval limitation
which might prove generally acceptable and thus render fruitful the
resumption of discussions in the Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference33 whose failure to record any progress during the
last eighteen months has been the source of universal disappointment. To
this end the two Governments have agreed substantially to modify the
positions which they held respectively at the meeting of the Commission in
March 1927, and have worked out proposals on the following lines, which
they are themselves ready to accept and which they hope will serve to
promote general agreement.
The limitations which the Disarmament Conference will have to
determine will deal with four classes of men-of-war:
(1) Capital ships, i. e. ships of over 10,000 tons or with
guns of more than 8 inch calibre.
(2) Aircraft carriers of over 10,000 tons.
(3) Surface vessels of or below 10,000 tons armed with
guns of more than 6 inch and up to 8 inch calibre.
(4) Ocean going submarines over 600 tons.

The Washington Treaty34 regulates limitations in classes (1) and
(2) and the Disarmament Conference will only have to consider
the method of extending these limitations to Powers non-
signatory to this Treaty.
As regards Classes (3) and (4), the final Disarmament Conference
will fix the maximum tonnage applicable to all Powers, which no
Power would be allowed to exceed for the total of vessels in each
of these respective categories during the period covered by the
Convention. Within this maximum limit, each Power will indicate
at the final Conference for each of these categories, the tonnage
they propose to reach and which they undertake not to exceed
during the period covered by the Convention.
I am instructed to inform you of the terms of the above compromise
between hitherto divergent views and to express the earnest hope of His
Majesty’s Government that it may prove acceptable to the United States
Government.
His Majesty’s Government believe it to offer the best, if not the only,
prospect of making an advance from the present position, and they are
confident that the Governments of other principal Naval Powers will
examine it with the utmost sympathy.
His Majesty’s Government will be grateful to receive a reply as soon as
possible and at all events before the meeting assembles on September 3rd.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON
Relations, 1922, vol.  I, p. 247.

[Document 231]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, August 2, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of July 31,
1928, in which you inform me of the result of the preliminary conversations
which have proceeded between His Majesty’s Government and the French
Government, with the aim of finding a basis for naval limitation.
I thank you for informing me concerning the agreements reached, which
agreements you suggest should be adopted by the Preparatory Conference
as a basis for limitation.
In the note above referred to there are certain points which I do not fully
understand. These points are as follows:
1. One of the categories of war vessels is stated to be as follows:
“(3) Surface vessels of or below ten thousand tons armed with
guns of more than 6 inch and up to 8 inch calibre.”
I should be grateful if you would inform me whether this means that there is
to be no limitation on any surface vessel armed with guns of 6 inch calibre
or less. If this is the case, it appears that all destroyers might be built in
unlimited numbers and that the same would be true of cruisers armed with 6
inch guns or less.
2. The fourth class is defined in your note as follows: “(4) Ocean
going submarines over six hundred tons.”
I should be glad to know whether this means that all submarines of 600 tons
or less may be built free of any limitation.
the final Disarmament Conference will fix the maximum tonnage

applicable to all powers which no power will be allowed to
exceed for the total of vessels in each of these respective
categories during the period covered by the Convention. Within
this maximum limit, each power will indicate at the final
Conference through each of these categories the tonnage they
propose to reach and which they undertake not to exceed during
the period covered by the Convention.
I do not understand what the above provision means. If there is no
limitation on destroyers or cruisers armed with six inch guns or less, there
would be but one class limited, and that is cruisers armed with guns of more
than six inches and up to eight inches. If, however, there is to be a limitation
on destroyers and cruisers armed with guns of six inches or less, I do not
understand why each power should be expected to indicate the tonnage it
desires to build in these categories since the provision does not say that
each nation must indicate the tonnage of each class in the category, and
apparently would be at liberty to build either cruisers or submarines to the
full maximum tonnage. I should be very grateful if you would let me have
the British Government’s explanation of this clause in connection with the
other provisions of the memorandum.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 232]
President Coolidge to the Secretary of State
SUPERIOR, WIS., August 2, 1928.
[Received August 2.]
Please make no commitments concerning limitation of armaments.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

[Document 233]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
180. I received yesterday from the British Embassy a communication from
Sir Austen Chamberlain embodying the understanding reached between
Great Britain and France in relation to naval limitation, with the added
suggestion that it should be adopted as a basis for discussion by the
Preparatory Conference. I have asked the Embassy for the explanation of
certain points which I do not fully understand as follows:
[Here follows substance of the note of August 2, 1928, to the British
[Paraphrase.] I think it might be well for you to see Chamberlain and
discuss with him the various points covered by my inquiry. He will
undoubtedly provide you with a copy of the agreement, should you not
already have seen it, and I think you might be able through conversation to
have more light thrown on the subject than I shall get in writing from the
Embassy here. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 234]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Of course, I shall make no commitments whatever concerning the limitation
of armaments and while abroad shall not even discuss it or any other
question. The note which Great Britain sent me suggests a basis for
limitation of surface vessels below ten thousand tons armed with guns of
more than six inch and up to eight inch calibre and for ocean going
submarines over six hundred tons. It makes no suggestion as to total
tonnage or ratio. The memorandum is somewhat obscure. After consulting
with the Navy, I am simply asking the British Government to explain
certain provisions in order that we may discuss it intelligently with the
Navy. I am making no suggestions to Great Britain. I have no idea when the
next preliminary conference35 will meet. Probably not until some time late
in the Autumn. Will write you fully as soon as I can have further
conversation with Navy officials.
KELLOGG
35 i. e., the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference.

[Document 235]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, August 3, 1928.
DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I received your telegram yesterday and, as I wired you, I
have no idea of making any commitments to the British or any other
Government on the subject of the limitation of armaments.
Wednesday I received from the British Government through the British
Embassy here the enclosed communication36 on the subject of the
agreement between Great Britain and France. I discussed the matter
yesterday and today with officers of the Navy Department, Admirals Long
and Scofield and Commander Train, who are familiar with all that took
place at the Preliminary Conference during the last two or three years and
also the discussions which took place at the Geneva Three Power
Conference.37
In the first place, I judge the memorandum to be an attempt to come to an
agreement with France on the bases of limitation of naval armament to be
submitted to the Preliminary Conference which adjourned some time ago
and which is expected to meet again in the Autumn. During the discussions
heretofore there has been a wide divergence between the British plan and
the French. The French have insisted on what is known as a global tonnage,
that is, that the total tonnage of all naval vessels which France might build
should be fixed and that France might construct in any class of ships up to
that total tonnage while Great Britain insisted that the tonnage must be
agreed to as to each class, battleships, aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers
and submarines. We took that same position at Geneva. Of course,
battleships and aircraft carriers are already provided for so that leaves the
other three classes of ships and we insisted, instead of a total tonnage for all
three, that there must be a tonnage agreed upon for each class. Our position
was the same in the Preliminary Conference but Admirals Jones and Long,
with their experts, had discussed with France a modification of this plan

which our Navy officials would have been willing to agree to, which
authorized the twenty per cent, variation in the construction of ships of each
class—that is, if one was increased, the other should be reduced.
I will not go into the details of this because before the Preliminary
Conference reassembles, we shall have to examine the whole subject and,
of course, present it to you upon your return to Washington. However, after
discussing it with the Navy, we thought we ought to ask for some
information. You will see from the British note that apparently they propose
no limitation for surface vessels, that is, cruisers or destroyers, except those
carrying guns of over six inch and up to eight inch calibre. If this is what
their understanding is, it would leave all cruisers with six inch guns or less
without any limitation at all and no limitation whatever on destroyers which
I assume we could not agree to. Also apparently it would permit any
country to build all the submarines of six hundred tons or less without any
limitation. Of course, the size of submarines vary. Most of them are more
than six hundred tons, especially the ocean-going ones. Nevertheless, a six
hundred ton submarine can be very effective with a short range of cruising.
We shall make no reply to the note at all until we get the British answer and
until the whole subject is studied and submitted to you. Of course, I cannot
see how we could agree simply to limit cruisers carrying over six inch guns
and leave the countries free to construct all the small cruisers they desire
armed with guns of six inch calibre or less. In any event, I do not believe
the Preliminary Conference would recommend any such proposition to a
disarmament conference if there is one ever called. I think, however, that
Great Britain is going to try very hard to get some plan to be recommended
to a general disarmament conference and officials of the Navy Department
are working on the whole subject for the next meeting of the Preliminary
Conference.
Faithfully yours,
FRANK B. KELLOGG

37 See Foreign Relations, 1927, vol._., ppt ff.

[Document 236]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
After careful consideration with Admiral Long and others in Navy we asked
the British Government what it meant by certain provisions in the tentative
agreement as it was sent to the United States requesting an answer and will
probably be published soon. We made no commitments in any way but
simply asked for the meaning of certain clauses. We wished to know this
before the document is published if we could. However, I have written you
fully sending you copy of the British memorandum and our request. Will
make no more communications without submitting them to you in advance.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 237]
President Coolidge to the Secretary of State
SUPERIOR, WIS., August 3, 1928.
[Received August 4.]
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have your wire relative to the British naval proposals.
What I desire to have done in relation to these at present is nothing at all. I
shall be back in Washington within a few weeks and we can take the matter
up at that time. I would not have you even ask the British Government for
any explanation of the proposals which they have made. Let the entire
matter stand in abeyance. I note that you say, “I shall make no commitments
whatever concerning the limitation of armaments and while abroad shall not
even discuss it or any other question.” That is exactly the correct position,
which your good judgment as usual causes you to take. I do not especially
like the meeting that is to be held in Paris.38 While it is ostensibly to sign
the treaty, I can not help wonder whether it may not be for some other
purpose not yet disclosed. Of course, so far as this Government is
concerned, it will neither discuss nor decide any other question of any kind
or nature at the Paris meeting.
We had a nice visit with Mrs. Kellogg when I went to Cannon Falls, and she
and her sister called at the Lodge the day before yesterday.
With kindest regards, I am [etc.]
CALVIN COOLIDGE
38 i. e., meeting of the signatories to the treaty for the renunciation of war.

[Document 238]
The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, August 8, 1928.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the
technical conversations entered into between the British and French Naval
experts regarding the manner in which limitation of naval armaments might
take place have resulted in a draft agreement approved by the two
Governments and whose tenor is indicated in this communication.
This draft agreement is designed to replace the French compromise
proposal submitted in the month of March, 1927, to the Preparatory
Disarmament Commission, entrusted with drawing up a draft convention.39
It had become evident during the fifth session of the Commission that this
compromise proposal still gave rise to such differences of principle that it
would be impossible to obtain a unanimous adhesion to the formulae
proposed. It had also become evident during the discussions that a
preliminary agreement at least on principles was necessary before the
meeting of the Commission, if a second reading of the draft Convention for
the Limitation of Armaments was to take place effectively.
The conversations were, therefore, renewed between the experts of the
British and French Governments and have resulted in the following
proposals:
The limitations which the Disarmament Conference will have to determine
would fix the number of classes of war vessels at four:
1. Line vessels, i. e., vessels of over ten thousand tons or armed
with guns of more than eight inch caliber.

2. Aircraft carriers of over ten thousand tons.
3. Surface vessels of or below ten thousand tons armed with guns
of more than six inch and up to eight inch caliber.
4. Ocean-going submarines, that is to say, submarines of over six
hundred tons.
No limitation is provided for vessels not includable in one of these four
classes.
The Washington Treaty regulated the limitations in classes one and two, and
the Disarmament Conference will only have to examine the method of
extending these limitations to powers non-signatory to this Treaty.
As regards classes three and four the final Disarmament Conference will fix
a maximum tonnage applicable to all powers which no power will be
authorized to exceed for the total of vessels in each of these respective
categories during the period covered by the Convention.
Before the final conference, each power will indicate, within this maximum
limit for each of these categories, the tonnage it proposes to reach and
which it undertakes not to exceed during the period covered by the
Convention.
The preceding provisions are summarized in the table of limitation of naval
materiel annexed to this communication.40
These are the provisions of the preliminary draft, which meets with the
approval of the British and French Governments. The French Government
earnestly hopes that the Government of the United States of America finds
it possible to give this draft its approval and begs it to be so good as to
inform it, if there is occasion to do so, of what amendments would be
necessary to make its adhesion possible. The French Government is
convinced that the adhesion of the great maritime powers to these proposals
would mark an important date in the accomplishment of the work begun at
the Washington Conference.

Please accept [etc.]
SARTIGES
39 See League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission,
Series IV, p. 361.
40 Not printed.

[Document 239]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
178. [Paraphrase.] Chamberlain came down with bronchial pneumonia
early part this week. Crisis comes today but in any event he will be unable
to return to the Foreign Office for several months. Lord Cushendun will
shortly take over duties of Foreign Secretary until Chamberlain returns.
p.m., who stated that Franco–British agreement was a 50–50 compromise,
that both sides had made concessions but that French had proved very
difficult throughout negotiations and that eventually the British as quid pro
quo had agreed to withdraw their objections in connection with French
trained reservists. Sir Ronald appeared somewhat vague as to what these
objections might be and stated that insofar as he was aware this particular
clause which completed Franco-British agreement had not been
communicated to the interested powers.
He also referred to attitude of the American press, whereupon I stated that
American pressman who had visited me at the chancery had in some
manner come to conclusion that the naval limitations only affected vessels
in which the United States was interested. Sir Ronald replied that that was
so. I asked him if there was any explanation. He replied in substance that he
had no explanation except that as regarded Europe no further military
disarmament seemed possible, especially with Russia in view, but that some
form of disarmament must be accomplished here; hence the Anglo-French
discussion. [End paraphrase.]
I thereupon referred to the points on which you desire information. The oral
answer given me to your (1) is, “There is to be no limitation on any surface
vessel armed with guns of 6-inch caliber or less.”

The oral answer given me to your (2) is, “Submarines of 600 tons or less
may be built free of any limitation.”
The oral answer given me to your (3) is, “The provision you quote textually
refers only to classes 3 and 4 [”], and he informed me there is no limitation
on destroyers or cruisers armed with 6-inch guns or less and there is thus
but one class of surface vessels limited and that is cruisers armed with guns
of more than 6-inch and up to 8-inch guns except as obviously limited by
the Washington treaties.
ATHERTON
41 British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 240]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
184. [Paraphrase.] Lord Cushendun assumed his duties as Acting Foreign
Secretary yesterday and at his request Marriner42 and I called upon him this
morning.
Cushendun said that he wished very much to avoid any complications that
might be brought about by a misinterpretation of the Franco–British
agreement concerning the principles of naval reduction by the press.… [End
paraphrase.]
He said that he had been struck by the obvious misunderstanding of both
the American and European press of the nature and scope of the Anglo-
French conversations which he said had been merely the effort of Great
Britain as representing a school of thought on naval subjects in which
England had been in close agreement with, on the one hand, the United
States and Japan during all the course of the Preparatory Commission, and
French as representing the divergent point of view on the other, and that any
agreement arrived at between them could only serve as a point of departure
for discussion with all members of the Preparatory Commission.
Marriner stated that he felt that due to the publicity given the statement in
Parliament43 the American press had taken the whole thing as a definite
fixed agreement upon which Great Britain and France would stand even in
opposition to the other members of the Commission. Lord Cushendun
emphasized his conviction that there was nothing whatever of this kind and
that his Government had only been interested in making some progress
toward the solution of Preparatory Commission problems as envisaged in
the two opposing draft conventions now before it. Marriner and I are quite
convinced of his sincerity. Marriner then referred to the press reports

especially in France concerning the withdrawal of the British objection to
the French thesis on trained reservists. Lord Cushendun said that he did not
feel that any agreement had been reached on this point but that his
Government had indicated that it might be willing to withdraw this
objection in case progress could be made on the naval question. He stated in
an aside that this objection could probably never be sustained in any case.
He pointed out that Great Britain, and he presumed the United States, was
not essentially interested in the question of land forces. Marriner then
referred to the wording of the Foreign Office telegram to Chilton asking an
American reply before September 3rd and questioned this urgency. Lord
Cushendun said that he believed the desire for a reply had been in order that
all information possible on this subject should be available at the opening of
the League Assembly but that he personally felt that this was not in any
way important since any information obtained could only be of actual use at
the time of the next meeting of the Preparatory Commission although
undoubtedly at the forthcoming meeting of the Assembly many questions
would be asked of these Anglo-French discussions. In fact Cushendun gave
as his preference that no answer be given until more time had elapsed for
American consideration and for a simmering down of the press discussions.
He added that the British Embassy in Washington would be instructed to
judge in this sense.
Cushendun then inquired what might be done to correct general press
opinion on this subject particularly in the United States. Marriner suggested
that if it were possible some form of statement be made either on the part of
Lord Cushendun himself or of the Foreign Office setting forth the idea that
Great Britain as representing one school of thought at the Preparatory
Commission on naval questions had made an effort to reach some
compromise proposals with France as head of the opposing school of
thought and had requested the reaction of the other powers thereto.
Marriner said that the question of the combination of the categories of
cruisers and destroyers would, no doubt cause difficulty for the United
States which had a great preponderance of destroyers and Cushendun said
that the Anglo-French compromise was of course not altogether satisfactory
to Great Britain which would welcome any attempt of the American
authorities to discuss with France the maintenance of the present categories.
He said that he regretted that he had no engagement for a public speech in

the immediate future, but he would cause Willert to be instructed to attempt
to find an opportunity to give out from the Foreign Office to the newspaper
reporters information of this nature and hoped that if this proved feasible
something of a similar nature might be done in Washington.
A copy of any remarks Willert gives out here on this subject will be
telegraphed to the British Embassy in Washington.
[Paraphrase.] Both Marriner and I feel that Cushendun is attempting to
remove any atmosphere of suspicion touching this whole subject and is not
in any way endeavoring to obtain any international recognition for British
Foreign Office. From manner in which he intends to handle this matter we
have concluded that he was looking forward to opportunity of renewing his
acquaintance with you when you are in Paris for signature of the
renunciation treaty, since he remembered you so vividly from your days in
London, and that he hoped you would not feel under any pressure to answer
questions raised by the Anglo-French conversations before your departure.
Cushendun’s reception of us confirmed a statement which a member of the
Government made to me that with his taking office any American question
would meet with understanding attention.
Copy sent to Brussels.
ATHERTON
42 J. Theodore Marriner, Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs.
43 For statement by the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

[Document 241]
The British Acting Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
(Cushendum) to the British Chargé in Washington (Chilton)44
[LONDON,] 10 August, 1928.
Addressed to Washington, Telegram unnumbered of August 10th. Repeated
to Rome, Tokio.
I gather there is a certain amount of misapprehension at Washington as to
the exact scope and purpose of the Anglo-French proposals for the
limitation of naval armaments.
As you are aware work of League Preparatory Commission for
Disarmament Conference has broken down largely as the result of a
deadlock between British and French delegates in regard to principle on
which process of naval limitation should be based. At meeting of
Preparatory Commission last March British and French delegates
announced that conversations were taking place between the two
Governments, which might lead to some arrangement if time were allowed
for the purpose. Work of Preparatory Commission has from the first been
based on two drafts submitted by British and French Governments
respectively in March 1927, His Majesty’s Government advocating the
retention of the principle agreed upon at Washington of limitation by
categories and the French Government advocating the principle of global
tonnage. The aim has been to reconcile these by producing an agreed text
which would necessarily represent a compromise between divergent views
expressed in rival drafts. Clearly the first step towards such an agreement
was to arrive at an accord between the two Governments responsible for the
original drafts. The compromise telegraphed to you represents a successful
attempt to do this, but we realise that it is no more than the first step which
we hope may lead to a general agreement among the Powers represented on
the Preparatory Commission enabling them to draft [an agreed] skeleton
Convention (leaving figures blank) for submission to Disarmament

Conference. In the divergencies of views which appeared at the outset
between the British and French Governments the view of the United States
was in principle in agreement with that of Great Britain and as the
compromise now reached with the French goes a considerable way towards
meeting the views of the United States and ourselves we entertain the hope
that it will have the approval and support of the American Government. But
we emphasise the fact that this Anglo-French agreement is not a treaty or
even a final binding agreement in regard to naval disarmament. Unless it
should lead to the signing of an agreed Convention at Geneva its purpose
will not have been achieved and it will be necessary to make further
attempts to arrange a compromise if we are not to abandon all hope of a
limitation of armaments by international agreement.
This compromise has now been submitted to the United States Government
in order that they may consider its terms and, should they see fit, give us the
benefit of their observations and of any suggestions which may occur to
them.
Premature publicity in regard to the details of the proposals would clearly
be undesirable. Both His Majesty’s Government and the United States
Government have been criticised on the ground that there was insufficient
preparation between Governments before Geneva Naval Limitation
Conference last year. However this may be we consider it very desirable
that confidential preparatory conversations which we hope will take place
between the two Governments before the meeting of the League
Preparatory Commission at Geneva should not be prejudiced by premature
publication. It seems only necessary to say to the Press that conversations
are taking place between the Governments concerned with a view to the
resumption of work of the Preparatory Commission and that it would
obviously be prejudicial to their ultimate success if tentative proposals are
at every stage to be prematurely published.
It has been stated in Press telegrams that this naval agreement with the
French represents a bargain one part of which is that His Majesty’s
Government agree to support the contention of the French Government in
the matter of military reserves. Here again there is some misapprehension.
His Majesty’s Government have reluctantly reached the conclusion that it

will be impossible to move the French [and the] majority of other European
Governments from the attitude which they have consistently adopted on this
question and that in [present] conditions no further progress in regard to
land disarmament will be possible as long as this stumbling block remains
in the way. They do not therefore propose to offer any further resistance to
the French contention at the present time. It is not believed that any
American interest can be prejudiced by withdrawal of His Majesty’s
Government’s opposition on the military reservist question. An agreement
on land disarmament, even if it is in our view not entirely satisfactory in the
matter of military reservists would represent an important stage in the
general progress of disarmament and would be far better than no agreement
at all. Moreover acceptance of the French Government’s thesis on reservists
question will have important effect on [of?] winning French Government
over to British and American side in the matter of classification to be
adopted as a basis for naval limitation.
A reply before September 3rd was suggested in my telegram of July 30th
because it was feared at that time that a meeting of the Preparatory
Commission might be called before meeting of the Assembly. We ourselves
should have much regretted premature summoning of Commission but
might have been powerless to prevent it. There now seems little further risk
of a meeting being summoned at that time. In the circumstances United
States Government will no doubt prefer to defer replying until there has
been time for a full consideration of the new proposal in all its bearings. It
is of course feasible [desirable] that a meeting of the Preparatory
Commission should not be summoned until Powers principally concerned
have had sufficient time for reflection.
You should read this telegram to Mr. Kellogg at earliest opportunity.
[File copy not signed]
44 Copy apparently left with the Secretary of State; date of receipt not
indicated.

[Document 242]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
BEVERLY FARMS, MASS., August 11, 1928.
[Received August 13.]
No. 380
SIR: I did not fail to convey to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs the text of your note of July 29th [August 2d] making
certain enquiries regarding the result of the preliminary conversations
which have proceeded between His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain
and the French Government with a view to finding a basis for naval
limitation.
I have now been informed that the same enquiries were made in London on
August 4th by the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States, and I presume
that you are already in possession of the information which was supplied to
Mr. Atherton in reply to his questions.
I have [etc.]
(For His Majesty’s Minister)
RONALD CAMPBELL

[Document 243]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
255. For Marriner. Reference to Atherton’s telegram No. 184, from London,
August 10, 5 p.m., regarding your conversation with Lord Cushendun. The
President desires that neither I nor any of our Embassies discuss further the
Anglo-French agreement on subject of naval disarmament, and nothing will
be done here in regard to it until the President returns to Washington.45
Transmit copy to our Embassies London and Brussels.
KELLOGG
45 This sentence was also telegraphed as an instruction to the Embassies in

[Document 244]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
201. The atmosphere is clearing in regard to the Franco–British naval
understanding. We now see a molehill where we formerly saw a mountain.
Apart from the value of the agreement, the awkward manner in which it
was announced by Chamberlain in the House of Commons and the fact that
it was not made public embarrassed the Foreign Office and caused the
British public to think that without their knowledge an effort was being
made to prepare an entente with France as in 1904 and 1906. Perhaps there
may have been an ulterior purpose in Chamberlain’s mind. But, if so, such a
possibility has been utterly destroyed by the sharp reaction here. Doubtless
France would welcome another entente but Great Britain would have
nothing to do with it.
The following seems to be the state of affairs. On all sides Chamberlain has
been urged to prevent a failure of the Preparatory Commission. Last spring
Fleuriau46 discussed the subject informally with him. In June Chamberlain
stopped in Paris on his way to Geneva and discussed, without reaching a
conclusion, disarmament prospects with the French President.
The present agreement was later submitted to him by the French.
Chamberlain took this before the Cabinet and the Cabinet accepted it. Such
is the origin of the present agreement as far as it concerns naval questions.
It was not put forward as a binding agreement but merely as a compromise
which both France and Great Britain might accept and submit to the
Preparatory Commission. I understand that Italy has already stated to the

Foreign Office that it cannot accept the agreement as it stands. I do not
know the Japanese standpoint.
May I offer the following suggestions in regard to our answer? I believe
that a sharp refusal to accept the agreement would simply allow the Foreign
Office to escape from its present embarrassment and to state that we had
killed a well meant effort aimed to save the Preparatory Commission from
failure. If our reply on the other hand is delayed, the Foreign Office may
drop the matter and never refer to it again. Should it do so, our reply will
not lose its emphasis. But I would suggest that your answer whenever made
should follow roughly your note in answer to the original proposal of M.
Briand.47 In other words, state our sympathy with the object the agreement
apparently strives to attain. Stress the desire of the President for reduction
of naval armaments, and suggest that a discussion in which a useful result is
anticipated should cover all classes not included in the Washington treaty
instead of one or two selected types.
HOUGHTON
46 French Ambassador in Great Britain.
47 French Minister for Foreign Affairs. Apparently the reference is to
Briand’s proposal for a treaty with the United States for renunciation of war,
Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  II, pp. 611 ff.

[Document 245]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[Paraphrase]
104. Telegram received from Houghton contains statement that, according
to his advices, Italy has already notified British Foreign Office that Anglo-
French agreement is not acceptable to them in its present form. Reference
is, of course, to Anglo-French understanding on basis of agreement for
naval limitation. Although I understand that text of agreement has nowhere
been published in full, you undoubtedly know about it from the press. I am
not authorized to speak for President in this matter, but for your own
information I am sure that the United States would never agree to the
limiting only of cruisers carrying 8-inch guns and leaving entirely unlimited
all cruisers which carry less than 8-inch guns, which Great Britain now
desires to build. That is to say, what the United States could do would be
limited, and what Great Britain wishes to do would be left unlimited. I
should like to have you discuss this matter informally with the Italian
Foreign Office and ascertain if possible Italy’s attitude on it.
KELLOGG

[Document 246]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ROME, September 18, 1928—noon.
[Received 4:50 p.m.]
Secretary Grandi this morning at the Foreign Office in an informal talk that
Italy had not replied concerning the naval agreement to either France or
Great Britain. The opinion of the Government here seems to be that public
opinion is forming against the naval understanding in various countries and
that for the time being no reply is necessary. I am informed by Grandi that
de Martino has been instructed to talk the matter over with you informally.
He suggests that it would be desirable for our two Governments to have an
informal exchange of impressions.
I was informed by Grandi that the political significance of England and
France coming to this agreement without the knowledge of Italy was more
important to Italy than the technical side of the agreement. Furthermore he
stated that while France had denied that secret arrangements existed
regarding land forces, London having tried to minimize their importance
had seemed to tacitly acknowledge that some understanding on this subject
between England and France had been reached.
Italy, according to the impression I gathered, fears that the naval
understanding marks a change in the policy of Great Britain which will
make her relations with Italy less close and less favorable than those with
France.
The agreement was not discussed from the technical standpoint, but Grandi
assured me of his willingness for further discussion at any time of this

subject and of his desire to facilitate between our Governments an exchange
of views concerning the agreement.
FLETCHER

[Document 247]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[Paraphrase]
105. At noon yesterday the Italian Ambassador read to me the following
telegram which he had received from Premier Mussolini, and which he
wished to communicate to me:48
“I have been very much interested in the communication that has
been made to me by the Secretary of State, Mr. Kellogg. Neither
the United States nor Italy has given any answer to the Franco-
British proposition. The point of view of Italy is not favorable to
those proposals in their entirety. The proposal should have been
made to facilitate the progress of disarmament. I have no reason
to doubt the good intentions of the two governments but it is
positive that in public opinion and in the press the accord has
been received with many doubts and uncertitude. This increases
instead of diminishes the difficulties and renders the more
problematical the answer for me to give. On my side I shall wait
some time before answering. If the Secretary of State will let you
know in due time the conclusion at which the American
Government will arrive this will be very gratifying to me and I
could also take into account our point of view in the decision that
we have to make concerning the definite attitude of Italy in this
matter. I will communicate to you this decision as soon as I have
made it so that you can inform the Secretary of State. Please have
a confidential conversation with Mr. Kellogg on this matter.”
I then said to the Ambassador that early next week I expect to present to the
President a draft of an answer to the British and French proposals. I am
quite sure, I told him, that this Government cannot adopt the Anglo-French

agreement as a basis for negotiating for a limitation of armament. I said that
I would not go into details now as my conclusions have not yet been
approved by the President, but there are some objections to the agreement
which seem to me to be apparent:
1. The agreement proposes only a limitation of cruisers of 10,000
tons or below that figure armed with guns of more than 6-inch
and up to 8-inch calibre, leaving unlimited all cruisers that carry
6-inch guns or less;
2. It leaves unlimited all destroyers which can easily carry guns of
at least 5-inch calibre and perhaps six;
3. It leaves unlimited all submarines of 600 tons or less, and only
limits the larger submarines. A 600-ton submarine, I said, is just
as destructive within the radius of its operations as a larger one;
and I added that if we were going to have a limitation of
armament it ought to cover combatant vessels of all kinds.
This Government is willing to take into consideration the special needs of
France or Italy or any other naval powers for a particular class of vessel,
and it would be willing, if an agreement as to a total limitation can be made,
to vary the tonnage of particular classes of vessels within a certain
percentage to be agreed upon. Object of this is that Italy or France or some
other power may have the vessels which are more suitable to their defense.
I told the Ambassador that I am not authorized to state definitely that the
foregoing will be this Government’s answer, but that it is my view, which I
believe will be adopted.
I also said that I had no objection to the Ambassador’s communicating this
information to his Government, of course subject to any change which the
President after consulting with me and with the Navy Department may
decide to make. I said further that I am inclined to think I shall send the
answer sometime next week, but that I am not sure.
KELLOGG

48 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

[Document 248]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armoury)49
329. Please prepare the following note on the subject of the Franco-British
naval limitation agreement for delivery to the Foreign Office:
“The Government of the United States has received from the
French
Government
a
communication
summarizing
the
understanding reached between the French and British
Governments as to a basis of naval limitation, which agreement, it
is stated, will be submitted to the next meeting of the Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference.
The Government of the United States, not knowing the full text of
the agreement, finds it difficult to answer the French note, but is
nevertheless willing to submit certain suggestions as to the basis
of
naval
limitation
as
therein
summarized.
From
the
communication of the French Government it appears that:
The limitations which the Disarmament Conference
will have to determine will deal with four classes of
men-of-war:
(1) Capital ships, i. e., ships of over 10,000
tons or with guns of more than eight inch
calibre.
(2) Aircraft carriers of over 10,000 tons.
(3) Surface vessels of or below 10,000 tons
armed with guns of more than six inch and up
to eight inch calibre.

(4) Ocean going submarines over 600 tons.
As the Washington Treaty regulates the first two classes, that is,
capital ships and aircraft carriers, the Preparatory Commission
will have to consider only the last two categories so far as the
signatories of that treaty are concerned.
From the foregoing summary of the agreement it appears that the
only classes of naval vessels which it is proposed to limit under
the Franco–British draft agreement are cruisers of or below
10,000 tons, armed with guns of more than six inch and up to
eight inch calibre, and submarines of over 600 tons. The position
of the Government of the United States has been and now is that
any limitation of naval armament to be effective should apply to
all classes of combatant vessels. The Franco-British agreement
provides no limitation whatsoever on six inch gun cruisers, or
destroyers, or submarines of 600 tons or less. It could not be
claimed that the types of vessels thus left without limitation are
not highly efficient fighting ships. No one would deny that
modern cruisers armed with six inch guns, or destroyers similarly
armed, have a very high offensive value, especially to any nation
possessing well distributed bases in various parts of the world. In
fact, such cruisers constitute the largest number of fighting ships
now existing in the world. The limitation of only such surface
vessels as are restricted in Class 3 of the draft agreement, that is,
cruisers of or below 10,000 tons, armed with guns of more than
six inch and up to eight inch calibre, would be the imposition of
restrictions only on types peculiarly suited to the needs of the
United States. The United States can not accept as a distinct class
surface combatant vessels of or below 10,000 tons armed with
guns of more than six inch and up to eight inch calibre. It is
further clearly apparent that limitation of this type only would add
enormously to the comparative offensive power of a nation
possessing a large merchant tonnage on which preparation may be
made in times of peace for mounting six inch guns.

At the Three Power Conference at Geneva in 1927 the British
Delegation proposed that cruisers be thus divided into two
classes; those carrying eight inch guns and those carrying guns of
six inches or less in calibre. They proposed further that eight inch
gun cruisers be limited to a small number or to a small total
tonnage limitation and that the smaller class of cruisers carrying
six inch guns or less be permitted a much larger total tonnage, or,
what amounts to the same thing, to a very large number of
cruisers of this class. The limitation proposed by the British
Delegation on this smaller class of cruisers was so high that the
American Delegation considered it, in effect, no limitation at all.
This same proposal is now presented in a new and even more
objectionable form which still limits large cruisers which are
suitable to American needs, but frankly places no limitation
whatever on cruisers carrying guns of six inches or less in calibre.
This proposal is obviously incompatible with the American
position at the Three Power Conference. It is even more
unacceptable than the proposal put forward by the British
Delegation at that Conference not only because it puts the United
States at a decided disadvantage but also because it discards
altogether the principle of limitation as applied to important
combatant types of vessels.
Much of what has been said above as to vessels in Class 3 of the
Franco–British agreement applies with equal or greater force to
Class 4. The American Government can not accept as a distinct
class of submarines those of over 600 tons leaving unlimited all
submarines of 600 tons or under. Six hundred ton submarines are
formidable combatant vessels. They carry the same torpedoes as
are carried by larger submarines and of equal destructive force
within the radius of their operation. They can also be armed with
guns of five inch calibre. The United States would gladly, in
conjunction with all the nations of the world, abolish the
submarine altogether. If, however, submarines must be continued
as instruments of naval warfare, it is the belief of the American
Government that they should be limited to a reasonable tonnage
or number.

If there is to be further limitation upon the construction of war
vessels so that competition in this regard between nations may be
stopped, it is the belief of the United States that it should include
all classes of combatant vessels, submarines as well as surface
vessels.
The Government of the United States has earnestly and
consistently advocated real reduction and limitation of naval
armament. It has given its best efforts towards finding acceptable
methods of attaining this most desirable end. It would be happy to
continue such efforts, but it can not consent to proposals which
would leave the door wide open to unlimited building of certain
types of ships of a highly efficient combatant value and would
impose restrictions only on types peculiarly suitable to American
needs.
The American Government seeks no special advantage on the sea,
but clearly can not permit itself to be placed in a position of
manifest disadvantage. The American Government feels,
furthermore, that the terms of the Franco-British draft agreement,
in leaving unlimited so large a tonnage and so many types of
vessels, would actually tend to defeat the primary objective of any
disarmament conference for the reduction or the limitation of
armament in that it would not eliminate competition in naval
armament and would not effect economy. For all these reasons the
Government of the United States feels that no useful purpose
would be served by accepting as a basis of discussion the Franco-
British proposal.
The American Government has no objection to any agreement
between France and Great Britain which those countries think
will be to their advantage and in the interest of limitation of
armament, but naturally can not consent that such an agreement
should be applied to the United States.
In order to make quite clear that, in declining to adopt the Franco-
British agreement as a basis for discussion of naval limitation, it
seems appropriate briefly to review the attitude of the United

States regarding the methods of limitation, in order to show that
the American Government has consistently favored a drastic
proportional limitation. The success of the Washington
Conference is known to all. It strictly limited all combatant ships
and aircraft carriers of over 10,000 tons. In order to bring about
such limitation the American Government made great sacrifices
in the curtailment of plans of building and in the actual
destruction of ships already built. At the first session of the
Preparatory Conference, the American Government submitted
proposals which were consistently adhered to at subsequent
meetings:
(1) That the total tonnage allowed in each class of
combatant vessel be prescribed.
(2) That the maximum tonnage of a unit and the
maximum calibre of gun allowed for each class be
prescribed.
(3) That so long as the total tonnage allowed to each
class is not exceeded, the actual number of units may be
left to the discretion of each power concerned.
Within this general plan the American proposal at the Geneva
Conference was, for the United States and the British Empire, a
total tonnage limitation in the cruiser class of from 250,000 to
destroyer class, for the United States and the British Empire, from
For the submarine class, for the United States and the British
tons. It was further stated by the American Delegation that, if any
power represented felt justified in proposing still lower tonnage
levels for auxiliary craft, the American Government would
welcome such proposal.
The purpose of these proposals was that there might be no
competition between the three powers in the building of naval

armament, that their respective navies should be maintained at the
lowest level compatible with national security and should not be
of the size and character to warrant the suspicion of aggressive
intent and finally that a wise economy dictates that further naval
construction be kept to a minimum.
The Government of the United States remains willing to use its
best efforts to obtain a basis of further naval limitation
satisfactory to all the naval powers, including those not
represented at the Three Power Conference in Geneva, and is
willing to take into consideration in any conference the special
needs of France, Italy or any other naval power for the particular
class of vessels deemed by them most suitable for their defense.
This could be accomplished by permitting any of the powers to
vary the percentage of tonnage in classes within the total tonnage;
a certain percentage to be agreed upon. If there was an increase in
one class of vessels it should be deducted from the tonnage to be
used in other classes. A proposal along these lines made by
France and discussed by the American and French representatives
would be sympathetically considered by the United States. It
expects on the part of others, however, similar consideration for
its own needs. Unfortunately the Franco-British agreement, so far
as its purport can be ascertained from the summary given, appears
to fulfill none of the conditions which, to the American
Government, seem vital. It leaves unlimited a very large class of
effective fighting ships and this very fact would inevitably lead to
a recrudescence of naval competition disastrous to national
economy.
In a letter of July 31, 1928, from the British Embassy and the
letter of August 3, 1928, from the French Embassy the following
practically identical statement occurs:
‘The final disarmament conference to fix the maximum
tonnage applicable to all powers.’
The United States does not understand the precise meaning of this
statement. Does it mean that the disarmament conference will fix

a definite maximum tonnage applicable to all nations, or does it
mean that the maximum tonnage will be fixed on some ratio basis
having in view the principle of relative needs? The United States
does not care to comment upon this in the absence of knowledge
as to what the Franco–British agreement means.”
Please repeat to London as No. 215 for delivery mutatis mutandis to the
British Government. I should like to have you deliver this note on Friday
morning, stating that the Department plans to give it to the press for
publication in the morning papers of Saturday, September 29.
KELLOGG
49 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to London as Department’s
No. 215. For changes in text as presented September 28, see telegram No.
Doc. 250 and Doc. 251].

[Document 249]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
No. 439
His Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the
Secretary of State of the United States, and has the honour, under
instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, to communicate to Mr. Kellogg herewith the texts of the notes
exchanged between His Majesty’s Government and the French Government
which led up to the compromise, the text of which was contained in the note
No. 358 which Mr. Chilton had the honour to address to Mr. Kellogg under
date of July 31st last.
Mr. Campbell is instructed to inform Mr. Kellogg that no other notes have
been exchanged between His Majesty’s Government and the French
Government on this subject, and to request that the texts communicated
herewith may be treated as confidential and not for publication.
WASHINGTON, September 26, 1928.
[Enclosure 1]
Text of a Note From the British Ambassador to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dated
June 28, 1928
His Majesty’s Ambassador is instructed by His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to inform the Minister for Foreign
Affairs that His Majesty’s Government have had under consideration a
suggestion made by the French naval representative in a conversation with
Admiral Kelly at Geneva early this month.
2. The suggestion is that the only surface vessels subject to
limitation should be those mounting a gun of greater calibre than

6". This would produce a classification for the preparatory
commission on disarmament as follows:—
Capital Ships.
Aircraft carriers.
Surface vessels of 10,000 tons and under mounting a
gun above 6ʺ.
Submarines.
3. His Majesty’s Government presume that this suggestion would
not have been made to Admiral Kelly by the French Naval
representative unless he had reason to suppose it would meet with
the approval of the Government of the Republic. In these
circumstances Lord Crewe is directed to inform Monsieur Briand
that His Majesty’s Government in their earnest desire to meet the
views of the Government of the Republic accept this suggestion
and that they are prepared to instruct their representative to
support it if put forward by the French representatives.
4. Lord Crewe is directed to add that the adoption of this
suggestion, which His Majesty’s Government recognize would be
a concession to their views on naval classification, would enable
them to meet the Government of the Republic by withdrawing
their opposition to the French standpoint in regard to Army
trained reserves.
[Enclosure 2—Translation]
Text of a Note From the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the British Embassy, Dated July
In his note of June 28 last the Marquis of Crewe kindly communicated to
M. Briand the bases on which his Government, solicitous of making
possible between France and Great Britain an understanding designed to
insure the success of the work of the Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference, was disposed to consider the limitation of naval

armaments. He added that if the Government of the Republic should share
these views the British Government, on its part, would give up its
opposition to the French position on the question of “trained reserves”.
The Government of the Republic convinced, as is the British Government,
that in the absence of an understanding between the two countries it would
be vain to hope for the success of the labours of the Preparatory
Commission and consequently impossible to achieve a general limitation of
armaments, has examined in the most receptive spirit the proposal which
the British Embassy has been good enough to transmit.
It would certainly have preferred that the British Government, taking into
account the views already expressed officially or semiofficially by the
United States and Japan, should have considered it possible to accept the
compromise draft presented by the French Delegation in the month of
March, 1927, and it remains convinced that, if, in spite of their
expectations, difficulties should continue to exist, the study of this draft
would eventually furnish ways of overcoming them.
Taking cognizance, however, of the declarations contained in the British
note, realizing the attempt at conciliation, of which these declarations give
evidence and desirous, on its part, of showing in this matter the same desire
for an understanding, the French Government after careful examination has
decided to agree with the principle of the proposals contained in the note of
June 28.
Nevertheless, it appears to the French Government that, to be submitted
effectively for the acceptance of the other interested naval Powers with a
view to the reconvening of the Preparatory Commission and in order fully
to safeguard the interests for which that Government is responsible, these
proposals should be made more definite with respect to the manner of their
execution.
It is with this in view that the Chief of the General Staff of the Navy
recently questioned Rear-Admiral Kelly, temporarily in Paris, concerning
the means which the British Admiralty considered employing in putting
into practise the proposed method of limitation. Rear-Admiral Violette in
particular asked whether the British Government, following a method

already put forward by its representatives, envisaged, for the limitation of
submarines, the fixing of a maximum tonnage equal for all the great naval
Powers, a system which should eventually have the advantage of avoiding
discussions frequently delicate regarding the determination of the needs and
the relative strength of their navies.
He similarly asked if the same method could be applied to cruisers, for the
limitation of which the note of June 28th provides, it being understood,
moreover, that, within the maximum tonnage theoretically authorized, the
Disarmament Conference should determine the limitation figures which in
practise the High Contracting Parties would undertake not to exceed during
the period of the Convention to be concluded. Such a procedure would, in
effect, have the advantage of avoiding discussions on the relative theoretical
strength of certain navies, the political consequences of which might
become delicate.
Finally, Rear-Admiral Violette asked whether, in accordance with a
proposal often made by the British Admiralty, submarines could not be
divided into two classes, coastal submarines, as the Japanese Delegation
suggested during the Three Power Naval Conference, being exempt from all
limitation because of their strictly defensive role.
The French Government sincerely hopes that the British Government will
see no obstacles to making complete its proposals in this sense. The French
Government itself could thus accept them in their entirety and that would
render it possible to avoid at Geneva painful discussions which would be
more likely to increase distrust between the Powers than to create the
atmosphere of mutual confidence necessary to the general limitation of
armaments.
Furthermore, it certainly has not escaped the British Government that the
understanding so ardently desired by both can only produce its happy
results if the American Government is willing to associate itself therewith.
M. Briand would therefore be glad to know whether His Majesty’s
Government will consider it opportune to take the necessary steps in
Washington in this respect. For its part, the Government of the Republic
would not fail to point out the reasons for which, anxious to reach a
conclusion, it has not thought that it should insist upon the adoption of the

compromise proposal which it presented in 1927. It, moreover, entertains
the hope that the concerted action of France and England will make it
possible to obtain the adherence of the interested naval Powers.
In any event, moreover, and even if this hope should be frustrated, there
would nevertheless remain for the two Governments the imperious duty of
coming to an agreement either to insure in other ways the success of the
work which is being done or to adopt a common policy which would permit
them to meet the difficulties which a failure of this work would not fail to
occasion.
[Enclosure 3]
Text of a Note From the British Embassy at Paris to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Dated July 28, 1928
His Majesty’s Embassy is directed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs to inform Minister for Foreign Affairs that His
Majesty’s Government highly appreciate the friendly and conciliatory
attitude displayed by the Government of the Republic in the memorandum
addressed to His Majesty’s Embassy by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on
July 20th respecting the limitation of naval armaments.
His Majesty’s Government, like the French Government, would have
preferred to see their own proposal for compromise accepted in the terms in
which they originally made it, and they cannot but observe that the
supplementary proposals suggested in the French note make very
considerable alterations in it. Nevertheless, His Majesty’s Government, in
their anxious desire to reach such an agreement with France and other
Powers as will lead to the successful conclusion of the labours of the
Preparatory Commission, and believing that the proposals now made by the
French Government are of a character to achieve this result, are prepared to
accept the supplementary proposals made in the French note, namely, that
an equal maximum tonnage for submarines and cruisers should be fixed for
the great naval Powers, and that submarines should be divided into two
classes, the smaller class being exempt from all limitation.

It is, of course, well known to the French Government that His Majesty’s
Government are unable to consider this class of vessel as possessing a
strictly defensive character, but, as above stated, they consent in deference
to the views of other Powers not to insist further on their point of view.
His Majesty’s Government are in full agreement with the French
Government that the assent of the other great naval Powers is essential to
success, and, as desired by the French Government, His Majesty’s
Government will communicate to the Governments of the United States,
Italy and Japan, the compromise which has already received the approval of
France and Great Britain, that is to say:—
“Limitations which the Disarmament Conference will have to
determine will deal with four classes of warships:—
“(1) Capital ships, i. e., ships of over 10,000 tons or
with guns of more than 8 inch calibre.
“(2) Aircraft carriers of over 10,000 tons.
“(3) Surface vessels of or below 10,000 tons armed
with guns of more than 6 inch and up to 8 inch calibre.
“(4) Ocean-going submarines, i. e., over 600 tons,
“The Washington Treaty regulates limitations in classes (1) and
(2) and the Disarmament Conference will only have to consider
the method of extending these limitations to Powers non-
signatory to this treaty.
“As regards classes (3) and (4), the final Disarmament
Conference will fix a maximum tonnage applicable to all Powers
which no Power will be allowed to exceed for the total of vessels
in each of these respective categories during the period covered
by the convention. Within this maximum limit each Power will at
the final conference indicate for each of these categories the
tonnage they propose to reach and which they undertake not to
exceed during the period covered by the convention.”

[Document 250]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)50
text of note to French Government concerning the Franco-British naval
agreement the Department has received from both governments the texts of
the notes exchanged. This full knowledge of the agreement does not change
the note telegraphed you, with the following exceptions:
In the second paragraph strike out the following words: “not knowing the
full text of the agreement, finds it difficult to answer the French note, but”.
Also strike out the word “nevertheless”. So that the paragraph would read
“The Government of the United States is willing to submit certain
suggestions as to the basis of naval limitation as summarized in the French
note.”
In the next to the last paragraph of the note strike out “So far as its purport
can be ascertained from the summary given”.
Also strike out the entire last paragraph beginning “In a letter of July 31”.
KELLOGG
50 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Great Britain as No.
218.

Approval by the Secretary of State of
House joint resolution favoring the
abolition of submarines by all nations
[251] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Stephen G. Porter
Washington, January 28, 1928.

[Document 251]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Stephen G. Porter50a
WASHINGTON, January 28, 1928.
MY DEAR CONGRESSMAN: I received your letter51 asking the Department’s report or
recommendations on H. J. Res. 139 expressing the opinion of Congress
against the use of submarines, etc.52 There is no objection to the Resolution
provided it expresses the opinion of Congress that submarines be abolished
and their construction prohibited by all the nations of the world. Of course,
it would be impossible for one country to abolish submarines and leave any
other country free to build and operate them. The United States would be
willing to sign a treaty with all the powers of the world prohibiting the use
of submarines entirely. I suggest, therefore, that the Resolution be amended
to read as follows:
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That it is the
opinion of the Congress of the United States that all nations of the
world should unite in prohibiting the use of submarines and
discontinuing the construction thereof in every country.
That the Government of the United States continue to use efforts
to bring about these results.
Very sincerely yours,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
50a Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of
Representatives.
51 Not printed.

Frothingham Jan. 9, 1928, and referred to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs:
“Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled, That it is the opinion of the Congress of
the United States that the use of submarines be prohibited and their
construction discontinued in this and every other country.
That the Government of the United States continue to use efforts to bring
about these results.”

Special
Commission
for
the
Preparation of a Draft Convention on
the Private Manufacture of Arms and
Ammunition and of Implements of
War, second and third sessions53
53 For correspondence concerning the first session of the Special
Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, pp. 213 ff.
[252] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[253] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
Washington, August 9, 1928.
[254] The American Representative on the Special Commission
(Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[255] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on
the Special Commission (Wilson)
[256] Statement by the American Representative (Wilson) in the
Fourth Meeting of the Second Session of the Special Commission,
August 29, 1928
August 29, 1928
[257] Preliminary Draft Convention With Regard to the Supervision of
the Private Manufacture and Publicity of the Manufacture of Arms
and Ammunition and of Implements of War Submitted to the Council
by the Special Commission
undated
[258] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[259] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[260] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[261] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[262] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium
(Gibson)
[263] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[264] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[265] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
Washington, November 22, 1928.

[266] Declaration by the American Representative (Wilson) in the
Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Special Commission,
December 7, 1928
December 7, 1928
[267] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[268] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 252]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, July 17, 1928—noon.
[Received 3:19 p.m.]
received.
“The Chairman of the Special Committee has the honor to inform
the members of the Committee that its second session will open at
agenda: Drafting of a single text for draft convention.”
WILSON

[Document 253]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, August 9, 1928.
No. 276
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 274 of August 3,
1928,54 designating you to attend the second session of the Special
Commission for the Preparation of a Draft Convention on the Private
Manufacture of Arms and Ammunition and Implements of War, which is to
meet at Geneva on August 27, 1928, there is transmitted herewith the text
of a draft convention on this subject, prepared with the cooperation of the
War and Navy Departments, and intended to serve as a possible basis for an
agreement acceptable to this Government.
It should be clearly understood that any draft convention adopted must
provide for the same degree of publicity for state manufacture as for private
manufacture, and that any convention which establishes a régime of
supervision, control, or inspection will not be acceptable to the United
States.
Inasmuch as this Government’s position with regard to questions to be
considered by the Commission is clearly set forth in its instruction No. 598
of February 28, 1927,55 and may also be determined from a study of the
enclosed draft convention, it is not considered necessary further to expound
in any detail the attitude which you should take at the forthcoming meeting.
While the Department has not had occasion to modify its views as
contained in its instruction to your predecessor, the situation obtaining at
the time of the first session of the Special Commission has undergone a
considerable change, since all Governments represented now would appear
to be in substantial agreement in so far as they are willing to discuss the
application of the Convention to public as well as private manufacture and
to limit the Convention to measures of publicity for such production. This

agreement in principle on the part of the Italian and Japanese delegates,
during an informal meeting on May 19, 1928, to publicity for government
manufacture of arms, makes it probable that the Commission will
successfully accomplish the purpose for which it is called, viz., the drawing
up of a single text for a draft convention.
While the Department does not anticipate that any attempt will be made to
resume the controversy regarding publicity of government manufacture,
you should, in the event of this contingency, as already indicated in the
second paragraph of this instruction, reassert with due emphasis this
Government’s refusal under any circumstances to consider entering into an
agreement which does not deal with government manufacture on the same
footing as private manufacture. You should similarly oppose the inclusion
of any provisions looking toward the supervision and control of arms
manufacture as distinct from publicity. The reasons for this attitude are
plainly set forth on pages 11 and 14 of the Department’s instruction of
February 28, 1927, and the annexes mentioned therein.
As regards the draft convention transmitted herewith, it will be noted that
its provisions follow as closely as possible the analogous provisions of the
are self-explanatory and need no further elucidation.
This draft is not intended for immediate presentation at the outset of the
deliberations, unless you find that the situation makes such procedure
expedient. It is believed that it would probably be wiser first to observe the
general trend of the discussions and to determine whether there is any
possibility that the American draft might be adopted in toto. Failing this,
you should, as occasion arises, submit individual articles of the draft with a
view to getting as many provisions thereof accepted as circumstances will
permit. The Department leaves it entirely to your discretion to determine
the most suitable time and method of introducing the proposals embodied in
its draft, but desires that you consult it prior to agreeing to any
modifications of substance or to any final draft which does not substantially
carry out this Government’s proposals.
Due to the fact that the draft convention to be adopted will be a companion
convention to the Arms Traffic Convention, and for other reasons, it is

considered highly desirable that the categories appearing in Article I of the
Arms Traffic Convention be embodied without any change in the draft
convention to be adopted by the Special Commission.
You should, of course, not join in any report which the commission may
make to the Assembly or Council of the League of Nations, but should state
instead that you will make your report to your Government.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
Draft Convention for the Regulation of and Publicity in Regard to the Manufacture of Arms and
Ammunition and of Implements of War
Whereas a Convention concerning the Supervision of the International
Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War was signed at
Geneva on June 17, 1925, and;
Whereas it is desirable that the international aspect of the manufacture of
arms and ammunition and implements of war should receive early
consideration;
The different governments have decided to conclude a Convention and have
accordingly appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
For the purpose of the present Convention, five Categories of arms,
ammunition, and implements of war are established as follows:
CATEGORY I. ARMS, AMMUNITION AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR EXCLUSIVELY DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR LAND, SEA OR AERIAL WARFARE

A.—Arms, Ammunition and Implements exclusively designed and intended
for land, sea or aerial warfare which are or shall be comprised in the
armament of the armed forces of any State, or which, if they have been but
are no longer comprised in such armament, are capable of military to the
exclusion of any other use, except such arms, ammunition and implements
which, though included in the above definition, are covered by other
Categories.
Such arms, ammunition and implements are comprised in the following
twelve headings:
1. Rifles, muskets, carbines.
2. (a) Machine-guns, automatic rifles and machine pistols of all
calibres;
(b) Mountings for machine-guns;
(c) Interrupter gears.
3. Projectiles and ammunition for the arms enumerated in Nos. 1
and 2 above.
4. Gun-sighting apparatus including aerial gun-sights and
bombsights, and fire-control apparatus.
5. (a) Cannon, long or short, and howitzers, of a calibre less than
(b) Cannon, long or short, and howitzers, of a calibre of 5.9
inches (15 cm.) or above;
(c) Mortars of all kinds;
(d) Gun carriages, mountings, recuperators, accessories for
mountings.
6. Projectiles and ammunition for the arms enumerated in No. 5
above.

7. Apparatus for the discharge of bombs, torpedoes, depth charges
and other kinds of projectiles.
8. (a) Grenades;
(c) Land mines, submarine mines, fixed or floating, depth
charges;
(d) Torpedoes.
9. Appliances for use with the above arms and apparatus.
10. Bayonets.
11. Tanks and armoured cars.
12. Arms and ammunition not specified in the above enumeration.
B. —Component parts, completely finished, of the articles covered by A
above, if capable of being utilized only in the assembly or repair of the said
articles, or as spare parts.
CATEGORY II. ARMS AND AMMUNITION CAPABLE OF USE BOTH FOR MILITARY AND OTHER PURPOSES
A —1. Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and
developments of the same, designed for single-handed use or
fired from the shoulder, of a calibre greater than 6.5 mm. and
length of barrel greater than 10 cm.
2. Fire-arms designed, intended or adapted for non-military
purposes, such as sport or personal defense, that will fire
cartridges that can be fired from fire-arms in Category 1; other
rifled fire-arms firing from the shoulder, of a calibre of 6 mm. or
above, not included in Category I, with the exception of rifled
fire-arms with a “breakdown” action.

3. Ammunition for the arms enumerated in the above two
headings, with the exception of ammunition covered by Category
I.
4. Swords and lances.
B. —Component parts, completely finished, of the articles
covered by A above, if capable of being utilized only in the
assembly or repair of the said articles, or as spare parts.
CATEGORY III. VESSELS OF WAR AND THEIR ARMAMENT
1. Vessels of war of all kinds.
2. Arms, ammunition and implements of war mounted on board
vessels of war and forming part of their normal armament.
CATEGORY IV
1. Aircraft, assembled or dismantled.
2. Aircraft engines.
CATEGORY V
1. Gunpowder and explosives, except common black gunpowder.
2. Arms and ammunition other than those covered by Categories I
and II, such as pistols and revolvers of all models, rifled weapons
with a “break-down” action, other rifled fire-arms of a calibre of
less than 6 mm. designed for firing from the shoulder, smooth-
bore shot-guns, guns with more than one barrel of which at least
one barrel is smooth-bore, fire-arms firing rimfire ammunition,
muzzleloading fire-arms.
ARTICLE 2
The provisions of the present Convention apply with equal force to all
production of the articles covered by Categories I to V of Article 1, within
the territory under the jurisdiction, control or supervision of the High
Contracting Parties, irrespective of whether the means of production are

owned, controlled, or managed by private individuals or corporations, or
whether such means of production are owned, controlled, or managed by
the State.
ARTICLE 3
The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish within six months after
the close of each calendar half-year a statistical return for that half-year of
all the articles covered by Categories I and II, which have been
manufactured within the territory under their jurisdiction, control, or
supervision. This return shall be drawn up in accordance with the specimen
form contained in Annex I57 to the present Convention and shall show
under each heading of the said Categories in Article 1, the weight, the
number, and the value of the articles so manufactured. This return in the
form shown in Annex I shall not include the items covered by Articles 4
and 5 which are published in the form shown in Annexes II and III to this
Convention. The first statistical return to be published by each of the High
Contracting Parties shall be for the half-year, beginning on the first day of
January or of July, subsequent to the date on which the present Convention
comes into force with regard to the High Contracting Party concerned.
ARTICLE 4
The High Contracting Parties in all cases covered by Category III undertake
to publish within six months after the close of each calendar half-year a
statistical return for that half-year, giving the information detailed below for
each vessel of war constructed, under construction, or to be constructed
within their territory or jurisdiction, whether on their own behalf or on
behalf of the government of another State;
a. The date of the signing of the contract or authorization and
appropriation for the construction of the vessel, the name of the
government for which the vessel is ordered, together with the
following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the
principal dimensions, namely, length at water line,

extreme beam at or below water line, and main draft at
standard displacement.
b. The date of laying the keel, the name of the government for
which the vessel is being constructed, together with the following
data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the
principal dimensions, namely, length at water line,
extreme beam at or below water line, and main draft at
standard displacement.
c. Date of delivery, or date of completion, the name of the
government to which the vessel is delivered, together with the
following data with respect to the vessel at that date:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the
principal dimensions, namely, length at water line,
extreme beam at or below water line and main draft at
standard displacement.
As well as the following information regarding the armament
installed on board the vessel at the date of delivery and forming
part of the vessel’s normal armament:
Number and calibre of guns;
Number and calibre of torpedo tubes;
Number of bomb throwers; number and calibre of
machine guns; number and calibre of antiaircraft guns,
quantity and kind of other armament.
By the standard displacement in the present Article it is to be understood
the displacement of the vessel complete, fully manned, engined, and
equipped ready for sea, including all armament and ammunition,
equipment, outfit, provisions and fresh water for crew, miscellaneous stores,

and implements of every description that are intended to be cared for58 but
without fuel or reserve feed water on board.
This return shall be drawn up in accordance with the specimen form
contained in Annex II of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 5
The High Contracting Parties in all cases covered by Category IV undertake
to publish within six months after the close of each calendar half-year a
return for that half-year, giving the information detailed below for each
aircraft and each aircraft engine manufactured under military specifications
within their territory or jurisdiction, whether on their own behalf or on
behalf of the government of another State:
a. Primary purpose for which manufactured whether military or
commercial.
b. Type.
c. Horse-power.
d. Gross weight fully-manned, engined, armed and equipped
ready for the performance of its mission, including normal
designed fuel supply. (For lighter-than-air craft volume to be
substituted for gross weight.)
e. Armanent—number and calibre of guns, with normal
ammunition, supply and bomb capacity.
By the term “manufactured under military specifications” is meant both
materiel manufactured for purely military purposes and materiel
manufactured for commercial purposes, but on specifications designed to
make it capable of military uses.
This return shall be drawn up in accordance with the specimen form
contained in Annex III.

ARTICLE 6
The Articles covered by Category V shall be subject to such publicity as
may be prescribed by the national legislation of each High Contracting
Party.
ARTICLE 7
The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish semi-annually, the text
of the provisions of all statutes, orders, or regulations in force within their
territories dealing with the manufacture, storage, or distribution of the
articles covered by Categories I to V of Article 1.
ARTICLE 8
The provisions of the present Convention are supplemented by those of
Annexes I to III, inclusive, which have the same value and which enter into
force at the same time as the Convention itself.
ARTICLE 9
In time of war the application of the present Convention shall be suspended
in so far as its application to a High Contracting Party who is a belligerent
is concerned.
ARTICLE 10
The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavors to secure the
accession to the present Convention of other states. Each accession will be
notified to the Government of the French Republic and by the latter to all
signatories or acceding states.
The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the
Government of the French Republic.
ARTICLE 11
The present Convention may be denounced by any Party thereto after the
expiration of four years from the time when it came into force in respect to

that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing,
addressed to the Government of the French Republic, which shall forthwith
transmit copies of such notification to the other Parties informing them of
the date on which it was received.
A denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of the receipt of the
notification thereof by the Government of the French Republic and shall
operate only in respect to the notifying state.
Should the Convention be denounced by one of the Powers whose
ratification is a condition of its entrance into force, any other High
Contracting Party may also, within a period of one year from the date of
such denunciation, denounce the Convention without waiting for the
expiration of the period of four years mentioned above, and may require
that its denunciation shall take effect at the same time as the first mentioned
denunciation.
ARTICLE 12
Any state signing or acceding to the present Convention may declare at the
moment of its signature, ratification or accession, that its acceptance of the
present Convention does not apply to any or all of the overseas territories
under its sovereignty, authority or jurisdiction, and may accede
subsequently in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 on behalf of
any territory so excluded. Denunciation may also be effected separately in
respect of any such territory, and the provisions of Article 11 shall apply to
any such denunciation.
ARTICLE 13
The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of
three years from the coming into force of the present Convention, under the
terms of Article 15, this Convention shall be subject to revision upon the
request of one-third of the said High Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE 14

The present Convention, of which the English and French texts are both
authentic, is subject to ratification, and shall bear today’s date.
Each Power shall address its ratification to the Government of the French
Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of such ratification to each
of the other signatory Powers.
The instruments of ratification will remain deposited in the archives of the
Government of the French Republic.
ARTICLE 15
A first proces-verbal of the deposit of the ratification will be drawn up by
the Government of the French Republic as soon as the present Convention
shall have been ratified by not less than . . . . . . . producing States.
The present Convention shall come into force four months after the date of
notification by the Government of the French Republic to all signatory
Powers.
Subsequently the present Convention will come into force with respect to
each High Contracting Party four months after the date on which its
ratification or accession shall have been notified by the Government of the
French Republic to all signatory or acceding States.
In witness thereof, the above mentioned Plenipotentiaries have signed the
present Convention.
Done at Geneva this . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19.
54 Not printed.
57 There are no annexes attached to the file copy of this draft.
58 On August 30 the Ambassador was informed that the phrase “cared for”
should read “carried in war.”

[Document 254]
The American Representative on the Special Commission
(Wilson) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, August 27, 1928—noon.
1. Article V of your draft of treaty discussing category III appears to limit
“civil aircraft” to those “manufactured under military specifications.”
Examination of Traffic in Arms Convention discloses no such limitation
and I would appreciate analysis of Department’s views in this matter. I have
requested Yount59 to proceed from Paris to advise me on this and other
questions.
I assume that full publicity concerning aircraft is made by our Government
departments. If this is so could we not safely promise full publicity on “civil
aviation” without limitation?
Address Ammission.
WILSON
59 Major Burton K. Yount, assistant military attaché for air, American
Embassy, Paris.

[Document 255]
The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on
the Special Commission (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
with Department’s instruction to you of August 9, the analogous provisions
of arms traffic convention were followed wherever possible for two
reasons: (1) To forestall inclusion and discussion of new classifications of
material; (2) to simplify the execution of the two conventions.
Owing to circumstances which arose during the negotiations over the arms
traffic convention there was no distinction made in providing for (he
publication of import and export statistics. The Government of the United
States requires these statistics in any event, and the feeling was, therefore,
that the provision of the proposed convention imposed no new requirement
on private manufacturers.
The Government of the United States does not wish, however, to require
publicity for all airplanes and engines which are privately manufactured in
this country in way which would become necessary were the provision in
the convention now under negotiation to be extended as you suggest.
Department also feels that the inclusion of all aircraft would be step in
direction of admitting that “potentials of war” should be open to restriction
or to control. As you are aware, the Government of the United States is
firmly opposed to any such admission as a basis for either regulation or
limitation.
Department realizes that provision including all aircraft and engines in the
arms traffic convention is inconsistent with title of this proposed convention

which includes only arms, ammunition, and implements of war. For this
reason the Department is all the more anxious that a similar inconsistency
should not be embodied in the convention now under negotiation. It would
seem quite as inconsistent with purpose of the convention as expressed in
its title to include all aircraft and engines as it would if there were included
under Category I, heading 11, all commercial and private automobiles along
with armored tanks and cars.
Accordingly, the Department instructs you to maintain position that only
aircraft and engines manufactured under military specifications should be
listed in convention. If the other Governments are not prepared to accept the
inclusion in the provision of all those manufactured under military
specifications, you should take the position that only aircraft and engines
manufactured for the armed forces of the respective countries should be
included.
Department is fully aware of the difficulty of your position on this point,
but it hopes that you will be able, nevertheless, to bring the other delegates
to share our views on undesirability of attempting to include material which
is not designed expressly for war purposes.
CASTLE

[Document 256]
Statement by the American Representative (Wilson) in the Fourth
Meeting of the Second Session of the Special Commission,
August 29, 192860
August 29, 1928
Yesterday the discussion turned on the question of aviation, and certain
reserves were made, which make it essential, in our opinion, to offer a
statement.
The American Government has consistently urged the fullest publicity for
all production of war material of both private and public manufacture.
In submitting a reserve to Article 1, category 4, which I am about to offer, I
desire to state that full information concerning the production in the United
States of America of aircraft and aircraft engines for civil and commercial
purposes is available to the public in Government publications.
From this fact it is evident that no question can arise of the good faith of my
Government in this matter; nor can anyone surmise that we suggest the
possibility of limitation of Category 4 for the purposes of secrecy.
Nevertheless, in the Preparatory Commission for Disarmament, and in
various subcommittees growing out of that Commission, the American
representatives have never failed to make clear our point of view that
limitation of civil and commercial aircraft is unacceptable.
Lest any doubt in the future should arise as to our attitude on this point, we
think it advisable to insert a note explaining that in this Draft Convention
we do not change our attitude as to our views against the incorporation of
all aircraft and aircraft motors as implements of war, as they are described
under the heading of Article l.61

60 Extract from minutes transmitted to the Department by the American
draft convention, infra.

[Document 257]
Preliminary Draft Convention With Regard to the Supervision of
the Private Manufacture and Publicity of the Manufacture of
Arms and Ammunition and of Implements of War Submitted to
the Council by the Special Commission62
undated
PREAMBLE
The following countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Whereas the signatories of the Final Act of the Convention concerning the
Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in
Implements of War, signed at Geneva on June 17th, 1925, have
unanimously declared that “the Convention of to-day’s date must be
considered as an important step towards a general system of international
agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of war, and
that it is desirable that the international aspect of the manufacture of such
arms, ammunition, and implements of war should receive early
consideration by the different Governments”;
Whereas the manufacture of arms and ammunition and implements of war
should be subjected to a general and effective system of governmental
supervision and publicity;
Whereas the manufacture of arms, ammunition or implements the use of
which in war is prohibited by international law ought not to be permitted for
such purpose;
Have decided to conclude a Convention and have accordingly appointed as
their plenipotentiaries:
(Here follow the names of the plenipotentiaries.)

Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows:
CATEGORIES
Article 1
[Same as Chapter I of the Convention for the Supervision of the
Remarks
1. The Belgian delegation has made a reservation with
regard to the advisability of a further study being made
of these categories.
2. The German delegation declares itself against the
inclusion of Category IV, in so far as civil aviation is
concerned, in this Convention.
3. The delegation of the United States of America
reserves the right to propose, for incorporation in the
final text of the Convention, a statement limiting the
material of Category IV of Article 1 to aircraft and
aircraft engines manufactured under military
specifications within their territory or jurisdiction on
their own behalf or on behalf of the Government of
another State.
By the term “manufactured under military specifications” it
means both material manufactured for purely military purposes
and material manufactured for commercial purposes, but on
specifications designed to make it capable of military use.
The delegation of the Netherlands associates itself with this
reservation.
SUPERVISION AND PUBLICITY

Article 2
For the purposes of the present Convention, private manufacture shall be
considered to mean manufacture of items defined in Article 1 taking place
in establishments of which the State is not the sole proprietor, and which are
mainly or to a large extent engaged in the manufacture of the said articles,
excluding manufacture on the order and behalf of the State.
Article 3
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to permit, in the territory under
their jurisdiction, the private manufacture as defined in Article 2 of the
articles included in Categories I, II, III and IV, or of the arms, ammunition
and implements the use of which in war is prohibited by international law,
unless the manufacturers thereof are licensed by the Government to
manufacture the articles referred to in this article.
This licence shall be valid for a period to be determined individually by
each High Contracting Party, and shall be renewable for a further period at
the discretion of the Government.
As regards arms, ammunition and implements the use of which in war is
prohibited by international law, authorisation shall only be given in cases
where it is established beyond doubt that such articles are to be
manufactured for purposes other than war.
Remarks
1. Certain delegations declared themselves against the
inclusion of Category IV in this article.
2. The British delegation made a reservation with
regard to clauses concerning arms, ammunition and
implements the use of which in war is prohibited by
international law.
3. The delegation of the United States of America
recalled its declaration of principle made previously to

the effect that its Government is powerless to prescribe
or enforce a prohibition or a system of licences upon
private manufacture which takes place under the
jurisdiction of the States which form the Union of the
Government of the United States.
Article 4
The High Contracting Parties undertake to transmit to the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations, or to publish within two months after the close of
each quarter beginning on the first day of January, April, July and October a
list of the licences granted during that quarter, together with:
(a) A description of the war material for which the licence is
granted;
(b) The name and address of the registered or head office of the
licensees and the period for which the licence has been granted.
(c) The names of all the enterprises with which the holder has
concluded agreements or associations of any kind whatever, with
a view to the production of the articles of war material for which
the licence has been granted.
Remark
Certain delegations are unable to accept the clause under (c)
above.
Article 5
The High Contracting Parties further undertake to transmit to the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, or to publish annually, a return showing
the total production, in value, of the private manufactures licensed in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3, in respect of each of the twelve
headings of Category I (A and B), of the four headings of Category II (A
and B), of the two headings of Category IV, set out in Article 1 of the
present Convention.

Each of the High Contracting Parties similarly undertakes to forward to the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations, or to publish annually, a return
showing the total production, in terms of value and by categories, of the
material manufactured for it either in establishments of which the State is
the sole proprietor, or in any other establishment.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to transmit to the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations, or to publish, the text of the provisions of all
statutes, orders or regulations in force within their territory dealing with
articles covered by Categories I, II and IV. All provisions enacted for the
purpose of carrying out the present Convention and all amendments and
additions to such statutes, orders, regulations and provisions shall also be
published, or transmitted to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
Remarks
1. Certain delegations declared themselves against the inclusion
of Categories IB, IIB and IV in this article.
2. Certain delegations made the reservation that, in order to be
accurate, “the particulars published in regard to private
manufacture should be set forth in terms of weight, number and
value”.
Other delegations were of opinion that, in order to satisfy the
requirements of the Assembly’s resolution of September 24th,
1927, publicity in terms of weight, number and value should be
prescribed for State as well as for private manufacture. Certain of
the latter delegations could not accept any treaty which does not
deal with State manufacture on the same footing as private
manufacture.
3. Certain delegations consider that the conditions of supervision
and publicity in regard to State manufacture must be brought into
line with the general conditions which will be laid down by the
Convention for the limitation of armaments.

Certain delegations, while accepting that remark, consider that it
must not be interpreted in such a way as to subordinate the
convening of a Conference on Private Manufacture to that of the
General Conference on the Reduction and Limitation of
Armaments.
4. Certain delegations are of opinion that the return provided for
in the second paragraph should contain information not only for
categories but also in respect of headings, as provided for in the
first paragraph.
Article 6
The High Contracting Parties, in all cases covered by Category III,
undertake to publish within two months after the close of each half-year a
return for that half-year, giving the information detailed below for each
vessel of war constructed, in the course of construction, or to be constructed
(i. e., for which the contract has been signed), within their territorial
jurisdiction:
(a) The date of the signing of the contract for the construction of the vessel,
and the following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the principal dimensions,
namely, length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line and mean
draft at standard displacement;
(b) The date of laying the keel and the following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the principal dimensions,
namely, length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line, mean
draft at standard displacement;
(c) Date of delivery, or date of completion, together with the following data
with respect to the vessel at that date:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the principal dimensions,
namely, length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line and main

draft at standard displacement.
By standard displacement in the present article is to be understood the
displacement of the vessel complete, fully manned, engined, and equipped
ready for sea, including all armament and ammunition, equipment, outfit,
provisions and fresh water for crew, miscellaneous stores and implements
of every description that are intended to be carried in war, but without fuel
or reserve feed water on board.
Remarks
A proposal was made to the effect of inserting, at the end of
paragraph (c) above, the following clause:
“As well as the following information regarding the armament
installed on board the vessel at the date of delivery and forming
part of the vessel’s normal armament:
“Number and calibre of guns; number and calibre of torpedo
tubes; number of bomb throwers; number of machine-guns.”
However, certain delegations declared that they had no
instructions from their Governments enabling them to take a
decision on this point.
Article 7
The articles covered by Category V shall only be subject to such publicity
as may be prescribed by the national legislation.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 8
In time of war, the application of the present Convention shall be suspended
until the restoration of peace as regards belligerents, and also as regards
non-belligerents threatened by the war and whose supply of arms would
become difficult as a result of hostilities.

Neutral High Contracting Parties who avail themselves of this right shall
duly notify the other High Contracting Parties.
Remarks
Certain delegations consider that the following words should be
omitted: “and also as regards non-belligerents threatened by the
war and whose supply of arms would become difficult as a result
of hostilities”. The second paragraph of the article would thus
become superfluous.
Other delegations expressed the opinion that only the words “and
whose supply of arms would become difficult as a result of
hostilities” should be omitted.
Article 9
The present Convention shall not be deemed to affect any rights and
obligations which may arise out of the provisions of the Covenant of the
League of Nations, or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at
Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon, or of the Treaty limiting Naval
Armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922, or of any other
treaty, convention, agreement or engagement concerning the manufacture of
arms and ammunition and of implements of war.
Article 10
The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavours to secure the
accession to the present Convention of other States.
Each accession will be notified to the Secretary-General of the League of
Nations, and by the latter to all the signatory or acceding States.
The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the
Secretariat of the League of Nations.
Article 11

The present Convention may be denounced by any High Contracting Party
thereto after the expiration of four years from the date when it came into
force in respect of that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification
in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations,
who will forthwith transmit copies of such notification to the other
Contracting Parties, informing them of the date on which it was received.
A denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of the receipt of the
notification thereof by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, and
shall operate only in respect of the notifying States.
Should the Convention be denounced by one of the Powers whose
ratification is a condition of its entry into force, any other High Contracting
Party may also, within a period of one year from the date of such
denunciation, denounce the Convention without waiting for the expiration
of the period of four years mentioned above, and may require that its
denunciation shall take effect at the same date as the first-mentioned
denunciation.
Article 12
Any State signing or acceding to the present Convention may declare, at the
moment of its signature, ratification or accession, that its acceptance of the
present Convention does not apply to any or all of the overseas territories
under its sovereignty, authority or jurisdiction, and may accede
subsequently in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 on behalf of
any territory so excluded. Denunciation may also be effected separately in
respect of any such territory, and the provisions of Article 11 shall apply to
any such denunciation.
Remarks
The Netherlands delegation proposed that this article should be
omitted.
Article 13

The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of
three years from the coming into force of the present Convention under the
terms of Article 15, this Convention shall be subject to revision upon the
request of one-third of the said High Contracting Parties, which request
shall be addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
Article 14
The present Convention, of which the French and English texts are both
authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear to-day’s date.
Each Power shall address its ratification to the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations, who will at once notify the deposit of such ratification
to each of the other signatory Powers.
The instruments of ratification will remain in the archives of the Secretariat
of the League of Nations.
Article 15
A first proces-verbal of the deposit of ratifications shall be drawn up by the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations as soon as the present
Convention shall have been ratified by the following Powers:
(Here follows the list of the, principal producing Powers, to be drawn up by
the Conference.)
The Convention shall come into force four months after the date of the
notification of this procès-verbal by the Secretary-General of the League of
Nations to all signatory Powers.
Subsequently, the Convention will come into force in respect of each High
Contracting Party four months after the date on which its ratification or
accession shall have been notified by the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations to all signatory or acceding States.
Remarks

The delegation of Salvador recommends that the text of this
article should correspond to that of Article 41 of the Convention
for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and
Ammunition and in Implements of War of June 17th, 1925, to the
effect that the Convention should come into force after
ratification by fourteen Powers.
Article 16
The High Contracting Parties agree to accept reservations which may be
made by Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Poland and Roumania at the moment of
their signature of the present Convention, and which shall suspend, until the
accession of Russia to the present Convention under the same conditions as
the said Powers, the application, in respect of those States, of Articles . . . . .
. of the present Convention
62 Reprinted from League of Nations, Special Commission for the
Preparation of a Draft Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms,
etc.: Report … to the Council on the Work of Its Second Session, held at
63 Brackets in the original.

[Document 258]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, September 10, 1928.
[Received October 1.]
No. 584
SIR: I have the honor to report that the Special Commission for the
preparation of a draft convention on the private manufacture of arms and
ammunition and of implements of war held sessions from August 27 to
August 30, inclusive. Several copies of the provisional minutes of these
meetings,64 as well as of the report of the Special Commission to the
I attended this conference with every intention of urging the acceptance of
to the fullest possible extent. The debates of the very first session, however,
made it clear that in spite of the optimistic attitude in which the
Commission had met, the widest divergencies of opinion as to the degree of
publicity to which public manufacture should be subjected were still
existing in the minds of the delegates. Furthermore, every delegation, as far
as I could see, with the exception of the delegation of the United States,
desired the incorporation of some form of licensing system in the
Convention. Since it was evident that this meeting would be in the main a
mere restatement of views, it seemed wise not to submit the Department’s
draft, but to save it for some future occasion when there might be more
hope of obtaining its adoption by the delegates.
Since the sessions were held in rapid succession there was no opportunity to
consult the Department on tactics and I therefore determined to advocate
the policies embodied in the Department’s draft and, where essential, to

submit reservations showing the views therein expressed. In regard to the
form of paragraph 6 (relating to category 3 concerning naval production), I
was able to gain a large measure of assent from the delegates to the form of
article suggested in the Department’s draft of Article 4.
noon, and to request Major Yount to proceed from Paris. We considered the
matter of civil and commercial aviation with the utmost care and reached
the conclusion that it was advisable to submit a reservation or explanation
of our attitude to be incorporated in the text of Article 1. In the minutes of
the fourth meeting (C. F. A./P. V. 4) the Department will find a statement
which I made in explanation of our attitude in submitting this reservation.66
p.m., was handed to me, and I was happily able to assure myself that the
action which I had planned was in harmony with the Department’s views on
this subject.
I shall take up the preliminary draft article by article.
Preamble: I stated that the use of the phrase “governmental supervision” in
paragraph 2 of the preamble, as amended, might cause us some
embarrassment in view of our known attitude as to the in-acceptability for
us of any form of licensing. I added, however, that I did not insist strongly
on this at the present time since this was a preliminary agreement only and
our interests were, I believed, covered by our general reservation.
Article 1: I have already explained the attitude taken by the
delegation in a preceding paragraph.
system, was a subject of extensive debate in which I took little
part, save to insert remark No. 3 under Article 3 published in the
Report. My observations in this connection will be found on
pages 12 and 13 of the minutes of the first meeting (C. F. A./P. V.
I).67
Article 5: The debate began on this article and it was on this
article that the most divergent views were expressed. The

Department will find my remarks on this article on page 23 of the
minutes of the first meeting and on pages 17 and 18 of the
minutes of the third meeting.67 I believe that the Department’s
point of view was adequately covered, although in view of the
impossibility of reaching an accord and the thoroughness with
which the subject had been analysed by the American delegations
in preceding conferences, I made my declarations as terse as
possible.
Article 6: Both in my telegrams and in the paragraph in the first
part of this report I have explained the action taken by the
American delegation in reference to this article. The Commission
was entirely willing to have the terms of this article harmonize
with the terms of Article 7 of the Arms Traffic Convention, but
certain delegations, notably the Japanese, were unwilling to
extend the type of information which must be given regarding
battleships. The British delegation, while offering no objections to
the extension of the type of information, was without instructions
on the subject and consequently unable to acquiesce. It was
therefore found essential to insert the remarks which follow
Article 6 rather than include this additional information in the
body of Article 6.
Article 7: No remarks.
Article 8: In view of the terms in which Article 9 of your draft is
drawn, I joined those delegations who considered that reference
to non-belligerents threatened by war should be eliminated from
the body of Article 8.
Article 9: No remarks.
Chairman Bernstorff and the Secretariat privately that they did
not desire that the French Government should be named as the
depository for ratifications and as the means of notification for
this treaty and hoped that it would be possible to write this treaty
in the terms in which the other instruments done at Geneva had

been drawn, namely, to use the Secretariat of the League of
Nations in place of the French Government. In view of the fact
that the Department had authorized my signature to the
Convention for the abolition of import and export prohibitions
and restrictions,68 in which the Secretariat General is indicated as
the place of deposit, and in view of the unwillingness of the
French Government to accept this responsibility, I raised no
objection to this procedure.
Article 15: The delegation of Salvador having recommended that
the Convention should come into force after ratification by
fourteen powers, I took the position that in the present stage of the
Convention it was unwise to endeavor to settle this point. The
final conference of plenipotentiaries is certain, in any case, to
reopen discussion on this question and with the realization that no
good purpose could be accomplished by discussion in advance, I
urged that full discussion of this subject should be postponed until
that final conference.
In transmitting the report to the Council, the Rapporteur recommended, and
the Committee accepted, the following phraseology:
“As the starting-point of its work, the Commission took the draft
convention prepared at its first session in March and April, 1927.
After attempting to reconcile the different points of view, it can
do no more than place on record the continued existence of
fundamental divergencies, and the impossibility of laying before
the Council the single text which the Assembly desired. Inasmuch
as, in the draft which the Commission is submitting as the
outcome of its labors, the divergent opinions are set down at the
close of each article, the Commission does not consider it
necessary to analyse in this report the various points of view
which found expression during the debates. It is of the opinion
that this document contains all the information required for an
appreciation of the stage at which its work has now arrived.”
This phraseology, I believe, is an adequate summary of the measure of
success achieved by this session. It might be added, however, that whereas

in previous meetings certain governments had entirely excluded the idea of
publicity for state manufacture, at the present time these same governments
are willing to accept a very limited measure of publicity for state
manufacture. To this extent, it may be considered that there has been some
measure of rapprochement.
In the penultimate meeting the Rapporteur asked for the views of the
Commission regarding the desirability of convening an international
conference, whereupon the Chairman stated: “From our discussions it
appears impossible to suggest a date or even to consider the convening of
an international Conference. The best course would be to submit the results
of our work to the Council, leaving it to take a decision.” There was no
objection to this statement, and indeed it clearly expressed the views of all
the delegates who had listened to the discussions.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON
64 Of these minutes, only the extract containing the American
Representative’s statement, August 29, is printed.
65 The report consisted of the preliminary draft convention printed supra,
with a covering statement, the substance of which is quoted near the end of
this document, the paragraph beginning “As the starting-point of its work”.
67 Not printed.
67 Not printed.

[Document 259]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
92. Next session of private manufacture conference called for December
5th. If I am to represent Department again it would be of great help in
preparing myself to receive as soon as possible detailed comment from the
Department on stand taken by delegation during the last session (see
despatch No. 584, September 10).
WILSON

[Document 260]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
meeting on December 5 is based on last paragraph of resolution adopted by
Third Committee as quoted on page 236 of Assembly Journal No. 14,
September 18. Please report by telegraph any developments which may
have taken place in direction of ending deadlock and whether there is
greater prospect of an agreement at forthcoming session.
Department did not receive your despatch No. 584, September 10, until
yesterday and the comments you request will be sent as soon as it has had
time to study your report.
KELLOGG

[Document 261]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7 p.m.]
Secretariat whether any developments toward ending the deadlock have
taken place between the last meeting of the Special Commission on private
manufacture and the adoption of the resolution to summon a session of the
Commission on December 5. I have not been able to find any evidence that
the situation has been altered. Some vaguely optimistic remarks by the
delegates in the Third Committee are the utmost that can be shown.
As it seems very improbable that any tangible results will come from the
approaching meeting, and as it seems that the Commission is summoned
only to satisfy those members of the League who demand continuance of
action on disarmament and closely related questions in order to appease
public opinion at home and to maintain prestige of the League, the
Department may wish to consider advisability of program somewhat as
follows:
In most courteous language inform Secretary General that having received
summons to the coming meeting we have given careful thought to our own
position in reference to Committee’s work; that we have taken note of fact
that great majority of States represented desire some form of licensing
private manufacture and that this, for reasons which have been made clear
in the Commission, cannot be accepted by this Government; that the
statement of our position on publicity has been made so clear and definite
that all members of the Commission are familiar with it; that in the present
status of the negotiations, therefore, we fear that our presence might impede
achievement of some form of agreement among the other delegations; that

we are animated by most earnest desire that Commission work out some
constructive solution; and that if such an agreement be reached, we shall
study it with deepest interest and give careful consideration as to adherence
thereto in conformity with our own special position as already explained in
the Commission.
The Department will be cognizant, of course, of fact that if we follow
course suggested above we shall run a certain amount of risk that attempt
may be made to impute a failure on part of Commission to our;
nonparticipation. This consideration would be of greatest importance if it
concerned a political gathering, but Department may feel that it carries less
weight when question is one of a technical meeting.
WILSON

[Document 262]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium
(Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
session of Commission on private manufacture of arms.69
The Department is giving consideration to Wilson’s suggestion and would
like to have your opinion before coming to a decision.
Although the Department would have preferred that further meetings be
postponed until there should be a greater prospect of an agreement, and
although it is aware that participation in forthcoming session on December
5 will probably be futile as regards actual accomplishments, there are
several reasons, nevertheless, which make doubtful the advisability of
carrying out Wilson’s suggestions at present time. Among these the most
important is the possibility which Wilson mentions in his last paragraph,
that the United States may be blamed for failure to agree at next meeting.
Press and public opinion might fail to discern distinction between political
gathering and technical meeting, as Wilson suggests. Our nonparticipation,
furthermore, would invite embarrassing comparisons with Soviet
Government’s action in refusing to attend meetings of the Commission.
The press in this country and, it is believed, that of other countries also, has
paid little attention to meetings of Commission, its successive failures so far
having elicited little adverse comment. Decision on our part to withdraw
would have immediate news value and would focus attention on futility of
Commission’s labors, thus lending further color to Russian thesis.

Lastly, if Commission, in our absence, should reach some agreement not
acceptable to this Government, it would be difficult to meet effectively the
charge that after refusing to collaborate we were trying subsequently to
render abortive the work accomplished without our participation.
Please telegraph Department your views as soon as possible on these points
and on any others which may occur to you.
CLARK
instructed Mr. Wilson to repeat to Mr. Gibson his telegram No. 97, supra.

[Document 263]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BRUSSELS, October 18, 1928—noon.
agree with Wilson’s suggestion, which he had discussed previously with
me. That is the only phase which I have felt qualified to consider. If press
comments in America, however, are likely to confuse this meeting with
general disarmament, and take our nonparticipation as a refusal to cooperate
in arms limitation, then it is obvious that the proposal should be considered
in that light.
If the meeting is called with no greater prospect of an agreement than exists
at present, and if it is felt that we should be represented in order to avoid
misunderstanding at home, then I believe it desirable that our representation
should be reduced to a minimum. One representative with civilian assistant
should be sufficient, as no new technical problems can very well be brought
up. This representative could easily refuse to be drawn into debate, limiting
himself to repeating previous statements on our position should this be
necessary in order to avoid distortion.
GIBSON

[Document 264]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Manufacture Commission.70
Department is sending by pouch to Berne two instructions (1) approving
your position at last session of Commission,71 and (2) designating you as
American Delegate to attend Third Session.72 Rand is being instructed to
act as Technical Assistant, and Blake as Disbursing Officer.
KELLOGG
71 Infra.
72 Not printed.

[Document 265]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, November 22, 1928.
No. 354
reporting on the second session of the Special Commission for the
Preparation of a draft Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms and
Ammunition and of Implements of War, you are advised that the
Department has studied your report, in the light of the minutes of the
meetings and of the Special Commission’s report to the Council, and is
appreciative of the fact that you have presented the views and supported the
interests of this Government, in harmony with your instructions.
paragraph two of page one that
It should be clearly understood that any draft convention adopted
must provide for the same degree of publicity for state
manufacture as for private manufacture, and that any convention
which establishes a regime of supervision, control, or inspection
will not be acceptable to the United States.
And in paragraph two of page two, that
While the Department does not anticipate that any attempt will be
made to resume the controversy regarding publicity of
government manufacture, you should, in the event of this
contingency … reassert with due emphasis this Government’s
refusal under any circumstances to consider entering an
agreement which does not deal with government manufacture on
the same footing as private manufacture. You should similarly

oppose the inclusion of any provisions looking toward the
supervision and control of arms manufacture as distinct from
publicity.
These instructions remain the basis of this Government’s position.
The Department regards its Draft Convention as affording a desirable basis
of discussion and authorizes you to make such use of it, either in its entirety
or by separate clauses, as seems to you most likely to support this
Government’s interest or to make clear this Government’s desire to promote
disarmament.
The position of this Government with respect to the manufacture of arms,
munitions and implements of war remains substantially unchanged. The
same objections and same reservations set forth in its Instruction No. 276 of
August 9, 1928, still apply to the proposals elaborated in the minutes and
report of the second session of the Special Commission. However, within
its reservations, it is felt that there is room for accommodation to the views
of other Governments, where it seems likely that such an attitude would
promote a general agreement to which this Government could subscribe.
The Department, therefore, brings to your attention its views with regard to
the draft convention adopted by the Special Commission on August 30,
The Department considers that the words “government supervision” in the
second paragraph of the Preamble are covered by your general reservation
on the system of licensing under Article 3.
As concerns your reservation regarding Category IV, under Article 1, the
sentence: “If the other Governments are not prepared to accept the inclusion
in the provision of all those manufactured under military specifications, you
should take the position that only aircraft and engines manufactured for the
armed forces of the respective countries should be included.” Should you
find that there is a greater possibility of agreement on the basis of this latter
position, you are authorized to withdraw your above-mentioned reservation
and to propose the inclusion only of aircraft and engines manufactured for
the armed forces of the respective countries.

licensing, is approved. The Department is firmly convinced that the fullest
publicity should be called for in Article 5, for both public and private arms
manufacture, and is in full accord with your reservations under this article.
You are requested to continue your endeavors to secure the agreement of
the other Governments to the publication of full particulars of weight,
number and value of arms manufactured.
The object of the words “for it” in paragraph two of Article 5 is not
altogether clear. If they are intended to exclude from the annual returns
arms manufactured by the State for a foreign Government or for private
individuals or organizations, they are clearly open to grave objections. The
Department would like to be informed of the object of these words, and
suggests that you endeavor to have them stricken out.
The Department continues to believe that Article 4 of its draft is preferable
to Article 6 adopted by the Commission, as being more specific, and you
should endeavor to secure the adoption of the American proposal appended
to Article 6 relating to naval specifications. In this connection it is pointed
out that since the data referred to may often be obtained in such manuals as
Jane’s “Fighting Ships”, there would appear to be no valid reason why
Governments should be unwilling to publish the details requested. If the
other Governments remain unwilling to accept the proposal, you need not
insist on this point. You may also make a concession with regard to the two-
month period in which returns must be published, although the Department
is of opinion that it may prove difficult to collect the necessary statistics in
so short a time.
With regard to Article 8, it appears evident that in the event of a major war
the convention would in fact be suspended, whatever its provisions.
However, the Department is of opinion that certain European states are
more concerned in this provision than is the United States, and that this
Government may find it possible to acquiesce in a text acceptable to the
other Governments; provided that the text adopted is not manifestly to the
disadvantage of this Government, as, for example, being so phrased as to
exempt all European Governments from publicity in the event of a
European war, while imposing upon this Government a continued

obligation which might be used as a means to impugn its neutrality. The
Department wishes to be informed of the text of this Article, as agreed
upon, before deciding whether or not it is acceptable.
The Department views the question of full publicity of State and private
manufacture as the most important feature of this convention, and desires
particularly that its support of complete publicity shall be duly registered in
the forthcoming session of the Special Commission. It considers that the
concessions referred to which this Government might be prepared to make
consent of the other Governments to the form of publicity desired. Under
our system of government, Congress has jurisdiction over interstate and
foreign commerce, while manufacture or production is generally within the
jurisdictions of the several States. Accordingly, the United States
Government would be unwilling to sign a convention which incorporated a
license system subjecting private manufacturers to Federal control. Should
the other delegates insist on retaining, as among themselves, the license
system contemplated in the report, the Department desires that you should
promptly notify it in order that it may take such action as may seem best
calculated to prevent a substantial domestic situation from being
represented in any way as an unwillingness to cooperate with other nations.
With reference to the selection of the League under Articles 10–15, as the
depositary for ratifications and as the means of notification for this treaty if
eventually concluded, while the matter does not appear to be pressing at this
time, the Department would not, of course, wish to encourage the selection
of the League for this purpose if arrangements can be made for deposit
elsewhere. As you point out, however, the Department has already accepted
deposit at the League as satisfactory in the case of certain other
conventions, which, however, have not yet been ratified by this
Government. It is believed that it would be undesirable, prior to ratification
of these conventions, to commit the Department to such deposit for further
treaties when other arrangements can be made. It would, therefore, appear
advisable to encourage postponement of the discussion of this question in
relation to the present treaty until such time as the treaty itself has assumed
a more concrete form.

The Department desires that you keep it currently informed by telegram as
to the course of negotiations and particularly as to the extent of
coordination between the points of view expressed by the French and
British delegations. In this connection, the Department commends your
activities in securing a large measure of support from the delegates to the
form suggested in the Department’s draft of Article 4 (relating to Category
III, concerning naval production) and desires that you continue to advocate
publicity as to armament, as well as displacement and dimensions, of
vessels of war. It will probably occur to you that your advocacy of more
complete naval publicity might afford an avenue by which to explore the
possibility of a concerted Anglo-French stand on naval matters, while the
question of commercial aircraft might indicate whether the British
delegation tends to support the French thesis of “potentials of war”, which
is unacceptable to this Government.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 266]
Declaration by the American Representative (Wilson) in the
Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Special Commission,
December 7, 192874
December 7, 1928
Mr. CHAIRMAN, the turn that the discussion has taken this afternoon has
confirmed me in an impression which I had that I should like to take an
opportunity in this plenary session, when all the delegates are present, to
make an appeal to them regarding something that might be done during the
interval until we meet again.
I feel that this meeting has clarified the atmosphere of our labours to a
considerable extent—at least in the Sub-Committee. We have measurably
approached each other’s points of view on nearly all questions save the one
which to my Government is one of the fundamentals without which the
Convention can have little value, namely, that of achieving full publicity for
both public and private manufacture. The importance which my
Government attaches to this point is, I am convinced, shared by the peoples
of the world. We have been able to establish that the wishes of a large
proportion of the States here represented, at least those represented on the
Sub-Committee, lie in the direction of complete equality of treatment for
public and private manufacture. I might state the matter a little more
definitely to say that a large number of the delegations regard such equality
of treatment as essential. That in itself is, I submit, no mean achievement.
Certain delegations, however, are still reluctant to afford a full measure of
publicity to State manufacture, and have offered us a limited publicity for
value only and by categories. What does this mean? As the delegate of the
Netherlands has clearly expressed it, it means that the States will be obliged
to furnish in some cases five figures, in some cases four figures and in other
cases three figures, according to the types of industry and production which
take place within their borders.

We have been urged to accept this as the minimum of agreement, but I fail
to see that such a minimum would have beneficial results, and indeed, I
believe it might have quite the contrary. To state to our various
Governments that we have achieved so low a minimum of agreement is a
very easy thing; indeed, we might record agreement merely on the principle
that we were agreed to disagree.
It is the profound conviction of my Government that our purpose in this
work is to make such contribution as we can to the cause of peace. The
cause of peace is not served by offering merely a further cause of
bewilderment between the States, a further cause of speculation, a further
cause perhaps of distrust; it can be furnished by the elimination of doubt
following on full publication which provides an accurate knowledge of the
facts all over the world.
We have discussed the achievement of publicity by means of three factors:
value, weight and numbers. It was clearly brought out in the Sub-
Committee that the choice of value as the only means is the choice of the
most elastic, the least definite, the least exact of these measures. It is a true
minimum, and I fail to see how any lower minimum could have been
suggested.
During the course of the debates we have endeavoured to give to the best of
our ability the most complete reasons for our attitude concerning complete
publicity, and we have consistently endeavoured to understand why certain
of the delegations have failed to agree to a full measure of publicity. We
have repeatedly asked for explanations and, speaking for myself, and I
believe for a considerable number of our members, I cannot find that any
adequate attempt has been made to convince us of this necessity; indeed, as
I stated yesterday, I should be very reluctant to have to explain to my
Government the reason for this attitude on the part of some of the
delegations. I should have frankly to say that I do not know.
I realise that we are representatives of our Governments and that we are all
bound by more or less detailed instructions. I realise that we cannot hope
here and now to change the opinions which have been expressed; indeed, I
have nothing but gratitude for the loyalty and clarity with which the
members have expressed their views. Nevertheless, I take this opportunity

to urge upon all my colleagues to examine with their Governments in the
most candid spirit this question of complete publicity, and to present to
them the real conviction of a large number of members here present that a
treaty providing for anything so far removed from complete publicity would
not be a first step towards the achievement of peace, but a step which would
arouse vain hopes and consequent disillusionment.
74 Extract from minutes transmitted to the Department in Mr. Wilson’s
despatch No. 673, Dec. 13, infra.

[Document 267]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 13, 1928.
[Received January 11, 1929.]
No. 673
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 354, of November
22, 1928, and other correspondence relative to the third session of the
Special Commission for the preparation of a draft convention on the private
manufacture of arms, munitions and implements of war, I have the honor to
report that the Commission sat at Geneva from December 5 to December 7,
inclusive. There are few documents to transmit in reporting on this session
for the reason that practically the entire time was taken up with
subcommittee debates on which there are no minutes. The report drawn up
by the subcommittee was submitted to the full Commission in the final
meeting on the evening of December 7th, but the members of the
Commission who had not been present in the subcommittee took the
position that they were unable to approve the report without more time for
consideration. It, therefore, has no juridic existence, but the original report
(Document C. F. A. 28)75 will serve to indicate the trend of the debates
which took place in the subcommittee. The revised report of the
The Chairman, Count Bernstorff, in the first meeting urged a general
discussion and was seconded in his appeal by the Rapporteur, M. Guerrero.
None of the delegates, however, seemed desirous of entering into a general
discussion and the Chairman was therefore constrained to suggest an
immediate convocation of the small committee which had functioned
during the previous session and which was composed of the delegates of
Germany, Salvador, Italy, Belgium, Great Britain, France, the Netherlands,
Japan, Spain and the United States. Spain did not have a delegate at the last
session and Mr. Cobian therefore sat on the subcommittee for the first time.

The Chairman of the subcommittee, M. Guerrero, opened the debate on
suggested a discussion of Remark No. 1 thereunder by the Belgian
delegation. It was instantly apparent that a situation had arisen which would
render it impossible to reach any definite agreement in this session and
might perhaps create a situation in which every article of the projected
convention might have to be debated over again. The Belgian delegate
stated that his Government considered it essential to examine the
arrangement of the categories and sub-headings under Article 1 in the light
of their unsatisfactory experience in analysing the administrative machinery
necessary to carry out the Traffic in Arms Treaty which they expected to
ratify at an early date. Sensing a decided opposition on the part of the other
members of the subcommittee, the Belgian delegate issued what was in
effect an ultimatum, stating that his Government could not sign any
convention which was not based on a previous and detailed analysis of the
categories of Article 1. At the request of the Chairman, the Belgian delegate
submitted his proposal in writing (Document C. F. A. 27).77 The French
delegate at once took the position that he could not pass upon the terms of
Article 5 until he knew exactly what Article 1 was to contain and this
statement naturally robbed the subsequent debate of actuality. It was agreed
that the delegates present were not prepared, either by instructions or by the
presence of technical advisers, to debate the Belgian proposal, and that it
would be essential to call a meeting of experts as soon as possible,
approximately March 1, 1929, for the purpose of giving consideration to the
proposal. Since the substance of the Belgian proposal was not debated, I did
not give the American point of view regarding further discussion of the
categories of Article 1.
Relative to Remark No. 2, the German delegate declared that he was
prepared to withdraw this remark and associate himself with that made by
the delegation of the United States.
Discussion then opened on Remark No. 3 which we had inserted relative to
aircraft and aircraft engines. As I telegraphed the Department,78 there was
immediate and vigorous opposition to the admission of our proposal,
mainly on the part of the military continental Powers and also on that of
Japan. It was evident that the alignment on this question was in general the

same as the alignment in the Preparatory Commission on the question of
“potentiel de guerre”. My suggestion as to limiting the category to those
“destined for the armed forces” met with no more favor, nor were the two
formulas even seriously discussed. It was merely stated axiomatically that
so far it had been impossible to distinguish between civil and military
aviation. (One of the French experts confided to me that they felt that a
distinction was possible in America, but that they had no confidence in the
results of any distinction for the continental states). The delegate of the
Netherlands, in the final plenary meeting, made a formal proposal that
experts should discuss Category IV as well as the Belgian proposal, but was
voted down. I declared that the title of the proposed convention and the
phraseology of the first sentence of Article 1 were such that if the
convention were accepted as it stands, Category IV would constitute an
undertaking by all States that they considered civil aviation as war material.
Since the points of view expressed by the other delegations, with the
exception of the British delegate, are already familiar to the Department, I
shall confine myself to describing that taken by Mr. Cadogan. He declared
that his Government had been preoccupied, as mine had been, with this
question of the definition of civil aviation as war material and for this
reason they had in the first instance objected to the inclusion of Category IV
in Article 1; that they had withdrawn their objection in deference to the
wishes of the other nations, but still felt the inadvisability of cataloguing all
aircraft as implements of war.
M. Massigli, the French delegate, finally proposed a clause reading as
follows:
“Owing to the difficulties in the way of formulating precise rules
which would enable a distinction to be made between military
and civil aircraft and without prejudice to any definitions which
may subsequently be set up of the one and of the other, no
distinction will be made between aircraft built for military
purposes and aircraft built for or capable of being used for other
purposes”.
not with the idea that this phraseology was satisfactory, but with the

possibility of working out a satisfactory phraseology in the event that the
Department felt that our thesis could be protected in some such way.
If I understand thoroughly the Department’s point of view as to this
reservation, it is based more on the implications involved than on objections
to the publication of the information that would be demanded by the
Convention. I understand that our objection is to the inclusion of all
aviation as “implements of war” and the resulting possibility of so branding
civil aviation. It had seemed to me that there was a possibility that the note
drawn up by the French delegate, or one of revised phraseology, might
expressly disclaim any prejudging of the question as to “potentiel de
guerre”, and at the same time furnish a basis on which we could all agree to
this category. I therefore stated that I had no idea how my Government
would view this proposal, but I would transmit it to Washington. When it
became apparent that no possible result could be obtained from the meeting,
I stated that I maintained our reserve as it was not worth while in the
present circumstances further to examine this proposal.
Article 2. No debate.
Article 3. Mr. Cadogan withdrew the British objection to the inclusion of
Category IV in this article.
Remark 2. After a lively debate, it was decided to strike out the words in
Paragraph 1: “or of the arms, ammunition and implements the use of which
in war is prohibited by international law”, and further to eliminate
paragraph 3. This did away with the necessity for maintaining Remark No.
2.
Remark 3. I made a brief declaration regarding our position, which the
Chairman stated would be brought to the attention of the Council. (It will
not be so brought, since the subcommittee’s report was not adopted by the
Commission).
Article 4. It was decided to eliminate sub-paragraph (c). The remark
therefore disappears.

Article 5. The most vigourous debate, as was to be expected, took place on
this article. It is needless to summarize this debate, since the Department is
thoroughly familiar with the points of view. The representative of the
Netherlands and myself made continuous efforts to force the representatives
of France, Japan and Italy to explain why they were reluctant to give full
publicity, without eliciting any response from them. The Chairman called
for a vote on those who advocated the principle of equal treatment for
public and private manufacture. Italy was the only State voting against the
principle, with the French delegate maintaining that he would not vote until
he knew the text of Article 5. It is safe to assume, however, that they will
only acquiesce in the principle of equal treatment if a very limited publicity
is accorded. This also was the basis of the Japanese position. A re-wording
This phraseology represents a so-called “minimum agreement”, but an
agreement to which the confirmed advocates of complete publicity, among
them ourselves, and the confirmed advocates of a distinction between
public and private manufacture, as, for example, Italy, made reservations.
Article 6. In the discussion of this article I am happy to report a certain
measure of achievement. The Japanese delegate could not agree to the
inclusion of the remark following this article although Mr. Cadogan did so
agree. I thereupon asked the Japanese delegate whether his instructions
were definite. He replied that they were. 1 then stated that my Government
had no desire to take such an unbending position in this debate that it would
cause difficulties to other governments and make it impossible for them to
accept; that I was able to show a certain measure of conciliation in this
matter if it was essential, but I pointed out to the Japanese delegate that he
was alone in his opposition to the inclusion of this additional information
and begged him to consult his Government again as to whether, in view of
the circumstances, they would not alter his instructions. In the final meeting
Mr. Sato reported that he withdrew his opposition and that therefore the
additional information could be inserted. I should like to emphasize at this
time the continuous endeavor of the Japanese delegate to meet our point of
view as far as his instructions permitted.
The Italian delegate was anxious to adopt in the first paragraph of Article 6
of the phraseology of the Washington Treaty, at least not to adopt any

phraseology which delayed publication more than that provided for in the
Washington Treaty. The Chairman appointed a subcommittee composed of
the naval experts of Italy, France and England to redraft Article 6
satisfactorily. Their redraft is contained in Document C. F. A. 29. In
presenting its report, the subcommittee explained that the phrase “date of
signing the contract” under subheading (a) had been eliminated, since for
purposes of state arsenals the signing of the contract did not exist and was a
plain absurdity. Furthermore, to require the date of the signing of the
contract for manufacture for outside states and not for manufacture for the
state itself would be a violation of the principle of equality of treatment
between public and private manufacture.
I acquiesced in Article 6 as prepared by the drafting committee, but stated
at the same time that I would have to reserve the right to consult our naval
authorities as this was in some degree a technical question and should be
passed on by experts.
Article 7. No debate.
Article 8. This article was revised to read: “In time of war the application of
the present Convention shall be suspended until the restoration of peace as
regards belligerents”. Certain reserves were made as will be seen in
Document C. F. A. 29.
On the subsequent articles I made the suggestion, which was immediately
taken up by Count Bernstorff, that they should be reserved for the final
conference, since nothing was to be gained by attempting to work out
phraseology on these articles, which dealt merely with the machinery of
ratification, notification, etc. The subcommittee accepted this view.
The text of the projected convention as revised by the subcommittee is
contained in Document C. F. A. 29.
As I stated in my first paragraph, the Commission was unable to adopt the
report of the subcommittee. Document C. F. A. 28 contains the original
report of the subcommittee, while Document C. F. A. 28 (1) contains the
revised report.

Bearing in mind your instructions in paragraph 6 of No. 354, relative to the
publication of full particulars, and desirous that a certain measure of
publicity be given to the point of view that full publicity is essential, I took
occasion to prepare certain remarks on this subject for the plenary meeting.
When it became clear that the Commission would not even transmit the
report of the subcommittee to the Council, it became still more necessary, in
my opinion, that some expression of this view should be embodied in
permanent form in the records of the third session of the Commission. I
therefore delivered a speech, the text of which the Department will find in
the minutes of the second meeting.81 This speech, as was to be expected,
aroused a high measure of satisfaction among those who were advocating a
large degree of publicity, but Mr. Massigli, the French Delegate, in taking
leave of me after the session, remarked: “I had thought that the elections in
the United States were over”.
I venture to invite the Department’s attention to the advisability of
immediate consideration of these questions, and especially of immediate
study by technical experts of the Belgian proposal in anticipation of the
meeting of experts which will presumably be summoned around March 1st.
Probably this meeting will shortly be followed by another meeting of the
full Commission and therefore I would appreciate the study and preparation
of fresh instructions based on the events in the third session at the earliest
possible moment. This is particularly necessary in view of the fact that it
was decided in the final plenary meeting that full discussion of all the
articles of the draft convention will again be opened. I shall submit
subsequently various considerations as to the new instructions.
With reference to the latter half of the final paragraph of your 354, I
constantly bore in mind your suggestions and venture to submit what can
only be impressions. I found that the British delegation made certain
concessions in the direction of the draft convention—concessions which
were designed to make possible unanimity in the adoption of a single text.
There was, however, no such complete agreement between the British
delegate and his French colleague as to prevent them from debating actively
certain points on which their views differed. In fact I could find no evidence
of a previously prepared common basis on naval matters.

Concerning the question of war potentials, the Department will note that I
have described above Mr. Cadogan’s remarks on our reservation to
Category IV of Article 1. There was a clear and distinct statement from him
that they disliked the inclusion of all aircraft in this category because of the
fact that this might cause the acceptance of a definition that commercial
aviation was an implement of war.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON
[Enclosure]
Revised Text of the Preliminary Draft Convention for the Supervision of the Private Manufacture
and Publicity of the Manufacture of Arms, Ammunition and of Implements of War82
PREAMBLE
(To be drawn up by the Conference or at the next session of the special
Commission).
Categories
ARTICLE 1
(The same as Chapter I of the Convention for the Supervision of the
International Trade in Arms).
Remarks
1. The Belgian Delegation has made a reservation with regard to
the advisability of a further study being made of these categories.
2. The Delegation of the United States of America reserved the
right to propose for incorporation in the final text of the
Convention, a statement limiting the material of Category IV of
Article 1 to aircraft and aircraft engines manufactured under
military specifications within their territory or jurisdiction, either

on their own behalf or on behalf of the Government of another
State.
By the term “manufactured under military specifications”, it means both
material manufactured for purely military purposes and material
manufactured for commercial purposes, but on specifications designed to
make it capable of military use.
The Delegations of Germany and the Netherlands associate themselves with
this reservation.
Supervision and Publicity
ARTICLE 2
(No modification).
ARTICLE 3
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to permit, in the territory under
their jurisdiction, the private manufacture as defined in Article 2 of the
articles included in Categories I, II, III and IV. unless the manufacturers
thereof are licensed by the Government to manufacture the articles referred
to in this article.
This licence shall be valid for a period to be determined individually by
each High Contracting Party, and shall be renewable for a further period at
the discretion of the Government.
Remarks
The Delegation of the United States of America recalled its declaration of
principle made previously to the effect that its Government is powerless to
prescribe or enforce prohibition or a system of licences upon private
manufacture which takes place under the jurisdiction of the States which
form the Union of the Government of the United States.
ARTICLE 4

The High Contracting Parties undertake to transmit to the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations, or to publish within two months after the close of
each quarter beginning on the first day of January, April, July and October,
a list of the licences granted or renewed during that quarter, together with:
(a) A description of the war material for which the licence is
granted;
(b) The name and address of the registered or head office of the
licensees and the period for which the licence has been granted.
ARTICLE 5
The High Contracting Parties further undertake to transmit to the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, or to publish annually, a return showing
the total production, in value, of the private manufactures licensed in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3, in respect of each of the twelve
headings of Category I (A and B), of the four headings of Category II (A
and B), of the two headings of Category IV, set out in Article I of the
present Convention.
The provisions of the foregoing paragraph shall also apply to the production
of the material manufactured for it in establishments of which the State is
the sole proprietor, or in any other establishment on behalf of the State.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to transmit to the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations, or to publish, the text of the provisions of all
statutes, orders or regulations in force within their territory dealing with
articles covered by Categories I, II and IV. All provisions enacted for the
purpose of carrying out the present Convention and all amendments and
additions to such statutes, orders, regulations and provisions shall also be
published, or transmitted to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
Remarks
1. Certain Delegations made the reservation that in order to be effective and
to satisfy the requirements of the Assembly’s resolution of September 24th,

1927, publicity should be prescribed in terms of weight and (or) number
and value.
2. Certain Delegations were of opinion that as regards State manufacture,
publicity should be given in terms of total value per category and that
publicity in regard to State manufacture must be brought into line with the
general conditions which will be laid down by the Convention for the
Limitation of Armaments.
Certain Delegations, while accepting that remark, consider that it must not
be interpreted in such a way as to subordinate the convening of a
Conference on Private Manufacture to that of the General Conference on
the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments.
3. The French Delegation, while abstaining from voting upon this Article,
stated that its Government was ready to consider in regard to the State
manufactures referred to in the present Article, any publicity corresponding
to the supervised limitations which may be fixed by the Convention for the
Reduction and Limitation of Armaments.
ARTICLE 6
The High Contracting Parties, in all cases covered by Category III,
undertake to publish as soon as possible, and in any case not later than
within two months after the close of each quarter beginning on January 1st,
information detailed below for each vessel of war constructed, in the course
of construction, or to be constructed within their territorial jurisdiction.
(a) The date of laying the keel, and the following data:
Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the principal dimensions,
namely, length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line and main
draft at standard displacement;
(b) Date of delivery, or date of completion, together with the following data
with respect to the vessel at that date:

Standard displacement in tons and metric tons; the principal dimensions,
namely, length at water-line, extreme beam at or below water-line, mean
draft at standard displacement, as well as the following information
regarding the armament installed on board the vessel at the date of delivery
and forming part of the vessel’s normal armament:
number and calibre of guns
number and calibre of torpedo tubes;
number of bomb throwers;
number of machine-guns.
By standard displacement in the present article is to be understood the
displacement of the vessel complete, fully manned, engined, and equipped
ready for sea, including all armament and ammunition, equipment, outfit,
provisions and fresh water for crew, miscellaneous stores and implements
of every description that are intended to be carried in war, but without fuel
or reserve feed water on board.
ARTICLE 7
No modification.
General Provisions
ARTICLE 8
In time of war the application of the present Convention shall be suspended
as regards belligerents until the restoration of peace.
Remarks
Certain Delegations have expressed the opinion that the following words
should be added. … “and also as regards nonbelligerents. Neutral High
Contracting Parties who avail themselves of this right shall duly notify the
other High Contracting Parties.”

The Italian Delegation proposes that this article should be drafted as
follows:
“In time of war the application of the present Convention shall be
suspended until the restoration of peace as regards belligerents
and as regards nonbelligerents upon their giving due notice to the
other High Contracting Parties, in conformity with an undertaking
to this effect.”
ARTICLE 9
No modification.
ARTICLE 10
No modification.
ARTICLE 11
No modification.
ARTICLE 12
No modification.
The Delegations of Germany, Italy and Salvador, however, associated
themselves with the proposal of the Netherlands Delegation that this article
should be omitted.
The Sub-Committee was of opinion that this article should be reserved for
discussion by the Conference.
ARTICLE 13
No modification.
ARTICLE 14
No modification.

ARTICLE 15
No modification.
The Spanish Delegation associated itself with the observation made by the
Delegation of Salvador. The Sub-Committee was of opinion that this article
should be reserved for discussion by the Conference.
ARTICLE 16
No modification.
The Sub-Committee was of opinion that this article should be reserved for
discussion by the Conference.
75 Not printed.
75 Not printed.
76 Not printed. For text of the draft convention under discussion see p. 303
77 Not printed.
78 Telegram not printed.
79 Not printed.
81 Of these minutes only an extract containing the speech is printed; see
supra.

[Document 268]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 28, 1928.
[Received January 11, 1929.]
No. 692
I have the honor to transmit herewith five copies of a communication, with
its enclosures, from the League of Nations, dated December 22, 1928, C. F.
A.–31,83 in which the Chairman of the Special Commission for the
preparation of a draft convention on the manufacture of arms and
ammunition and of implements of war requests the appointment of an
expert to discuss the proposal submitted by the Belgian delegate with regard
to the drafting of Article I of the preliminary draft convention. The meeting
of experts will be held on March 11, 1929, at Geneva.
I have [etc.]
(For the Minister)
PIERREPONT MOFFAT
Secretary of Legation
83 Not printed.
83 Not printed.

Policy of the Department of State
regarding the exportation of military
equipment to certain countries
[269] The Acting Secretary of War (MacNider) to the Secretary of State
Washington, October 15, 1927.
[270] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Davis)
Washington, January 11, 1928.

[Document 269]
The Acting Secretary of War (MacNider) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 15, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Reference is made to the policy of the War Department
concerning the sale of Liberty Aviation engines abroad, as set forth in the
letter from the Assistant Secretary of War (Mr. Davison), to the Chief of Air
For his information in taking action upon applications for the purchase of
Liberty engines for sale abroad in lots of less than fifty (50), the Chief of
Air Corps has requested that he be furnished a list of those countries with
which the United States is not on satisfactory diplomatic relations.
For the purpose indicated, it is requested that this Department be furnished
a list of those countries to which, in the opinion of the State Department,
there is objection to having aviation engines exported.
Sincerely yours,
HANFORD MACNIDER
84 Not printed.

[Document 270]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Davis)
WASHINGTON, January 11, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to your letter of October 15, 1927, requesting
to be furnished with a list of those countries to which, in the opinion of this
Department, there is objection to having Liberty Aviation engines exported.
The following observations relative to certain countries are deemed
pertinent to your inquiry under present conditions.
Latin America. At the present time an embargo is in force against the
shipment of arms and ammunition to Honduras85 and Nicaragua.86 The
Department would not view with favor the export of any arms to Nicaragua
except for the use of the National Guard which is commanded by American
officers. The Department would be disposed to give favorable consideration
to the purchase of a moderate quantity of arms and munitions by the
Honduran Government but is closely watching all shipments to private
individuals. In view of the special situation now existing as regards Peru,
Chile and Bolivia, the Department would desire to give very careful
consideration to any proposed sale of arms, munitions or aviation engines to
those countries. The regime now functioning in Ecuador has not been
recognized by the United States although this Government is maintaining
friendly relations therewith, and the Department would not object to the
sale of aviation engines to the authorities in control of the government of
that country should your Department desire to dispose of Liberty engines
there. With regard to Mexico I may say that this Government has for some
time past been maintaining an embargo on arms and munitions of war to
that country, including aviation material for the use of the Mexican
Government.87 However, the Department is now giving favorable
consideration to applications covering aircraft and aviation material
destined for use in Mexico.88

Europe. It is the policy of the Department to view with disfavor the
exportation from the United States of military equipment to, or intended for,
Russia, and in view of this fact the Department would not look with favor
on the sale at the present time by your Department of Liberty engines for
export to that country, Germany, Austria and Hungary. Article 170 of the
Treaty of Versailles89 provides that “importation into Germany of arms,
munitions, and war material of every kind shall be strictly prohibited”.
However, Article 201 of the same Treaty provides that
“During the six months following the coming into force of the
present Treaty, the manufacture and importation of aircraft, parts
of aircraft, engines for aircraft, [and] parts of engines for aircraft,
shall be forbidden in all German territory.”
Similar provisions to those of Articles 170 and 201 of the Treaty of
Versailles may be found in the Treaty of St. Germain (Articles 134 and 147,
respectively) and the Treaty of Trianon (Articles 118 and 131,
respectively).90 The foregoing treaty provisions would appear to have no
bearing on the importation into Germany, Austria and Hungary at this time
of civilian aircraft engines, parts, et cetera. Whether this is true of military
aircraft matefial, et cetera, is not so clear, in view of the provisions of
Article 170 of the Treaty, which might possibly be held to apply. In the
event that your Department should consider the sale of Liberty Aviation
engines in any of the three above mentioned countries, it would seem
advisable to give further consideration to this point. Upon your request the
Department will be pleased to take this point under further advisement.
Far East. In so far as China is concerned I would call attention to the
Presidential Proclamation of March 4, 1922,91 a copy of which is enclosed
herewith, making unlawful the exportation of arms and munitions of war to
that country which would seem to prevent the exportation to China of
aviation engines for military purposes. There would be no objection to the
exportation to China of aviation engines if this Department were satisfied
that they would be used for commercial purposes.
This Department would, however, like to be advised of any requests for the
sale of aviation material or war supplies to any foreign government, as the

situation changes from time to time.
I have [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
89 William M. Malloy (ed.), Treaties, Conventions, etc., Between the United
States of America and Other Powers, 1910–1923 (Washington, Government
Printing Office, 1923, vol. III, p. 3329.

Convention and protocol for abolition
of import and export prohibitions and
restrictions,
with
supplementary
agreement and protocol, signed at
Geneva92
92 For correspondence concerning the First International Conference for the
Abolition of Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, see ibid.,
366 is part of Doc. 272] ff.
[271] International Convention and Protocol for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, Signed at Geneva,
November 8, 1927, Together With a Supplementary Agreement and
Protocol, Signed July 11, 1928
Done at Geneva, the eighth day of November, one thousand nine hundred
and twenty-seven, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives
of the Secretariat of the League of Nations, and of which authenticated
copies shall be delivered to all Members of the League of Nations and non-
Member States represented at the Conference.
Treaty Series No. 811

Treaty Series No. 811
[Document 271]
International Convention and Protocol for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, Signed at
Geneva, November 8, 1927, Together With a Supplementary
Agreement and Protocol, Signed July 11, 192893
The President of the German Reich; the President of United States of
America; the President of the Austrian Federal Republic; His Majesty the
King of the Belgians; His Majesty the King of Great Britain and Ireland and
of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India; His Majesty
the King of the Bulgarians; the President of the Chilian Republic; His
Majesty the King of Denmark; His Majesty the King of Egypt; the
President of the Estonian Republic; the President of the Republic of
Finland; the President of the French Republic; His Serene Highness the
Governor of Hungary; His Majesty the King of Italy; His Majesty the
Emperor of Japan; the President of the Latvian Republic; Her Royal
Highness the Grand-Duchess of Luxemburg; His Majesty the King of
Norway; Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; the President of the
Polish Republic; the President of the Portuguese Republic; His Majesty the
King of Roumania; His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes;
His Majesty the King of Siam; His Majesty the King of Sweden; the Swiss
Federal Council; the President of the Czechoslovak Republic; the President
of the Turkish Republic:
Having regard to the resolution of the Assembly of the League of Nations
dated September 25th, 1924;
Being guided by the conclusions of the International Economic Conference
held at Geneva in May 1927, and agreeing with the latter that import and
export
prohibitions,
and
the
arbitrary
practices
and
disguised
discriminations to which they give rise have had deplorable results, without
the grave drawbacks of these measures being counterbalanced by the

financial advantages or social benefits which were anticipated by the
countries which had recourse to them;
Being persuaded that it is important for the recovery and future
development of world trade that Governments should abandon a policy
which is equally injurious to their own and to the general interest;
Being convinced that a return to the effective liberty of international
commerce is one of the primary conditions of world prosperity; and
Considering that this object may best be achieved by resort to simultaneous
and concerted action in the form of an international convention;
Have appointed their plenipotentiaries, namely:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form,
have agreed to the following provisions:
ARTICLE 1
The provisions of the present Convention shall apply to prohibitions and
restrictions imposed on the importation into the territories of any High
Contracting Party of goods the produce or manufacture of the territories of
any other High Contracting Party, and to prohibitions and restrictions
imposed on the exportation of goods from the territories of any High
Contracting Party to the territories of any other High Contracting Party.
ARTICLE 2
Subject to the exceptions provided for in the following articles, the High
Contracting Parties undertake to abolish within a period of six months from
the date of the coming into force of the present Convention, in so far as the
respective territories of each of them are concerned, all import and export
prohibitions or restrictions, and not thereafter to impose any such
prohibitions or restrictions. During this period each of the High Contracting
Parties will adopt all appropriate measures in order to reduce existing

prohibitions and restrictions to a minimum and will refrain from imposing
any new prohibitions or restrictions.
Further, the High Contracting Parties undertake to adopt the necessary
measures to ensure that the provisions of the present Convention are strictly
observed by all authorities, central or local, and that no regulation is issued
in contravention thereof.
ARTICLE 3
Should the High Contracting Parties, in pursuance of their legislation,
subject the importation or exportation of goods to certain regulations in
respect of the manner, form or place of importation or exportation, or the
imposition of marks, or to other formalities or conditions, they undertake
that such regulations shall not be made a means of disguised prohibition or
arbitrary restriction.
ARTICLE 4
The following classes of prohibitions and restrictions are not prohibited by
the present Convention, on condition, however, that they are not applied in
such a manner as to constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination between
foreign countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised
restriction on international trade:
1. Prohibitions or restrictions relating to public security.
2. Prohibitions or restrictions imposed on moral or humanitarian
grounds.
3. Prohibitions or restrictions regarding traffic in arms,
ammunition and implements of war, or, in exceptional
circumstances, all other military supplies.
4. Prohibitions or restrictions imposed for the protection of public
health or for the protection of animals or plants against disease,
insects and harmful parasites.

5. Export prohibitions or restrictions issued for the protection of
national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value.
6. Prohibitions or restrictions applicable to gold, silver, coins,
currency notes, banknotes or securities.
7. Prohibitions or restrictions designed to extend to foreign
products the regime established within the country in respect of
the production of, trade in, and transport and consumption of
native products of the same kind.
8. Prohibitions or restrictions applied to products which, as
regards production or trade, are or may in future be subject within
the country to State monopoly or to monopolies exercised under
State control.
ARTICLE 5
Nothing in this Convention shall affect the right of any High Contracting
Party to adopt measures prohibiting or restricting importation or exportation
for the purpose of protecting, in extraordinary and abnormal circumstances,
the vital interests of the country.
Should measures of this character be adopted, they shall be applied in such
a manner as not to lead to any arbitrary discrimination against any other
High Contracting Party. Their duration shall be restricted to that of the
causes or circumstances from which they arise.
ARTICLE 6
1. The High Contracting Parties, recognising that there exist in
the case of certain of them situations of fact or of law which
prevent the latter from immediately undertaking, as regards
certain specified products, the engagements entered into under the
previous articles, have deemed it equitable to authorise these
High Contracting Parties to make a reservation in regard to
certain temporary exceptions, which the latter undertake to

withdraw as soon as the circumstances from which they arise
cease to exist.
2. Moreover, the High Contracting Parties, recognising that the
abolition of certain import or export prohibitions or restrictions
applied by some of them would involve the latter in grave
difficulties, and that, moreover, these prohibitions or restrictions
do not prejudicially affect the trade of other countries, have also
deemed it equitable to authorise these High Contracting Parties to
make a reservation in regard to these exceptions.
3. The Annex to the present Convention sets forth the exceptions
coming within the provisions of the two preceding paragraphs,
which have been agreed to on this day’s date in favour of the
High Contracting Parties who are mentioned by name in the
Annex and who have signed the Convention on that date.
4. Exceptions which the High Contracting Parties may desire to
claim subsequently to that date shall be dealt with in accordance
with the procedure laid down in the Protocol to the present
Convention.
ARTICLE 7
Should one of the High Contracting Parties be obliged to adopt any measure
of prohibition or restriction against products of any foreign country,
whether the Convention be applicable to that country or not, he shall frame
the measure in such a way as to cause the least possible injury to the trade
of the other High Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE 8
If a dispute arises between two or more High Contracting Parties as to the
interpretation or application of the provisions of the present Convention—
Protocol relating to these articles—and if such dispute cannot be settled
either directly between the parties or by the employment of any other means
of reaching agreement, the parties to the dispute may, provided they all so

agree, before resorting to any arbitral or judicial procedure, submit the
dispute with a view to an amicable settlement to such technical body as the
Council of the League of Nations or the parties concerned may appoint.
This body will give an advisory opinion after hearing the parties and, if
necessary, effecting a meeting between them.
The advisory opinion given by the said body will hot be binding upon the
parties to the dispute unless it is accepted by all of them, and the parties, if
they all so agree, may either after resort to such procedure, or in lieu
thereof, have recourse to any arbitral or judicial procedure which they may
select, including reference to the Permanent Court of International Justice
as regards any matters which are within the competence of that Court under
its Statute.
If a dispute of a legal nature arises as to the interpretation or application of
the provisions of the present Convention—with the exception of Articles 4,
5 and 6, and of the provisions of the Protocol relating to these articles—the
parties shall, at the request of any of them, refer the matter to the decision
of the Permanent Court of International Justice or of an arbitral tribunal
selected by them, whether or not there has previously been recourse to the
procedure laid down in the first paragraph.
In the event of any difference of opinion as to whether a dispute is of a legal
nature or not, the question shall be referred for decision to the Permanent
Court of International Justice or to the arbitral tribunal selected by the
parties.
The procedure before the body referred to in the first paragraph above or
the opinion given by it will in no case involve the suspension of the
measures to which the dispute refers; the same will apply in the event of
proceedings being taken before the Permanent Court of International Justice
—unless the Court decides otherwise under Article 41 of its statute—or
before the arbitral tribunal selected by the parties.
Nothing in the present Convention shall be construed as prejudicing the
rights and obligations derived by the High Contracting Parties from the
engagements into which they have entered with reference to the jurisdiction

of the Permanent Court of International Justice, or from any bilateral
conciliation or arbitration conventions between them.
ARTICLE 9
Any High Contracting Party may, either upon ratifying the present
Convention or thereafter, declare that he undertakes, in regard to any other
High Contracting Party accepting the same obligation, to extend the
application of the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 8 to any dispute
which may arise in connection with the interpretation or application of the
provisions of the present Convention, including all or part of Articles 4, 5
and 6, and whether or not the dispute is of a legal nature.
Any High Contracting Parties who do not give the undertaking referred to
Articles, and as regards the provisions of the Protocol relating thereto, may
matters as between themselves.
ARTICLE 10
Any High Contracting Party may at the time of signature, ratification or
accession declare that, in accepting the present Convention, he does not
assume any obligations in respect of all or any of his colonies, protectorates
or territories under suzerainty or mandate; and the present Convention shall
not apply to any territories named in such declaration.
Any High Contracting Party may give notice to the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations at any time subsequently that he desires that the
Convention shall apply to all or any of his territories which have been made
the subject of a declaration under the preceding paragraph, and the
Convention shall apply to all the territories named in such notice ninety
days after its receipt by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
Any High Contracting Party may at any time declare that he desires that the
present Convention shall cease to apply to all or any of his colonies,
protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate, and the Convention

shall cease to apply to the territories named in such declaration one year
after its receipt by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 11
Nothing in the present Convention shall prejudice the rights and obligations
which the High Contracting Parties may derive from international
Conventions in force to which they are parties.
The present Convention shall not prejudice the provisions of any bilateral
agreements in force at the present date between the High Contracting
Parties which establish, in regard to import and export prohibitions or
restrictions, a more liberal regime than that established by the provisions of
the present Convention.
ARTICLE 12
The present Convention shall not in any way affect rights and obligations
arising from the Covenant of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 13
The High Contracting Parties shall, within twelve months after the coming
into force of the present Convention in their territories, communicate to one
another through the Secretary-General of the League of Nations a report on
the steps taken to give effect to the provisions of the Convention.
ARTICLE 14
The present Convention, of which the French and English texts are both
authentic, shall bear this day’s date.
It shall be open for signature until January 1st, 1929, on behalf of any
Member of the League of Nations or of any non-Member State represented
at the Conference which drew up this Convention or to which the Council
of the League of Nations shall, for this purpose, have communicated a copy
of the present Convention.

Members of the League of Nations and non-Member States on whose
behalf the Convention has been signed prior to February 1st, 1928, may
avail themselves of the procedure referred to in Article 6, paragraph 4.
ARTICLE 15
The Present Convention shall be ratified.
The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, who shall notify the receipt thereof to all
Members of the League and to the non-Member States referred to in the
previous article.
ARTICLE 16
On and after January 1st, 1929, any Member of the League of Nations or
any State referred to in Article 14 may accede to the present Convention.
This accession shall be effected by a notification made to the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, to be deposited in the archives of the
Secretariat. The Secretary-General shall at once notify such deposit to all
who have signed or acceded to the Convention.
ARTICLE 17
The present Convention shall come into force under the conditions and on
the date to be determined at the meeting provided for hereinafter.
League of Nations shall invite the duly accredited representatives of the
Members of the League of Nations and of non-Member States on whose
behalf the Convention shall have been signed on or before June 15th, 1928,
to attend a meeting at which they shall determine:
(a) The reservations which, having been communicated to the
High Contracting Parties in accordance with Article 6, paragraph
4, may, with their consent, be made at the time of ratification;

(b) The conditions required for the coming into force of the
Convention and, in particular, the number and, if necessary, the
names of the Members of the League and of non-Member States,
whether they are signatories or not, whose ratification or
accession must first be secured;
(c) The last date on which the ratifications may be deposited and
the date on which the Convention shall come into force if the
conditions required under the preceding paragraph are fulfilled.
If, on the expiration of this period, the ratifications upon which the coming
into force of the Convention will be conditional have not been secured, the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall consult the Members of
the League of Nations and non-Member States on whose behalf the
Convention has been ratified and ascertain whether they desire nevertheless
to bring it into force.
ARTICLE 18
The present Convention may be denounced by a notification in writing
addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations on behalf of
any Member of the League of Nations or of any non-Member State after the
expiration of a period of five years reckoned from the date on which the
Convention shall have entered into force.
Such denunciation shall take effect twelve months after the date on which it
is received by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, and shall
operate only in respect of the Member of the League of Nations or the non-
Member State on whose behalf it is made.
Nevertheless, the Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member
of the League of Nations or any non-Member State after the expiration of
the third year from the date of the present Convention, if, after that period,
any one of the exceptions allowed in virtue of Article 6, paragraph 1, still
exists. This denunciation shall take effect six months after the date on
which it is received by the Secretary-General, and shall operate only in
respect of the Member of the League of Nations or the non-Member State
on whose behalf it is made.

Furthermore, the Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member
of the League of Nations or of any non-Member State after the expiration of
the fifth year from the date of the present Convention, if, after that period,
such Member of the League of Nations or non-Member State considers that
any one of the exceptions allowed by the High Contracting Parties at the
meeting provided for in Article 17 has impaired the effects of the present
Convention.
This denunciation shall take effect six months after the date on which it is
received by the Secretary-General, and shall operate only in respect of the
Member of the League of Nations or the non-Member State on whose
behalf it is made.
Any denunciation made in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall
be notified immediately by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations
to all the other High Contracting Parties.
If, as a result of denunciations, the conditions for the coming into force of
the Convention which the High Contracting Parties may lay down at the
meeting provided for in Article 17 should no longer be fulfilled, any High
Contracting Party may request the Secretary-General of the League of
Nations to summon a Conference to consider the situation created thereby.
Failing agreement to maintain the Convention, each of the High Contracting
Parties shall be discharged from his obligations from the date on which the
denunciation which led to the summoning of this Conference shall take
effect.
ARTICLE 19
If, before the expiration of the period of five years mentioned in paragraph
1 of Article 18, notifications should be addressed to the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations on behalf of one-third of the Members of the
League of Nations and of non-Member States to which the present
Convention applies, informing him that they desire the Convention to be
revised, all the Members of the League of Nations and all non-Member
States to which the Convention applies agree to take part in any
consultation which may be held for this purpose.

If the revision has taken place before the end of the fifth year from the date
of the coming into force of the present Convention, any Member of the
League of Nations or non-Member State who has not accepted the revised
Convention shall have the right to denounce the present Convention,
without regard to the period of five years provided for in paragraph 4 of
Article 18. Such denunciation shall take effect on the date on which the
revised Convention comes into force.
If the revision has taken place in the course of the fifth year from the date of
the coming into force of the present Convention, the period of denunciation
referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 18 will be prolonged by one year.
ANNEX TO ARTICLE 6
In accordance with Article 6, paragraph 3, and with Section IV (d) of the
Protocol, each of the exceptions maintained in favour of the countries
mentioned below is only admitted under the terms of the present
Convention if the country concerned appends its signature* thereto on this
day’s date, and if, on that same date, the prohibition or restriction which it
seeks to maintain is still in force.
I. Exceptions agreed to under Paragraph 1
Germany
Coal, coke, peat, lignite, briquettes
import
and
export
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Austria
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Belgium
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Great Britain
Synthetic organic dyestuffs and colours or
colouring matter containing them, as well as
organic intermediate products used in the
manufacture of such dyestuffs, colours and
colouring matter
import
France
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Hungary
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export

Italy
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Japan
Synthetic organic dyestuffs and colours or
colouring matter containing them, as well as
organic intermediate products used in the
manufacture of such dyestuffs, colours and
colouring matter
import
Rice
import
and
export
Luxemburg
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Roumania
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
Used machinery for industrial installations
import
Czechoslovakia Coal, coke, peat, lignite, briquettes
import
and
export
Scrap iron and scrap of other metals and alloys
export
II. Exceptions agreed to under Paragraph 2
Egypt
Live-stock (exportation subject to licence)
export
Eggs, during certain months of the year
export
Organic fertilisers, including pigeon-manure,
slaughter-house offal and dried blood
export
United States
of America
Helium gas
export
Italy
Iron ores
export
Corn
export
Roumania
Ores of iron, copper and manganese
export
Crude oil
export
IN FAITH WHEREOF the delegates have signed the present Convention.
DONE at Geneva, the eighth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-seven, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives of
the Secretariat of the League of Nations, and of which authenticated copies

shall be delivered to all Members of the League of Nations and non-
Member States represented at the Conference.
Germany
Dr. TRENDELENBURG
United States of America
At the moment of signing the International Convention for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, and the Protocol to the
Convention, I, the undersigned, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to Switzerland, duly
empowered to sign the said Convention and Protocol, declare, pursuant to
instructions from my Government, that the United States, in accordance
with Article 10 of the Convention, does not assume any obligation in
respect of the Philippine Islands and that I sign the Convention and Protocol
subject to the following reservations and conditions with respect to the
United States of America:
(a) That prohibitions or restrictions designed to extend to
exported products the regime established within the country in
respect of the production of, trade in, and transport and
consumption of such products in domestic commerce are not
prohibited by the said Convention, provided, however, that such
prohibitions or restrictions shall not be applied in such a manner
as to constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination between
foreign countries or a disguised restriction on international trade.
(b) That the said Convention affects neither the tariff systems nor
the treaty-making methods of the participating countries nor the
measures taken to ensure the application thereof, including
measures to counteract dumping, bounties, subsidies, unfair
methods
or
acts
in
foreign
trade,
undervaluation
or
discrimination.
HUGH R. WILSON

Austria
E. PFLÜGL
Belgium
J. BRUNET
F. VAN LANGENHOVE
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and those Parts of the British Empire
which are not separate Members of the League of Nations
I declare that my signature does not include any of His Britannic Majesty’s
colonies, protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate.
S. J. CHAPMAN
India
Under the terms of Article 10 I declare that my signature does not include
the territories in India of any Prince or Chief under the suzerainty of His
Majesty.
ATUL C. CHATTERJEE
Bulgaria
PROF. GEORGES DANAÏLLOW
Chile
At the moment of signing the present Convention, the undersigned declares,
on behalf of his Government:
cannot be invoked by the other High Contracting Parties to

prohibit or restrict the importation into their territories of Chilian
nitrate of soda, principally employed in agriculture.
(b) That, in the Chilian Government’s opinion, the Convention
affects neither the tariff system nor the treaty-making methods of
the participating countries, nor the measures taken to ensure their
application, including the measures intended to counteract the
effects of dumping.
E. VILLEGAS
Denmark
Subject to reservation as regards Greenland.94
J. CLAN
Egypt
SADIK. E. HENEIN
Estonia
C. R. PUSTA
Finland
RAFAEL ERICH
France
On signing the present Convention, France declares that by its acceptance it
does not intend to assume any obligation in regard to any of its Colonies,
Protectorates and territories under its suzerainty or mandate.

D. SERRUYS
Hungary
BARANYAI ZOLTÁN
Italy
A. DI NOLA
Japan
In signing the International Convention for the Abolition of Import and
Export Prohibitions and Restrictions we, the undersigned, declare that the
provisions of Article 8 of the present Convention are in no way derogatory
to the acts of the Japanese judicial authorities in the application of Japanese
laws and decrees.95
N. ITO J. TSUSHIMA
Latvia
CHARLES DUZMANS
Luxemburg
ALBERT CALMES
Nomoay
GEORG WETTSTEIN
The Netherlands
POSTHUMA

DE GRAAFF F. M. WIBAUT
Poland
F. SOKAL
Portugal
FRANCISCO DE CALHEIROS E MENEZES
Roumania
D. J. GHEORGHIU CÉSAR POPESCU
Subject to ratification by the Roumanian Government and Parliament.96
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
CONST. FOTITCH
Siam
CHAROON
Sweden
EINAR HENNINGS
Switzerland
W. STUCKI
Czechoslovakia
Dr. IBL

Turkey
M. KEMAL
PROTOCOL TO THE CONVENTION
At the moment of signing the Convention of to-day’s date for the Abolition
of Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, the undersigned, duly
authorised, have agreed on the following provisions, which are intended to
ensure the application of the Convention:
SECTION I—AD ARTICLE 1
(a) The words “territories of the High Contracting Parties”
employed in the Convention refer only to territories to which it is
made applicable.
(b) Should the Customs territory of any High Contracting Party
include territories which are not placed under his sovereignty,
these territories are also to be regarded as “territories” within the
meaning of the Convention.
(c) In view of the fact that within or immediately adjacent to the
territory of India there are areas or enclaves, small in extent and
population in comparison with such territory, and that these areas
or enclaves form detached portions or settlements of other parent
States, and that it is impracticable for administrative reasons to
apply to them the provisions of the Convention, it is agreed that
these provisions shall not apply to them.
India, however, will apply as regards the areas or enclaves in question a
regime which will respect the principles of the Convention and facilitate
imports and exports as far as practicable, and will refrain from imposing in
regard to them any new measures of prohibition or restriction which would
not be authorised by the provisions of the Convention, unless there should
be no other means of ensuring the collection of customs and excise duties.

SECTION II—AD ARTICLE 2
As regards the application of Article 2, the obligation accepted by Canada
binds only the Federal Government and not the Provincial Governments,
which, under the Constitution, possess the power of prohibiting or
restricting the importation and exportation of certain products into or from
their territories.
SECTION III—AD ARTICLE 4
The protection of animals and plants against disease also refers to measures
taken to preserve them from degeneration or extinction and to measures
taken against harmful seeds, plants, parasites and animals.
The High Contracting Parties, although they have refrained from making
any reference to measures relating to “standard” products and definitions of
products, declare that this paragraph must be interpreted as in no way
interfering with the practice followed by certain countries of subjecting the
exportation of their products to certain conditions as to quality with the
object of preserving the reputation of those products and at the same time of
offering a guarantee to the foreign purchaser. They declare, on the other
hand, that they interpret the paragraph in question as prohibiting recourse to
any system of classifying or defining products which is employed as an
indirect means of restricting the importation of foreign products or of
subjecting importation to a regime of unfair discrimination.
The High Contracting Parties declare that prohibitions or restrictions the
sole object of which is either to prevent imported goods from escaping the
payment of the customs duties applicable thereto, or in exceptional cases to
prevent the importation of certain goods which would reduce the revenue
from the duties imposed on certain other goods, may only be established or
maintained, if no other effective means exist of securing the said revenue.

The High Contracting Parties declare that if, on account of the constitution
of certain States and the different methods of internal control which they
employ, it should prove impossible to secure complete similarity of
treatment between native and imported products, any such difference in
treatment must not have the object or effect of establishing an unfair
discrimination against the latter.
The High Contracting Parties declare that they have solely in view
monopolies each of which applies only to one or more specific articles.
SECTION IV—AD ARTICLE 6
The High Contracting Parties who have made the reservations referred to in
paragraph 1 of Article 6 declare that they do not regard their acceptance of
the provisions of Article 18, paragraph 3, as an undertaking on their part
that the circumstances which compelled them to make these reservations
will have ceased to exist at the end of three years, but as entitling any High
Contracting Party to resume his freedom of action if, in the event of these
circumstances not having changed within the said period, he considered that
his economic conditions were detrimentally affected by the maintenance of
any of the prohibitions or restrictions to which the aforesaid reservations
refer.
By allowing the exceptions referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, the High
Contracting Parties have not intended to give perpetual recognition to their
existence, but merely to indicate that the necessity of abolishing these
exceptions is not so imperative, in view of their slight importance in
international trade.

The High Contracting Parties declare that, by accepting in the case of
Roumania, in consideration of her exceptional situation of fact and of law,
the reservation concerning crude oil in accordance with Article 6, paragraph
2, they have not in any way agreed to measures of prohibition or restriction
for this product, which they regard as being of very great importance for the
world market. The High Contracting Parties feel confident that, as soon as
circumstances allow her to do so, Roumania herself, acting in the spirit of
the preceding paragraph (b) above, will abolish this prohibition, and, in the
meantime, that she will take into account the interests of the neighbouring
contracting countries.
The Roumanian Delegation fully associates itself with this dec laration.
(i) Scope of the Provision
As regards paragraph 4, it is understood that any claims for exceptions
which may be put forward after the date of the present Convention shall
refer only to prohibitions or restrictions in force on that same date.
(ii) Procedure
1. Any High Contracting Party may make known by a
communication addressed to the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations any prohibitions or restrictions which he desires to be
communication must reach the Secretary-General before February
1st, 1928. It shall state the conditions, if any, on which the High
Contracting Party in question would be prepared to abandon such
prohibitions or restrictions.
General of the League of Nations shall notify the High
Contracting Parties of all applications which he has received
under the preceding paragraph.

3. Any High Contracting Party wishing to make observations on
any
applications
so
communicated
may
forward
such
observations to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations
not later than May 1st, 1928. As soon as possible after that date,
the Secretary-General will inform the High Contracting Parties of
all observations received.
4. Any applications and observations made by the High
Contracting Parties shall be examined at the meeting provided for
in Article 17 of the Convention.
SECTION V—AD ARTICLE 7
The expression “trade of the High Contracting Parties” signifies the trade of
their territories to which the Convention applies.
SECTION VI
Prohibitions or restrictions applying to prison made goods are not within the
scope of the Convention.
SECTION VII
Should any prohibitions or restrictions be imposed within the limits laid
down by the Convention, the High Contracting Parties shall strictly adhere
to the following provisions as regards licences:
(a) The conditions to be fulfilled and the formalities to be
observed in order to obtain licences shall be brought immediately
in the clearest and most definite form to the notice of the public;
(b) The method of issue of the certificates of licences shall be as
simple and stable as possible;
(c) The examination of applications and the issue of licences to
the applicants shall be carried out with the least possible delay;
(d) The system or [of] issuing licenses shall be such as to prevent
the traffic in licences. With this object, licences, when issued to

individuals, shall state the name of the holder and shall not be
capable of being used by any other person.
As regards the allocation of quotas, the High Contracting Parties, without
pronouncing upon the method to be adopted, consider that an equitable
allocation of such quotas is one of the essential conditions for the equitable
treatment of international trade.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol.
DONE at Geneva the eighth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-seven, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives of
the Secretariat of the League of Nations, and of which authenticated copies
shall be delivered to all Members of the League of Nations and non-
Member States represented at the Conference.
Germany
DR. TRENDELENBURG
United States of America
HUGH R. WILSON
Austria
E. PFLÜGL
Belgium
J. BRUNET
F. VAN LANGENHOVE
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and those Parts of the British Empire
which are not separate Members of the League of Nations
I declare that my signature does not include any of His Britannic Majesty’s
colonies, protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate.
S. J. CHAPMAN
India

Under the terms of Article 10 of the Convention I declare that my signature
does not include the territories in India of any Prince or Chief under
Suzerainty of His Majesty
ATUL C. CHATTERJEE
Bulgaria
PROF. GEORGES DANAÏLLOW
Chile
E. VILLEGAS
Denmark
Subject to reservation as regards Greenland.97
J. CLAN
Egypt
SADIK. E. HENEIN
Estonia
C. R. PUSTA
Finland
RAFAEL ERICH
France
Subject to the reservations made on signing the Convention.97
D. SERRUYS
Hungary
BARANYAI ZOLTÁN
Italy
A. DI NOLA

Japan
Subject to the reservations made on signing the Convention.97
N. ITO J. TSUSHIMA
Latvia
CHARLES DUZMANS
Luxemburg
ALBERT CALMES
Norway
GEORG WETTSTEIN
The Netherlands
POSTHUMA
DE GRAAFF F. M. WIBAUT
Poland
F. SOKAL
Portugal
FRANCISCO DE CALHEIROS E MENEZES
Roumania
D. J. GHEORGHIU CÉSAR POPESCU
Subject to ratification by the Roumanian Government and Parliament.98
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
CONST. FOTITCH
Siam
CHAROON

Sweden
EINAR HENNINGS
Switzerland
W. STUCKI
Czechoslovakia
Dr. IBL
Turkey
M. KEMAL
ANNEXED DECLARATION
The delegations of France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, the Kingdom
of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and Switzerland, present at the
International Conference for the Abolition of Import and Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions, desire to place it on record that, though they
have abstained, in the desire not to place any obstacle in the way of the
success of the Conference and not to raise between the participating States a
controversy on a question of principle which could lead to no definite
conclusion, they are nevertheless fully convinced that the prohibition of
viticultural products cannot be justified on the ground of the provisions of
Article 4, No. 4, of the Convention.
Geneva, November 8th, 1927.
France
D. SERRUYS
Greece
VASSILI DENDRAMIS
Hungary
BARANYAI ZOLTÁN
Italy
A. DI NOLA
Portugal
F. DE CALHEIROS E MENEZES
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes CONST. FOTITCH
Switzerland
W. STUCKI
Chile

The Government of the Chilian Republic accedes to the Declaration
annexed to the Convention and, like the delegations of France, Greece,
Hungary, Italy, Portugal, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
and Switzerland, it is convinced that the prohibition of viticultural products
cannot be justified on the ground of the provisions of Article 4, No. 4, of
the Convention.98
E. VILLEGAS
SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT
TO THE CONVENTION OF NOVEMBER 8TH, 1927, FOR THE ABOLITION OF IMPORT AND EXPORT PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
The President of the German Reich; the President of the United States of
America; the President of the Austrian Federal Republic; His Majesty the
King of the Belgians; His Majesty the King of Great Britain and Ireland and
of the British Dominions Beyond the Seas, Emperor of India; His Majesty
the King of the Bulgarians; the President of the Chilian Republic; His
Majesty the King of Denmark; His Majesty the King of Egypt; the
President of the Estonian Republic; the President of the Republic of
Finland; the President of the French Republic; His Serene Highness the
Governor of Hungary; His Majesty the King of Italy; His Majesty the
Emperor of Japan; the President of the Latvian Republic; Her Royal
Highness the Grand Duchess of Luxemburg; His Majesty the King of
Norway; Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; the President of the
Polish Republic; the President of the Portuguese Republic; His Majesty the
King of Roumania; His Majesty the King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes;
His Majesty the King of Siam; His Majesty the King of Sweden; the Swiss
Federal Council; the President of the Czechoslovak Republic; the President
of the Turkish Republic.
Having regard to the Convention signed at Geneva on November 8th, 1927,
for the Abolition of Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions;
Having regard to the provisions of Article 17 of the said Convention;
Have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries for the meeting provided for in the
said Article, namely:

[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form,
have agreed on the following provisions, intended to supplement the
provisions of the aforesaid Convention, of which they shall form an integral
part.
ARTICLE A
supplemented as follows for the benefit of the countries named hereafter:
Exceptions agreed to under Paragraph 1
Bulgaria
Rose trees and roots and shoots Export
Chile
Scrap iron and scrap zinc
Export
Mares
Export
Czechoslovakia Hop shoots
Export
Portugal
Fine wool
Export
Cork in the raw state
Export
Sweden
Scrap iron
Export
Exceptions agreed to under Paragraph 2
Czechoslovakia Quartzite
Export
Estonia
Platinum, precious stones, pearls and corals (in a
rough state or finished, loose or mounted)
Export
Portugal
Pine resin
Export
United States
Helium gas
Export
ARTICLE B
The High Contracting Parties agree that, in the event of the Agreements
concluded on this day’s date relating to the Exportation of Hides and Skins
and Bones not coming into force in default of the necessary ratifications,
each of them shall be authorised to submit subsequent requests for

exceptions which they were entitled to submit under the provisions of
Article 6 of the Convention and the annexed Protocol, and which they have
not submitted in view of the aforesaid Agreements.
Such requests for exception shall be addressed to the Secretary-General of
the League of Nations before September 30th, 1929, and shall be notified
by him to the High Contracting Parties before October 31st, 1929.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to meet without delay upon
receiving an invitation from the Secretary-General in order to examine the
requests for exceptions referred to above.
ARTICLE C
The High Contracting Parties agree that the Convention in order to be
brought into force, must have secured either ratification as provided for in
Article 15 or accession as provided for in Article 16 of the said Convention
on behalf of at least eighteen Members of the League of Nations or non-
Member States.
The ratifications must be deposited before September 30th, 1929.
Each of the High Contracting Parties shall have the right to inform the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations at the moment of the deposit of
his ratification or of the notification of his accession that he makes the entry
into force of the Convention, in so far as he is concerned, conditional on
ratification or accession on behalf of certain countries, without, however,
being entitled to specify countries other than those named below:
Austria
Czechoslovakia
France
Germany
Great Britain

Hungary
Italy
Japan
Poland
Roumania
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
Switzerland
Turkey
United States of America
The Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall immediately inform
each of the High Contracting Parties of each ratification or accession
received and of any observations by which it may be accompanied in
conformity with the preceding paragraph.
On October 31st, 1929, the Secretary-General of the League of Nations
shall notify all the Members of the League and non-Member States on
behalf of which the Convention has been signed or acceded to under Article
16 of the Convention of the ratifications deposited and accessions notified
before September 30th, 1929.
ARTICLE D
If it appears from the communication of the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations, which is referred to in the last paragraph of the
preceding Article, that the conditions required in virtue of the first three
paragraphs of the said Article and of the annexed Protocol have been
fulfilled by September 30th, 1929, the Convention shall come into force on
January 1st, 1930.

In the contrary event, the procedure laid down in the last paragraph of
Article 17 of the Convention shall be followed.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the above-mentioned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Agreement.
DONE at Geneva on the eleventh day of July, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-eight, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives of
the Secretariat of the League of Nations; certified true copies shall be
forwarded to all the Members of the League of Nations and all the non-
Member States represented at the Conference.
Germany
Dr. ERNST TRENDELENBURG
United States of America
HUGH R. WILSON
Austria
Dr. RICHARD SCHULLER
Belgium
J. BRUNET F. VAN LANGENHOVE
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and all parts of the British Empire
which are not separate Members of the League of Nations
I declare that my signature does not include any of His Britannic Majesty’s
Colonies, Protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate.
S. J. CHAPMAN
India
H. A. F. LINDSAY
Bulgaria

On signing the present Supplementary Agreement, Bulgaria declares that it
shall be ratified and put into force as soon as the national currency shall be
re-established in gold.2
D. MIKOFF
Chile
TOMÁS RAMIREZ FRIAS
Denmark
J. CLAN WILLIAM BORBERG
Egypt
SADIK E. HENEIN
Estonia
A. SCHMIDT
Finland
RUDOLF HOLSTI GUNNAR KIHLMAN
France
On signing the present Supplementary Agreement France declares that by
its acceptance it does not intend to assume any obligation in regard to any
of its Colonies, Protectorates and territories under its suzerainty or
mandate.2
D. SERRUYS
Hungary
NICKL
Italy
A. DI NOLA P. TROISE

Japan
ITO J. TSUSHIMA
Latvia
CHARLES DUZMANS
Luxemburg
ALBERT CALMES
Norway
GUNNAR JAHN
Netherlands
POSTHUMA F. M. WIBAUT S. DE GRAAFF
Poland
FRANÇOIS DOLEZAL
Portugal
A. D’OLIVEIRA F. DE CALHEIROS E MENEZES
Roumania
ANTONIADE D. T. GHEORGHIU CESAR POPESCO
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
CONST. FOTITCH GEORGES CURCIN
Siam
CHAROON
Sweden
EINAR MODIG

Switzerland
W. STUCKI
Czechoslovakia
IBL
Turkey
Subject to reservation as regards Article B.3
HASSAN
PROTOCOL TO THE SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT
At the moment of proceeding to the signature of the Supplementary
Agreement to the International Convention for the Abolition of Import and
Export Prohibitions and Restrictions signed on this day’s date, the
undersigned, duly authorised, have agreed on the following provisions,
which are intended to ensure the application of the Supplementary
Agreement:
SECTION I
The High Contracting Parties declare that, in the text of the Supplementary
Agreement of this day’s date, the expression “the Convention” shall be
taken to mean both the International Convention for the Abolition of Import
and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions dated November 8th, 1927, and
the Supplementary Agreement of this day’s date.
SECTION II
Ad Article A.
(a) Cork in the raw state, in respect of which an exception has
been allowed for Portugal, does not include scrap cork, or cork in
agglomerated form, in shavings, or in sheets.
(b) Although the exceptions set out in Article A, like those
appearing in the Annex to Article 6 of the Convention, have been

allowed on the condition that the countries benefiting thereby
shall sign the present Supplementary Agreement on the day of the
general signature, it has appeared equitable to grant an extension
of time up to August 31st, 1928, inclusive, to Bulgaria, Portugal
and the United States of America.
(c) As regards the exception of hop shoots which has been agreed
to in favour of Czechoslovakia under paragraph 1 of Article 6 of
the Convention, the High Contracting Parties declare that their
consent has been given in return for the written undertaking
entered into by the Czechoslovak delegation to allow the free
export of this product to all countries which now or in the future
guarantee Czechoslovakia by legislative or contractual measures
the protection of the appellation of origin of Czechoslovak hops.
SECTION III
Ad Article B.
The High Contracting Parties agree to recognise in the case of Italy the
application of the provision of the Protocol to the International Agreement
relating to the Exportation of Bones (Section 1, ad Article 1 (a)), in the
event of the said Agreement coming into force.
SECTION IV
Ad Article C.
(a) Owing to the position of the United States in consequence of a
short Session of Congress in the year 1928–29, the High
Contracting Parties agree that, if the ratification of the United
States has been asked for under paragraph 3 of Article C and has
not been deposited by September 30th, 1929, the Convention
shall come into force on January 1st, 1930, provided that all the
other countries on which the entry into force of the Convention
depends and the total number of which would in this case be
reduced to seventeen shall have notified the Secretary-General of
the League of Nations of their ratifications or accessions before

September 30th, 1929, and provided no objection is raised before
November 15th, 1929, by any of the countries which, at the time
of the deposit of their ratification or accession, made the entry
into force of the Convention, in so far as they were concerned
conditional upon the ratification or accession of the United States.
If any objection is raised, the last paragraph of Article 17 of the
Convention shall apply.
(b) The High Contracting Parties declare that, in drawing up the
list of countries which appears in Article C, they have been
chiefly guided by the interdependence of certain interests
emphasised in the course of the proceedings of the Conference.
They have thought it unnecessary to mention countries the inclusion of
which would be justified only by the importance of economic interests or
considerations of geographical situation.
If they have not mentioned certain countries, it is because those countries at
present impose no prohibitions of any importance. The High Contracting
Parties think they can rely upon their ratification or adhesion.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the above-mentioned plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Protocol.
DONE at Geneva on the eleventh day of July, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-eight, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives of
the Secretariat of the League of Nations; certified true copies shall be
forwarded to all the Members of the League of Nations and to all the non-
Member States represented at the Conference.
Germany
Dr. ERNST TRENDELENBURG
United States of America
HUGH R. WILSON
Austria
Dr. RICHARD SCHULLER

Belgium
J. BRUNET F. VAN LANGENHOVE
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and all parts of the British Empire
which are not separate Members of the League of Nations
I declare that my signature does not include any of His Britannic Majesty’s
Colonies, Protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate.
S. J. CHAPMAN
India
H. A. F. LINDSAY
Bulgaria
D. MIKOFF
Subject to the reservation made on signing the Supplementary Agreement.5
Chile
TOMÁS RAMIREZ FRIAS
Denmark
J. CLAN WILLIAM BORBERG
Egypt
SADIK E. HENEIN
Estonia
A. SCHMIDT
Finland
RUDOLF HOLSTI GUNNAR KIHLMAN
France

Subject to the reservations made on signing the Supplementary Agreement.5
D. SERRUYS
Hungary
NICKL
Italy
A. DI NOLA P. TROISE
Japan
N. ITO J. TSUSHIMA
Latvia
CHARLES DUZMANS Luxemburg ALBERT CALMES
Norway
GUNNAR JAHN
Netherlands
POSTHUMA F. M. WIBAUT S. DE GRAAFF
Poland
FRANÇOIS DOLEZAL
Portugal
A. D’OLIVEIRA F. DE CALHEIROS E MENEZES
Roumania
ANTONIADE D. T. GHEORGHIU CESAR POPESCO

Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
CONST. FOTITCH GEORGES CURCIN
Siam
CHAROON
Sweden
EINAR MODIG
Switzerland
W. STUCKI
Czechoslovakia
IBL
Turkey
Subject to reservation as regards Article B.6
HASSAN
ANNEXED DECLARATION
The Austrian, German and Hungarian delegations, in accepting in favour of
Czechoslovakia the exception of quartzite under paragraph 2 of Article 6 of
the Convention, declare that their consent has only been given in return for
an undertaking on the part of Czechoslovakia to maintain, as long as the
Convention remains in force, the export quotas and conditions provided for
in special treaties or arrangements.
Germany
Dr. ERNST TRENDELENBURG
Austria
DR. RICHARD SCHULLER
Hungary
NIGEL
Czechoslovakia IBL
[The Senate resolution of September 19, 1929, giving advice and consent to
the ratification of the convention and protocol of November 8, 1927 and the

supplementary agreement and protocol of July 11, 1928, contained the
following reservation:
“It is understood that the provision of Section VI of the Protocol to the
Convention, excepting from the scope of the Convention prohibitions or
restrictions applying to prison made goods, includes goods the product of
forced or slave labor however employed.”]
93 In English and French. French text not printed. Convention and protocol
signed on the part of the United States, January 30, 1928. Supplementary
agreement and protocol signed on the part of the United States, July 31,
1928. Ratification advised by the Senate, with reservation, September 19,
1929 (legislative day of September 9); ratified by the President; September
20, 1929; ratification of the United States deposited at Geneva, September
* Among the countries referred to in this Annex, the following signed the
Convention on November 8th, 1927: Germany, Austria, Belgium, Great
Britain, etc., Egypt, France, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Luxemburg, Roumania
and Czechoslovakia. [Footnote in the original.]
94 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
95 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
96 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
97 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
97 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
97 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
98 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
98 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
2 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
2 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
3 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
5 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
5 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.
6 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.

Second International Conference for
the Abolition of Import and Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions, Geneva,
International Conference for the Abolition of Import and Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions, etc.: Proceedings of the Conference
For
correspondence
concerning
the
First
Conference, see Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, pp. 246 ff. The texts of the
convention and protocol together with the supplementary agreement and
protocol which resulted from these two Conferences are printed pp. 336 [Pg.
concerning French regulations regarding motion picture films, see vol.  II,
pp. 844 ff.
[272] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[273] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[274] The Chargé in Switzerland (Moffat) to the Secretary of State

[275] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[276] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[277] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[278] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerlamd (Wilson)
Washington, June 15, 1928.
[279] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[280] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[281] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[282] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[283] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[284] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Delegation (Wilson)
[285] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State

[286] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[287] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[288] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[289] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[290] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State

[291] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[292] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[293] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American, Delegation
(Wilson)
[294] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[295] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State

[296] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation
(Wilson)
[297] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[298] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[299] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[300] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation
(Wilson)

[301] The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State

[Document 272]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
BERNE, February 16, 1928.
[Received March 7.]
No. 294
SIR: With reference to the International Convention for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions and particularly to the
instructed to submit detailed criticism of action taken by the signatory states
since November 8th, I have the honor to transmit herewith one copy of
entitled “Exceptions Claimed by Various Governments in Virtue of Article
… In general terms, the Convention will only accomplish its purpose if it is
clear and definite and cannot do so if the nations do not know what to
expect from their neighbors during the life of the Convention.
(10) In relation to the letter from France on page 10, we come
here to the question which may be of more importance to us than
any other raised under the Convention. The Department will
recollect that no state requested reservations either under article 6
or elsewhere relative to restrictions and prohibitions concerning
the import of films and that this letter, dated January 27th, raises
for the first time the film question. I am informed in the
Secretariat that neither under this Convention nor in any other has
the Economic Committee the power to pass on the meaning of a
treaty and that the French letter, if they desire to maintain it, must
be debated in the July conference.

I have not in my possession full data concerning the restrictive
measures which the French Government either has made effective
or contemplates and I cannot therefore hold views of value
concerning the importance of this letter to our trade. I have
requested Dr. Lyon, Commercial Attaché, to communicate with
the Commercial Attaché attached to the Embassy at Paris and to
request him to furnish us with material both as to the restrictive
measures now in force and as to those contemplated by the
French Government. On receipt of such material I will
supplement this despatch.10
(11) In the course of the debates in the sessions of the Diplomatic
Conference, the question was raised as to what procedure should
be followed in the July conference relative to voting on
reservations submitted by states between November 8th and
February 1st. No clear cut decision was reached and I have
subsequently talked over the matter with interested members of
the Secretariat. They themselves are much troubled by the
situation, pointing out that as matters now stand, any state which
votes against a reservation introduced by another state, if that
reservation is accepted, will be free to withdraw from the
Convention. This would naturally create great uncertainty and
cause many states to delay ratification awaiting action by their
neighbors. Since I have discussed this matter with the Secretariat,
the Legal Section has been instructed to consider the situation
thoroughly and to give advice as to what should be proposed. I
shall not fail to communicate further on this point as soon as I
hear the result of the deliberations of the Section.
(12) Finally, I venture to call the Department’s attention to the
fact that both Austria and Germany in formal communications,
and other states in the course of the plenary sessions, declared
that they must hold themselves free to request certain exceptions
provided such exceptions were requested and obtained by other
states. It will be, I believe, essential for our representation to bear’
in mind this very important point, namely, that by granting an
exception to one state, even though it looks of very little

importance, the door is opened to a demand by other states for the
granting of the same exception which might have great economic
importance. It would seem advisable, therefore, to fight the
number of exceptions as far as possible and to limit them to those
clearly of the same nature as those already granted under the
Convention previous to the signature of November 8th.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON
[Enclosure]
LETTER FOR THE SECRETARY-GENERAL [OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS] FROM THE FRENCH MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS11
PARIS, January 27, 1928.
In view of the difficulties at present being experienced by the
cinematograph industry in France, the French Government is considering
the adoption of certain restrictive measures which will apply equally to
French and foreign films.
Although these measures cannot be described as prohibitions within the
strict meaning of the Convention of November 8th last, the French
Government has felt bound to conform with the procedure laid down in
Section IV of the Protocol of this Convention by notifying you before
February 1st of its intentions.
Since these restrictive measures may to some extent hamper international
and national trade, the Government desires to learn, either from the
Economic Committee which is to meet on March 30th, 1928, or under the
procedure laid down in Article 17 of the Convention for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, whether the proposed
measures, which are entirely similar to those in force in certain other
signatory states or adopted by certain of these States since the signature of
the above-mentioned instrument, are compatible with the provisions of the
Convention.

For the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
CORBIN, Minister Plenipotentiary, Director of the Political and Commercial
Department
8 Telegram not printed.
9 Only the letter from France is reprinted.
of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273].

[Document 273]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, February 29, 1928.
[Received March 20.]
No. 317
relative to the International Convention for the Abolition of Import and
Export Prohibitions and Restrictions and particularly to item No. 10,
appearing on page 7 of that despatch, concerning a letter which the French
Government had sent to the Secretariat of the League of Nations relative to
film restrictions.
Through the courtesy of the Commercial Attaché in Paris I am now in
receipt of a copy of the law of February 18th, published in the Official
Journal of the French Republic on February 19th, relative to the control of
cinematograph films. Presumably both the State Department representatives
in Paris and those of the Department of Commerce have forwarded this law
with appropriate observations and I shall therefore merely consider it in its
relation to the treaty in question and to the discussions which may take
place regarding the French letter in the Conference to be held in July next.
The text of the law itself does not appear to violate the terms of the
convention since no provision is made for the prohibition or restriction of
importation. The law appears to set up merely a censorship under a body
which will take into consideration “the sum total of the national interests in
question and especially that of the conservation of national customs and
traditions. Also when it is a question of foreign films consideration shall be
given to the ease with which, in the separate countries of origin, French
films may be acquired.” Obviously the Powers given to the Commission are

very broad and presumably under this law foreign films might be refused
the visa necessary for exhibition. This might be done arbitrarily and for the
sake of protecting the French film industry. Only experience will show the
result of the institution of the censorship.
If the subject comes up for debate in the July meeting, the Department may
desire our representative to take an occasion to call attention to the first
paragraph of article 5 of the Final Act of the Convention,12 especially to
those words “or hindrances of any other kind which would replace those
that it is the aim of the Convention to remove.” Admission might be made
frankly that while this and similar laws do not violate technically the
convention, they might open the door to a violation of the spirit of the
convention should the authorities administering them feel so inclined. That
the United States Government, however, in view of the aspirations
expressed in article 5 above cited, is confident that such laws will not be
used for purposes which would be a violation in effect if not in law of the
convention.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON
12 For text of the final act, see League of Nations, International Conference
for the Abolition of Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, etc.:

[Document 274]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Moffat) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, April 13, 1928.
[Received April 28.]
No. 393
honor to transmit herewith a communication addressed to you on April 11
by the Deputy Secretary-General of the League of Nations, announcing that
the International Conference for the Abolition of Import and Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions will reconvene under the Presidency of Mr.
Colijn on July 3, 1928, for the purpose of taking decisions with regard to
the requests for exceptions submitted in accordance with Article 6 of the
Convention of November 8, 1927, and the necessary conditions for putting
the Convention into force. The communication closes with the request that
as soon as convenient the composition of the American delegation be
transmitted to the Secretariat.
I have [etc.]
PIERREPONT MOFFAT
[Enclosure]
The Deputy Secretary General of the League of Nations (Dufour-Feronee) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, April 11, 1928.

SIR: By the terms of Article 17 of the International Convention for the
Abolition of Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, of which I
had the honour to forward you a certified true copy in my letter of
November 19th 1927, I have to summon a meeting to be held between June
on whose behalf the Convention will have been signed by June 15th 1928.
This meeting will have to take decisions with regard to:
a) the requests for exceptions submitted by certain States in
accordance with Article 6 of the Convention. Copies of these
requests were forwarded to you with my circular letter 27.1928.II.
b) the necessary conditions for the putting into force of the
Convention.
In agreement with M. Colijn, President of the November 1927 Conference
on prohibitions, who has been invited by the Council to preside also over
the proposed meeting, I have the honour to inform you that I have fixed the
date for July 3rd 1928, at Geneva.
I should be grateful if you would be good enough to let me know as soon as
convenient the composition of the delegation which your Government will
send to the meeting on July 3rd.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT DUFOUR-FERONCE
13 Not printed.
14 Circular letter not printed.

[Document 275]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
following communication to the Secretary General of the League of
Nations:
“With reference to the communication of February 13 addressed
to the Secretary of State of the United States by the Acting
Secretary General,15 I have been instructed to present the
following observations of the Government of the United States in
regard to the communications received by the Secretary General
pursuant to the terms of paragraph (ii) of sub-section (d) of
Section IV of the Protocol to the Convention for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions.16
The Government of the United States is greatly disappointed to
note the number and extent of the exceptions requested by the
signatory states, and considers that such extensive exceptions are
clearly contrary to the spirit and purpose of the convention.
Acceptance of the exceptions claimed would detract very
materially from its usefulness, if not tend to render it nugatory.
Furthermore, the Government of the United States regrets to find
in certain of the declarations and observations presented a
disposition to prepare the way for subsequently claiming
additional exceptions.
The observations and communications of a number of
governments indicate a tendency to claim for their own part the
right to make exceptions that may be admitted in favor of other
governments. Accordingly, exceptions specified by particular
countries have to be considered not merely in relation to the

foreign commerce of those countries in the articles in question,
but rather in the light of the possible effect of the general
application of such exceptions by other countries as well.
The Government of the United States is strongly of the opinion
that every effort should be made to dispense with exceptions, and
in principle is not disposed to agree to exceptions under the terms
of Article 6 of the convention unless it clearly appears that such
exceptions would not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the
convention. The Government of the United States therefore
reserves the right to object at the appropriate time to any or all of
the exceptions specified or desired by the signatory states.”
Telegraph briefly and report fully by mail concerning the observations
submitted by the several countries.
KELLOGG
15 Not printed.

[Document 276]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
following to the Secretary General of the League of Nations in the usual
informal manner:
“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has
received, with appreciation, the note of the Deputy Secretary
General of the League of Nations, dated April 11, 1928,17 in
which he was good enough to inform the American Government
that the meeting, provided for under Article 17 of the
International Convention for the Abolition of Import and Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions, would take place on July 3, 1928, at
Geneva, and in which he requested that he be advised, as soon as
convenient, of the composition of the delegation which the
Government of the United States will send to this meeting.
In reply the Secretary of State takes pleasure in stating that the
President has appointed Mr. Hugh Wilson, American Minister to
Switzerland, to attend the meeting in question as the
representative of the United States. Mr. Wilson will be assisted by
one or more advisers whose names will be communicated to the
Secretariat as soon as possible.”
The Department expects to appoint Bidwell, Lyon, and Moffat as your
assistants. Please instruct Tuck to act again as Secretary.
Full instructions will be transmitted by pouch.
KELLOGG

[Document 277]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:10 p.m.]
There are increasing signs of tendency on the part of other states to await
result of July conference as applied to French letter of January 27
concerning films19 and to base their action thereon. I respectfully suggest
that you may desire to instruct me to keep our record clear by some
statement in July conference, possibly to include following:
That French letter states Government does not believe action violates
convention:
That we hope this is so but that powers of censor board are so large that
only experience can show what application will be;
That we fear a violation of spirit if not of letter;
That conference has not material and time for detailed study and therefore
is not competent to pass on what constitutes a technical violation but that
we do not wish our silence to be construed as acquiescence in French plan
or in other plans which may follow the French lead;
That we therefore reserve our right of diplomatic or arbitral recourse in the
future if the need arises.
WILSON
18 Letter to Young and despatch No. 435 not printed.

[Document 278]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerlamd (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1928.
No. 237
SIR: The President has instructed me to inform you of his desire that you
represent the Government of the United States at the forthcoming
Conference to be held at Geneva beginning July 3, 1928, to consider
matters pertaining to the International Convention for the Abolition of
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions. You will be assisted by
Charles E. Lyon, Commercial Attaché at Berne; Percy W. Bidwell, one of
the European representatives of the Tariff Commission; and Mr. J. P. Moffat
of the Legation. Mr. S. P. Tuck, American Consul at Geneva, will serve as
Secretary of the delegation.
In connection with this Conference, reference is made to the Department’s
instruction of October 6, 1927,20 and to subsequent correspondence on this
general subject.
The Conference is convened pursuant to the provisions of Article 17 of the
Convention, which reads as follows:
In this same connection, reference is made to Article 6, which reads as
follows:
The pertinent part of the Protocol to the Convention is sub-paragraph (ii),
“Procedure”, of paragraph (d) of Section IV, which reads as follows: [Here

The exceptions claimed by the several governments and other observations
in the premises are set forth in document C. I. A. P. 23 of February 10,
Examination of the subject matter of the forthcoming Conference indicates
that the points of interest to the Government of the United States call for the
following comment and instructions:
You will probably find it advisable at the beginning of the Conference to
make for the record a formal statement of the general position of this
Government. Such a statement might set forth inter alia the sincere regret
felt by this Government at the tendency to claim exceptions contrary to the
spirit and purpose of the Convention, and could reiterate and if necessary
expand upon the considerations set forth in your communication of April
It is obvious that discussions of the particular exceptions claimed by the
various States may easily become unduly complicated and technical unless
such exceptions are tested by the application of general criteria. The first
criterion which might logically be applied is whether certain exceptions
claimed are not already covered under the terms of the convention, and in
particular under Articles 4 and 5 thereof. In case there should be agreement
that certain exceptions claimed are already so covered, you may suggest
that that fact might be recognized merely by its inclusion in the proces-
verbal of the conference. Such recognition of the exceptions would of
course always have force in the interpretation of the convention.
In addition to reducing the number of individual exceptions to be discussed
by the Conference, and ultimately the number of specific restrictions
recognized as admissible under the convention, this procedure would have
the advantage of bringing into the open the particular objectives sought by
the different countries in presenting their reservations, and obtaining either
the withdrawal or the limitation of the application of exceptional
restrictions to the purposes or circumstances for which they are recognized.
This scrutinizing and winnowing process should tend to strengthen
materially the agreement that finally results.

It would appear desirable, however, in recognizing such exceptions, to have
it made entirely clear that such recognition is without prejudice to the future
interpretation of the provisions of the instruments signed.
Specifically, examination of the exceptions claimed indicates that the
following may be so covered:
Bulgaria
Importation of products used for the falsification of national
products.
It appears that this exception might be covered under paragraph 7
of Article 4, or by internal regulations as to the marking of
imported products to show origin and in special cases the nature
and ingredients of the product.
Czechoslovakia
Importation of pink clover seed; sugar beet seed; seeds of
conifers; shoots of forest trees.
Two courses of action other than specific reservations seem
possible. If it is a question of the sanitary condition of these seeds
or shoots, the exception is covered under paragraph 4 of Article 4;
or if it is a question of quality standards, they are covered by
paragraph 7 of Article 4. The second alternative is for the
Czechoslovak Government to dispense with import restrictions on
the above commodities by establishing internal regulations
requiring the examination by Government experts of such
products when offered for importation into Czechoslovakia, or for
their identification by prescribed means; e. g. by the requirement
that a certain proportion of seed be colored to indicate origin or
quality. Such means of internal control are now applied on
products of this character in the United States and other countries.
Importation of cattle and swine.

It is suggested that inquiry be made whether the object is the
protection of public health or protection of domestic animals
against disease, and if so the 4th paragraph of Article 4 would
cover such a case.
Exportation of hop shoots.
If it is the maintenance of the reputed high quality of
“Czechoslovak hops” which that Government desires to insure,
that can be done by taking measures under the terms of the 7th
paragraph of Article 4, and the corresponding provisions of the
protocol, which are designed to cover quality standards. If the
purpose sought is that presented by the Czechoslovak
Government in its note to the Secretary General of February 14
(C. I. A. P. 23–Addendum), namely of preventing foreign
competitors from misleading consumers as to the true origin of
hops imported by them, it is difficult to see how a restriction on
exportation from Czechoslovakia could prevent producers in
another country from misrepresenting the products they ship into
a third country. Protection in a common market against producers
in a competing country would need to be secured rather by the
methods employed to protect the use of other distinctly regional
appellations, such as “champagne”, either by seeking protection
under the Madrid Convention of 1891,23 concerning “the
repression of false indications of origin of merchandise” (to
which Czechoslovakia, as a number of other countries, has
adhered), or by bilateral agreements with the Governments of
those common markets for protection or legal redress against such
misrepresentations within their territory.
Importation of matches.
It could be recognized that the Czechoslovak Government
correctly interprets this reservation as coming under paragraph 8
of Article 4 as a de facto State monopoly.
Estonia

Exportation of platinum, precious stones, etc.
Inquiry may be made whether the goods in question are national
treasures such as would come under the terms of paragraph 5 of
Article 4. If so, specific reservation is unnecessary.
Exportation of butter and eggs.
The Estonian regulations affecting these commodities indicate
that the purpose is to maintain the standard of quality of such
products going abroad. If so, they are covered under the protocol
to paragraph 7 of Article 4.
Portugal
Importation of horses, mules and cattle.
Inquiry may be made whether the Portuguese Government has in
mind sanitary considerations, and if so, the exception for these
animals could be covered under the 4th paragraph of Article 4.
It may be noted at this point, with reference to certain of the
aforementioned prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary nature, that the
Department fails to perceive how a general prohibition applicable to
imports of whatever origin could be justified as a bona fide sanitary
requirement. It is not believed that any country exists whose sanitary
situation is such as to be endangered by imports of any commodity from
every other part of the world. Nevertheless, the question should be raised
and if sanitary grounds are alleged, the foregoing point may be made and
effort may appropriately be made to persuade the countries noting such
exceptions to withdraw or modify them.
As a second step in the application of the general criterion as to the
necessity of reservations, the exceptions admitted at the time of signing the
convention might similarly be examined with a view to determining
whether they could be admitted as falling within the terms of Articles 4 and
5. Thus, in view of the dependence of the Japanese people upon rice as their
staple article of food, the Japanese exception as to restriction on rice might

be considered as coming within the terms of Article 5 which authorizes an
exception in the case of “extraordinary and abnormal circumstances” in
order to protect the “vital interests” of the country. It is, of course,
understood that the Japanese Government does not wish permanently to
maintain this restriction, but rather wishes to reserve the right to impose it
from time to time. Recognition of any prohibitions or restrictions as coming
under Article 5 should take due account of the fact that their duration “shall
be restricted to that of the causes or circumstances from which they arise”.
The exception claimed by the United States as to the export of helium gas
would doubtless be recognized as properly falling under the 3rd paragraph
of Article 4 which relates to traffic in implements of war, and you are
authorized to agree to its recognition as coming thereunder. Particularly
since the exception of this commodity was agreed to at the time the
convention was signed on November 8, 1927,24 the Department assumes
that no objection will be raised to granting that exception in favor of the
United States. If, however, any questions should be raised as to this
exception, you may state that the Government of the United States desires
to maintain it, and that obviously it does not “prejudicially affect the trade
of other countries” (see Article 6).
A further criterion by which the exceptions claimed under paragraph 2 of
Article 6 may be tested is obviously found in the construction of the terms
of that Article. It is therefore believed that the conference should examine
carefully all such exceptions from that point of view. The Government of
the United States considers that certain exceptions claimed under paragraph
2 are not properly admissible thereunder. In particular, reference is made to
the claims for exception of raw materials, which appear to be essentially
claims designed to effect economic protection by restrictions rather than by
duties. Thus the Polish Government desires to restrict exportation of crude
oil and the Czechoslovak Government of rounded timber.
The second paragraph of Article 6 of the convention only permits
prohibitions or restrictions which “do not prejudicially affect the trade of
other countries”. Restrictions on the exportation of such important raw
materials as crude oil and rounded timber can not be justified in accord with
that principle. It is considered that a large measure of liberty in the

exportation of raw materials is in the general interest of all countries, and
makes for the reduction of friction between countries. Such a freedom of
exports is clearly contemplated by Articles 1 and 2 of the convention.
The same considerations apply to the reservations made at the time of the
convention, under paragraph 2 of Article 6, by Italy on the exportation of
iron ores, and by Rumania on the exportation of ores or iron, copper and
manganese. The fact that the countries in question may not be predominant
suppliers of the commodities concerned does not change the situation; once
it has been recognized that a country under the convention may reserve the
right to impose restrictions on the exportation of raw materials from its
territory, it would be difficult to prevent the major producers of the same
materials for the world’s markets from claiming the same privilege. In view
of the position taken by Italian representatives in favor of freedom of access
to raw materials at other international conferences, e. g., the Economic
Conference of 1927,25 it is possible that the Italian representatives may not
insist on this exception.
The conditions under which Rumania’s reservation regarding crude oil was
allowed to stand last November might be recalled. The subject came up as
the conference was about to end; the delegates, eager to leave for home, are
reported to have interposed no objection (with the exception of the
representative of the United States), not because the reservation seemed
warranted, but rather because a refusal of the request would re-open the
whole controversy and prolong the sessions. The Polish request for a
similar reservation was obviously encouraged by that decision. The
necessity for acting upon the Polish reservation gives logical occasion for
the re-consideration of the hasty and inconsistent decision last fall regarding
Rumanian oil.
Referring now to the reservations presented under paragraph 1 of Article 6
of the convention, whereby various Governments desire to maintain import
or export restrictions for a temporary period, it appears to the United States
Government that a good many of these reservations represent essentially
attempts to afford domestic industries economic protection by restrictions
rather than by duties, and are therefore contrary to the spirit and purpose of
the convention unless justifiable on the same grounds as led the delegates to

accept the reservations regarding such products as scrap metals and
synthetic dye stuffs at the time of the convention. While the American
delegation should take its stand against all such economic restrictions on the
fundamental principle involved, the following are of particular concern to
its trade and those on which it is desired that every effort be made to
prevent their acceptance by the convention:
Import Restrictions: On automobiles (presented by Czechoslovakia and
Portugal); agricultural food products (presented in varying degrees by Italy,
Japan, Norway and Portugal); and motion picture films. The question of
films has been brought forward since last November by the action of
France, although similar restrictions are found in Great Britain, Germany,
Austria, Hungary and Italy. The fact that the restrictions on films are
operated through rationing at time of the granting of licenses for exhibition,
rather than at the customhouse, does not essentially change their nature nor
exempt them from the application of the convention on any ground that
they are internal measures. To refuse to grant licenses for the exhibition of
foreign films or the films of a given foreign country is tantamount in
practice to refusing their importation into the country. Your stand in
opposition to the film quota restrictions should find support from the
representatives of the German Government which, despite repeated requests
from its domestic film industry, declared that it would not ask a reservation
for films because of its inconsistency with the general objective of the
convention.
The grounds for objecting to the acceptance of import restrictions on
automobiles or staple food products are obvious and need no particular
elaboration. The fact that particular countries desire to maintain such
essentially economic restrictions, the purpose of which is fully served in
other countries by import duties, as important bargaining considerations in
forthcoming treaty negotiations, does not make them any less objectionable
in the light of the ends sought by the convention.
Export Restrictions. The permanent restrictions on the exportation of crude
oil desired by Poland and Rumania, and on metal ores by Italy and Rumania
have already been dealt with. The problem of export restrictions on hides
and skins appears to be on its way to solution through the special agreement

on that subject recently concluded, but the attitude of this major conference
against the acceptability of such restrictions should be unmistakable. In
addition, the Portuguese desire to reserve restrictions on export of raw cork
is of particular concern to American industries using that material, and the
similar reservations desired by Czechoslovakia on rounded timber and by
Finland on pulp wood are similarly objectionable to the United States. In
the case of the reservations on lumber products, it is desirable that objection
be maintained not primarily because the particular countries desiring these
restrictions are important sources of supply, but because of the
objectionable principle involved, which once recognized could be invoked
also by other countries (as Canada in the case of pulp wood) and for other
raw materials.
The Portuguese desire to reserve restrictions on other raw materials (wool,
cocoons and pine resin) and on a range of staple food products (poultry, oil,
vegetables, cereals, meat, etc.) as well as the Italian request for an exception
on the exportation of “corn” (presumably an inexact translation for cereals)
are of lesser direct importance to American trade, but should be equally
objected to on the grounds of their obvious inconsistency with the basic
principle upon which the convention is built. If accepted, these reservations,
though apparently unimportant from the viewpoint of the volume of trade
involved, would open the way to similar reservations on the part of other
countries for these and other staple foods and raw materials for which they
might desire a similar privilege of restricting their trade for economic
purposes.
In this connection, attention is again called to the formal statement
presented to the League on behalf of the United States on April 28
emphasizing the importance of considering specific exceptions by particular
countries “not merely in relation to the foreign commerce of those countries
in the articles in question but rather in the light of the possible effect of the
general application of such exceptions by other countries as well”.
Recognizing that it may not be possible to bring about the withdrawal or
non-acceptance of all the reservations mentioned above, which the
Department considers deleterious in principle, it appears that a practical
means of compromise in case of need would be the granting of the

reservation but subject to a definite time limit upon the periods which these
temporary exceptions may be maintained. If possible it would be preferable
that the time of termination of a given temporary reservation should take
the form of a specified date rather than a given period from the coming into
force of the convention. Thus, instead of agreeing to certain restrictions
being enforceable for a period for example of a year after the coming into
force of the convention or the date of ratification by the particular country,
it might be preferable to fix upon a definite date such as July 1, 1929 or
January 1, 1930. At present the setting of such a date would appear to give a
longer period for the maintenance of a restriction, but it has the important
advantage of definiteness of termination upon which commercial interests
can count. You may insist upon some such limitation as essential to our
agreement to the exceptions desired by the various Governments.
The Department considers in principle that if it is not possible to have the
above mentioned reservations ruled out altogether, but if a satisfactory
agreement can be reached to abolish the objectionable exceptions within a
given period in the near future, it would be preferable not to destroy the
chances of agreement on the basis of the draft convention by inflexible
insistence on their withdrawal, but rather to vote to carry it into effect, even
with a number of temporary reservations, because of the moral effect to be
derived.
Article 17, which is quoted above, provides that the conference shall
determine:
“(b) The conditions required for the coming into force
of the Convention and, in particular, the number and, if
necessary, the names of the Members of the League and
of non-Member States, whether they are signatories or
not, whose ratification or accession must first be
secured;
“(c) The last date on which the ratifications may be
deposited and the date on which the Convention shall
come into force if the conditions required under the
preceding paragraph are fulfilled.”

Inasmuch as the Government of the United States is broadly interested in
the effecting of a suitable agreement on this subject, which will have
considerable moral force as condemning recourse to prohibitions and
restrictions, the Department would consider it unfortunate if conditions
were stipulated which would make unduly difficult the coming into effect
of the convention. Inasmuch as the decision of the conference on this head,
however, will depend to a considerable extent upon the attitude of the
European Governments, the Department does not give you precise
instructions on the point at this time but suggests that you discuss the
situation informally with your colleagues at the earliest practicable
opportunity and report the situation with your recommendations and a
request for instructions.
It may be suggested that the United States should be one of the parties
whose adherence to the convention would be requisite for its entering into
force. Should this question be raised, you might informally point out that
the United States does not apply prohibitions or restrictions of the character
that would be prohibited by the convention and that accordingly it would
seem unnecessary to stipulate that the adherence of the United States should
be prerequisite to the convention coming into effect. Nevertheless, if your
colleagues feel definitely that the United States should be mentioned, the
Department sees no ground on which objection to such a course could be
maintained.
With respect to paragraph (c), the Department would be glad to see the
convention come into force at the earliest practicable date inasmuch as its
object is to remove burdensome and arbitrary interferences with commerce.
As has already been suggested, any compromise that may be found
necessary might take the form of fixation of a date until which temporary
restrictions might be continued under the first paragraph of Article 6. Such
date should be the earliest practicable date.
During the course of the conference you will, of course, keep the
Department closely informed of important developments. The Department
will endeavor to instruct you promptly in relation to matters that may be
presented.

Before signing any agreement, you will, of course, report the full text to the
Department for consideration.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
25 For correspondence concerning the Economic Conference, see Foreign
Relations, 1927, vol. i , pp. 238 ff.

[Document 279]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[Paraphrase—Extract]
63. …
Department has received since June 15 insistent requests from film interests
which urge a very strong stand. A subsequent telegram may take up this
subject.
KELLOGG

[Document 280]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:45 p.m.]
1. Please elaborate meaning of second paragraph page 5
beginning “It would appear desirable.”
2. Relative to films. Our attitude on this question will provoke the
liveliest public interest and should be most seriously considered.
offer certain observations.…
WILSON

[Document 281]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
alternative that you suggest, namely the presentation in a speech of what
would amount to a brief on the legality of the French action with respect to
films under the terms of the treaty. However, the Department agrees with
you that it is essential that such a procedure should meet with success, a
matter concerning which you alone are in a position to judge. The
Department therefore leaves to your discretion the question of what
procedure you shall adopt in this case and is desirous of receiving the text
of your proposed remarks, which you may make or not in accordance with
the circumstances that may arise at the conference. Telegram will follow on
point 1.
KELLOGG

[Document 282]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
page 4 of Department’s instruction No. 23726 suggests possible recognition
in procès-verbal that certain particular articles, exception of which from the
application of the Convention is demanded by particular countries, may be
considered as falling within the stated general exceptions of the
Convention. Such recognition would doubtless determine the interpretation
of the Convention so far as the articles and countries named are concerned.
The second paragraph on page 527 was inserted because it is deemed
important that such interpretation be not used as a precedent for a loose
interpretation of the Convention so as to except from its application similar
articles or the same articles in respect of other countries. Accordingly, if
such exceptions are recognized by the Conference in order to bridge over
present difficulties, it is important that a clause be inserted in the procès-
verbal safeguarding against the extension of such interpretation of the
Convention to cases that may arise at a future time.
Department intended this portion of its instruction No. 237 as suggestive
only, leaving to your discretion the question whether or how far it is
feasible.
Please inform Department concerning the time you will arrive at Geneva.…
KELLOGG
that discussions of the particular exceptions claimed”.
desirable”.

[Document 283]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
2. Following is text of speech, summarized when possible, which I suggest
making with respect to restrictive measures on films.
Paragraph 1 refers to letter of French Government to League Secretariat
dated January 2729 (see C. I. A. P. number 23).
Paragraph 2 contains tribute to the bona fides of the French Government
and to Serruys.30
Paragraph 6. Now, gentlemen, what is the meaning in simple words of this
dry material which I have been forced to inflict upon you. To speak as
directly and concisely as I can, it means nothing but this: That over and
above a fixed percentage of the number of films introduced last year (and
this percentage is good for this year only) an American producer of films
must obtain the right to expose those films in France in one of two ways,
either by the purchase and showing of a French film or by arranging with a
French producer to obtain one of his seven visas which the producer has
obtained for making a French film; furthermore, the total number of foreign
films which may be shown in France within a given period is fixed.
7. Gentlemen, I have not hitherto used the words prohibition or restriction.
It is difficult to perceive, however, how anyone can make known such a
situation without using the words prohibition or restriction as applying to
the action which the French are undertaking.

8. Let me turn to article 10 which I mentioned above and let us envisage for
an instant what such regulation might mean. Suppose an American film, the
scene of which was laid in any country of the world, introduced as a
character a Frenchman whose conduct might be obnoxious to the 32
gentlemen sitting on the commission, under this regulation not only could
that film be refused a visa for French territory, but every film produced by
this company, or any film handled by any person who had even handled this
film, might be refused a visa for all time in France. Surely, gentlemen, I
who am a very rare visitor to the films have frequently seen my countrymen
put in a position and represented in a way which is objectionable to me as
an American citizen. France is not alone in suffering from this
misrepresentation. And yet has it occurred to any other nation to endeavor
to take such drastic measures to protect their reputation abroad? Naturally
no one deplores more than I do the bad taste of an American producer who
will caricature or falsify the characteristics of a member of any foreign
nation, and I the more deeply deplore this in that I am persuaded that one of
the best forms of mutual understanding and one of the best lessons in
comprehension between nations is conveyed by means of the motion
picture films. However, this must be produced by mutual satisfaction and
by mutual good understanding on the part of producers and foreign
governments and cannot, it seems to me, be produced by the application of
force. Carry this thought to a possible extreme and you must envisage the
possibility of the exclusion, or at least the restriction, of foreign books,
magazines, plays and in fact any form of artistic or intellectual productions.
9. One of the complaints most frequently heard against the system of import
and export restrictions and prohibitions, a complaint which was brought by
chambers of commerce of all nationalities as was shown by the speeches in
the First Conference, lay in the fact that international trade must have a
definite and accurate basis for a foreseeable period in advance in order to
lay its plans and carry out its business. To eliminate this state of fluidity and
uncertainty was one of the primary purposes for which we were summoned
6 months ago to write a convention. Such action as is authorized by the
French decree which established a commission which from day to day or
from hour to hour may change its rules goes back to that uncertainty and to
those fluid conditions which make it nearly impossible to do business with
success. In the motion picture trade as in others a considerable investment is

necessary in order to sell goods abroad. There must be offices, there must
be distributing centers and showing centers, and a hundred other expenses.
Under these French regulations our producers are asked to undertake this
expense with no certainty that the field will even be open to them in the
future. They may establish a distribution service on the basis fixed for a
year’s distribution and as soon as their expense is consummated the whole
basis on which they have built up their service may be altered over night.
10. For the sake of clarity I must ask you to subdivide this question in your
minds into two very distinct and separate categories; the first, the right of a
nation, based on the very reasonable contention that a state must maintain
public morals and order, to censor the films shown to its own people. With
this right we have of course no opposition to raise. We fully recognize such
right in any state. The second category has to do with the handling of this
question for economic purposes for the purpose of protecting industry. It is
the action of France in relation to this second category to which we take
exception and which I hope to be able to demonstrate to you gentlemen is
clearly contrary to the purpose of this convention.
11. Gentlemen, when we drew up our convention last autumn it was to do
away with restrictive measures on importation—certain specified
exceptions were allowed but it was certainly the spirit, more than that it was
the intent—of the instrument to do away with all other types of formalities
and regulations of a nature to restrict importation.
12. Now, I ask you, what does importation mean?—in our minds, in the
minds of businessmen, in the ordinary conception of the word? Does it
mean, I ask you, merely the passing of a frontier or the passing of a frontier
for a useful purpose? Does it mean that we Americans are free to ship
wheat and cotton to the world, to enter the states freely, but still may be
prevented from distributing this wheat and cotton by so-called internal
regulations? Does it mean we can send typewriters, motorcars, or any other
form of our products freely to the world but that the other states may in
their discretion decide which ones of these motorcars and which ones of
these typewriters may be distributed and sold within their frontiers? On
[Eliminate] the question of public order and public morals, and [the] cases
are not only analogous but identical.

13. I cannot conceive that any body of men who have the welfare of
commerce at heart and who have given the labor that you, my colleagues,
have given to this convention are willing to see it vitiated by a legalistic
interpretation which makes it not worth the paper it is written on. If it
should be decided that our convention has to do with the mere crossing of
frontiers for articles of trade but leaves foreign nations free to prevent the
disposal of these articles within their frontiers, then what, I ask you, is left
of this convention?
14. The word films was not mentioned through our debates in October. No
nation having similar restrictions brought up this question. I wish this
conference would consider this point—it is an important one—that is, why
was this question not raised in the [first] conference? Gentlemen, I have
made careful inquiry among the representatives of states having [similar]
restrictions and I have ascertained from at least two of these representatives
that they did not raise the question because they assumed that once this
convention was put in force those questions [restrictions] must
automatically be dissolved by the states or at least after six months as
provided by article 1 of this convention. There was no question in their
minds as to whether a restriction on importation meant only the crossing of
the frontier or meant crossing the frontier for a useful purpose.
15. The point may be brought out that large film interests of the United
States have dealt with the French Government on the basis of these
regulations and have reached a satisfactory agreement and therefore why
should the Government of the United States enter into this question.
16. I should like to deal with this phase of the question now. In the first
place, such film interests as have dealt with the French Government have
acquiesced [in] and not agreed to the procedure of that Government. They
have so acquiesced because they were faced with a condition in which they
stood to lose heavily. They were confronted with a state of facts with which
they had to deal and under force majeure they took the best they could get
in order to enable them to continue to do business temporarily. It obviously
does not mean that the case of the United States Government is in any way
prejudiced in dealing with the convention, which has not yet come into

effect, and in discussing what interpretation may be put to [upon] that
convention in the future.
17. I mentioned earlier that this question was broader than the action of
France alone and I earnestly beg you to consider the consequences implied
in the acceptance of the French thesis that their action does not violate the
convention. Warning has already been served by certain states which
implies that they will consider the decision as to France as a precedent and
as I endeavored to make clear before, this matter must not be considered
alone but as a precedent by which any state which is embarrassed on
economic grounds by importation may set up a machinery by way of
internal regulation by which it may act in harmony with the convention and
still against its purposes. It seems to me, gentlemen, that this is one of the
most vital questions with which the Conference has been confronted
because we must decide not a simple question of one exception, but a
question of principle by which we establish a precedent which may save or
wreck the future operation of this convention. I most earnestly hope that
this question will be examined in the broadest spirit and with the fullest
comprehension of the dangers which lie in acquiescing in the French
contention.
18. I cannot reach my conclusion without again paying tribute to the spirit
of loyalty which animated the French Government in bringing this matter
before the Conference. If anything that I have said has raised a shadow of
doubt as to my belief in the sincere good faith in which the French
Government has acted, I can only assure you that nothing could have been
more remote from my intention than to [carry] such an implication. The
French Government said, “Although these measures cannot be described as
prohibitions within the strict meaning of the convention”. My government
is not prepared to agree with the French Government even as to this
contention, in which the French Government itself seems to have
considerable doubt, but leaving aside for a moment the question of strict
interpretation, I beg you will not consider this affair merely as one of strict
legality but on a broader and more comprehensive basis and one calculated
to accomplish the broad purpose for which we have written this convention,
namely, to increase the facilities of international trade.

WILSON
28 Telegram in three sections.
30 Director of French Commercial Agreements.

[Document 284]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chief of the American
Delegation (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
p.m., is approved.
(2) The Department desires, if you make this address, that you follow it up
with the utmost vigor and that you urge, unless you know of some reason to
the contrary, a positive expression by the Conference that it considers
restrictions such as those of France on the subject of exhibiting foreign
films, to be contrary to the intent of the convention of November 8, 1927,
and, in fact, in contravention of it. If encouragement is given you and the
agenda of the Conference permits, you should take under advisement the
offering of a protocol or of a declaration such as outlined above, which
instrument would be signed by the states parties to the convention itself.
Department approves your telegraphing the text of such a declaration
should you consider at any time that the probability of success warrants
placing it before the Conference.
(3) Should there be slight prospect of the adoption by the Conference of
such an instrument as that outlined above, or even of a nonbinding
resolution, you should naturally undertake to prevent any expression on the
part of the Conference on the subject of film restrictions. …
CASTLE

[Document 285]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[Received 10:37 p.m.]
3. In today’s meeting Colijn held Conference strictly to immediate business
and gave no opportunity for remarks of a general nature. He called states
alphabetically who had made reservations since November 8th and
requested them to state:
(a) Whether they maintained those reservations;
(b) Whether those reservations were in effect before November
(c) To make such explanation and defense of the reservations as
seemed desirable.
Considerable debate developed on procedure and whether Conference could
give assurance to states that certain exceptions were covered by specific
articles other than article 6. In the light of your instructions, I advocated
giving such assurances in specific border[line] cases but I was unable to
obtain complete acceptance of this view. The Conference finally decided
that lacking full facts and under limited terms of reference no such
assurance could be given and that claims for exception which seemed to be
covered by other sections of the convention must be thrown out as not
admissible to discussion under article 6. Thus the petitioner would have a
clear indication of the opinion of the Conference, while the Conference
would have committed itself to no affirmative interpretation.
WILSON

[Document 286]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
bones in view of signature yesterday of agreement on hides and bones, text
of which is not yet available.
Consideration of the Bulgarian exceptions postponed.
Estonian exception for butter and eggs rejected; that on platinum, et cetera,
admitted for discussion.
United States exception on helium gas admitted for discussion.
Norway withdrew exception for cereals. Its exception on shares of shipping
companies was thrown out; its exception for vessels and parts of vessels
admitted for discussion.
Chile, which signed on June 14th, submitted reservations which Conference
voted not to debar because of delayed date of submission, reading as
follows:
“Reservations: On signing the present convention the undersigned
declares on behalf of his Government:
(a) That he is firmly convinced numbers 1 and 3 of
Article 4 cannot be [invoked by the] other high
contracting parties in order to prohibit or restrict the
import into their territory of Chilean nitrate of soda,
which is employed for agricultural purposes.

(b) That, in the opinion of the Chilean Government, the
convention affects neither the tariff system nor the
treaty-making methods of the participating countries,
nor the measures taken to ensure the allotment
[application] thereof, including any steps taken to
counteract the effects of dumping.
[My Government also takes this opportunity of drawing the
attention of the other High Contracting Parties to the prohibitions
or restrictions which it desires to maintain, and which I should be
obliged if you would likewise submit to the said Conference for
consideration:
Upon the export of:]33
(1) Scrap iron and scrap zinc, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of article 6 of the convention.
(2) Guano, the export of which is prohibited as the
reserves will probably be exhausted in the near future.
In my government’s opinion, this prohibition could also
be based on paragraph 8 of article 4 of the convention.
as my Government has been obliged for the time being
to prohibit the export of these animals to meet the
requirements of national defense.”
Conference refused to discuss reservation (a), threw out exception for
guano and postponed consideration of exceptions on scrap iron and on
mares.
Poland withdrew reservations on dye stuffs and crude oils but indicated at
the same time that it retained its declaration relative to ratification contained
in its letter of January 31st (C. I. A. P. 23).
WILSON

33 Bracketed portion, omitted in telegram as received by the Department,
supplied from Proceedings of the Conference, p. 119.

[Document 287]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
its terms of reference its only task is to discuss the three provisions
stipulated in article 17 of the convention. From this fact and from
consultation with my colleagues it would appear impossible to bring film
matter to a decision, so that if we cannot win at least we cannot lose.
I propose therefore to tell the President that whatever limitation the
Conference has put on its scope, France having stated its viewpoint in its
letter of January 27,35 I must insist upon the right to make a statement of
our viewpoint regarding the French regulations. I anticipate that Conference
will promptly rule after my statement that subject does not fall within its
competence.
WILSON

[Document 288]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[Received 10:30 p.m.]
6. In meeting this morning Portugal withdrew all claims for exceptions on
imports and all but three, those on raw cork, wool and pine resin, for export.
These three were transferred to paragraph 2 of article 6 and were admitted
for discussion.
Sweden maintained its reservation on scrap iron.
Czechoslovakia withdrew most of its reservations but maintained four
outright which were admitted to and understood under article 6, paragraph
1. These dealt with automobiles, salicylic acid, cattle and swine and wine. It
also maintained contingently reservations under paragraph 2 of article 6 on
sugar beets, rounded timber and quartzite which have been referred to
subcommittee composed of German, Austrian, Czechoslovakian and
Hungarian delegates, for possible special agreement which may enable
complete withdrawal.
At the risk of repetition, the following greatly reduced list has now been
admitted for discussion under article 6 as a result of winnowing process:
Claims for exceptions admitted by the Conference for consideration under
article 6:
Czechoslovakia: Import: Automobiles, salicylic acid and its
derivatives, cattle and swine for slaughter and breeding, wine;
Export, conditional (subject to agreement with neighboring
countries): Sugar beet[s], timber rounded, quartzite.

Estonia: Export: Platinum, precious stones, pearls and corals (in
rough state of finished, loose or mounted).
Norway: Export: Vessels and parts of vessels.
Portugal: Export: Wool, raw cork, pine resin.
Sweden: Export: Scrap iron.
United States of America: Export: Helium gas.
Claims for exchange left open for decision:
Bulgaria: Export: Rose-trees and roots and shoots; Import:
Products used for falsification of national products.
Chile: Export: Scrap iron and scrap zinc; mares.
WILSON

[Document 289]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[Received 10:12 p.m.]
precious stones and corals admitted under paragraph 2 of article 6.
United States reservation on helium admitted under paragraph 2.
Swedish reservation on scrap iron admitted under paragraph 1.
Portuguese request concerning wool postponed pending receipt of further
information. Exception on raw cork voted down under paragraph 2 and
accepted under paragraph 1. I voted in the negative in the first instance and
abstained in the second. I made final proposal for time limit which
Portuguese delegate refused. The discussion brought out the fact that the
Portuguese prohibition on the export of raw cork has been in existence
since 1910 and that the Portuguese Government has never restricted the
exportation of cork in sheets or other forms of manufactured,
semimanufactured cork. Also that in commercial negotiations no objection
has ever been raised to the Portuguese restriction on the exportation of raw
cork which has for its purpose merely to furnish occupation for Portuguese
peasants. Though I argued against acceptance, the Conference was
overwhelmingly desirous of giving some satisfaction to Portugal to enable
it to ratify. Therefore when it was inserted under paragraph 1, i. e.
“temporary”, I abstained from opposition.
Portuguese reservation on pine resin admitted under paragraph 2.
WILSON

[Document 290]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
8. On termination of debate on exceptions under article 6, Colijn plans to
call for general discussion on ratification and then to appoint a
subcommittee to work out a definite plan to be submitted to Conference, He
will probably request each state to declare when convention may be
submitted to legislative body for approval. Am I authorized to state that
convention and protocol with new annex, if you authorize me to sign, will
be submitted to the Senate in the next session?
WILSON

[Document 291]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
9. Portugal limited its reservation on wool to “fine wool of category known
as ‘Marquis de Lema” in which form it was accepted under paragraph 2.
Czechoslovak delegate withdrew reservation on salicylic acid and gave
formal undertaking that his country would only maintain its reservation on
automobiles, wine, cattle and swine until November 8, 1930.
Debate on Czechoslovakian reservation assumed a certain intensity and it
became clear that if they were admitted even in modified form numerous
other reservations would be demanded by other countries. After opposing
automobile reservation, I finally suggested that the difference between the
date on which the convention would actually enter into force was so slight
that Czechoslovakia might well withdraw reservation without disadvantage
to herself. France supported this suggestion.
WILSON

[Document 292]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
withdrew his reservation on vessels and parts of vessels.
Chilean reservation on scrap iron and scrap zinc rejected under paragraph 2
but accepted under paragraph 1. Reservation on mares accepted under
paragraph 1.
Decision on Czechoslovak reservations postponed at the request of [Dr.
Vincent] Ibl pending receipt by him of further instructions.
There was then a preliminary discussion of the second and third points of
agenda dealing with conditions required for entry into force of convention.
This brought up a greater divergence of opinion than hitherto manifested in
Conference. Tendencies not yet sufficiently clarified to telegraph.
WILSON

[Document 293]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American, Delegation
(Wilson)
that would bind the President to submit a treaty to the Senate and would not
undertake in advance to recommend a treaty to the President. Nevertheless,
you may state that the next regular session of the Senate convenes on
December 3 and that there is every reason to suppose that the instruments
which you signed on January 30 and such instruments of the Conference
now in session as you may be authorized to sign will be submitted to the
Senate on or shortly after that date.
KELLOGG

[Document 294]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
11. Morning meeting. A proposal was brought forward by small drafting
committee concerning ratification. It provided:
(a) Ratification must be made by at least 20 states.
(b) Each state notifying ratification before September 30, 1929,
might name certain states from following list on whose
ratification it makes its own ratification dependent.
List follows: Germany, Austria, (United States of America),
France, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Poland, Rumania,
Serb-Croat-Slovene State, Switzerland, Czechoslovakia, Turkey.
In presenting proposal French delegation stated committee had put the
United States in parentheses since they realized that this was year of short
session of Congress and ratification might be delayed by rush of business.
A confused and inconclusive debate followed in which I took no part, as I
had previously followed Department’s instructions by stating that we
considered it improbable that the United States need be included in the list
because we had no prohibitions to abolish. One fact of interest to us came to
light. Certain states, notably Germany, insisted that ratification by the
United States might be necessary essential prerequisite to their ratification.
The German delegate explained that unconditional most-favored-nation
clause in American-German bilateral commercial treaty36 would make it
essential to give benefits to the United States if Germany ratified
irrespective of American ratification.

I propose to take little part in the debate since matter is primarily one of
Central European concession. Enlarged subcommittee is now endeavoring
to work out another concrete proposal.
WILSON

[Document 295]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[Received July 7—1 a.m.]
12. At afternoon session general conference received report from the special
conference on hides, skins and bones to the effect that conventions on skins
and bones had been approved by 18 states. These are to be regarded as acts
separate from the general convention and to be ratified in advance thereof.
The conference agreed in principle to insert a paragraph in the general
convention providing that, if the hides and bones agreements have not been
ratified at the time of the entry into force of the former, the interested states
may again introduce their claims for exceptions on hides and bones which
would then have to be passed on by a special meeting of the Conference.
The drafting was referred to a subcommittee.
The Conference then agreed in principle that the general convention must
be ratified by at least 18 states, including the list of 14 states contained in
Ratifications are to be notified before September 30, 1929; if all conditions
have been fulfilled on that date, convention will enter into force on January
A special clause to be added to protocol was passed in principle as follows:
“Owing to the position of the United States resulting from the
short session of the Congress during the year 1928–1929, the high
contracting parties are agreed that if the United States’ ratification
has not been obtained before September 30, 1929, in conformity
with the provisions of article (blank) but the ratifications or
accessions of all the other states which are indispensable by the

same article have been received by September 30, 1929, the
convention shall come into force on January 1, 1930, unless
previous to November 15, 1929, one of the states having ratified
the convention by that date or having acceded thereto before
September 30, 1929, raises an objection.
In this case the last paragraph of article 17 of the convention of
In regard to Czechoslovakia’s conditional reservations, those on sugar beets
and rounded timber have been withdrawn. That on quartzite was admitted
p.m., thereupon withdrew its exceptions on automobiles, wine, cattle and
swine.
Bulgarian reservation on rose trees, roots and shoots admitted under
paragraph 1; that dealing with falsification of national products rejected.
Colijn announced that there will be a short session tomorrow morning at
which drafting committee will be appointed to work over weekend and
submit final draft for consideration Monday afternoon. Colijn subsequently
informed me I would be given an opportunity to make statement on films
Saturday morning.
WILSON

[Document 296]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation
(Wilson)
influence in debate or otherwise persistently against proposal outlined and
in favor of the simplest practicable provisions for bringing the Convention
into effect. Prompt operation of the Convention is of importance to
American commerce.
There seems no good reason for requiring acceptance by a larger number of
States than the number which at present maintain well-developed systems
of prohibitions and restrictions. If the effectiveness of the Convention or the
effectiveness of any State’s ratification thereof must be contingent upon its
acceptance by any particular State, that State should be one which
maintains such a system.
The contention of German delegate could have practical importance only if
the United States maintained a system of restrictions. Since the ratification
by the United States of the Convention would not alter the situation so far
as its laws and regulations are concerned, Germany, though bound to give it
most-favored-nation treatment, would, in return, receive everything without
American ratification that it would in the event of American ratification. As
a practical matter, only countries that are under most-favored-nation
obligations to countries that maintain systems of restrictions, against which
the former countries desire to retaliate, need hesitate on that ground to ratify
the Convention.
Referring to your reports of the Conference, Department is gratified that a
number of the exceptions reserved by other countries have been withdrawn,
and wishes you to assist diligently in this process, especially urging the

immediate withdrawal of all restrictions affecting the import of automobiles
and the export of the raw materials of industry.
KELLOGG

[Document 297]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
[Received July 7—3 p.m.]
13. Drafting committee composed of Colijn, Serruys, Brunet, Chapman and
Ito.
Portuguese reservation changed as a result of garble in telegram; it now
reads “fine wool” and has been admitted under paragraph 1 of article 6.
Special provision agreed upon permitting the United States and Bulgaria
[to] maintain their reservations by signing annex and protocol to general
convention on or before September 1st.
Text for first reading will be circulated tomorrow morning for probable
signature Wednesday, July 11th.
WILSON

[Document 298]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
14. Made film speech this morning and general reservations of our rights37
characterized by considerable bitterness in manner maintained that national
culture was at stake. He claimed that his restrictions were manifestation of a
spiritual defensive to protect manners, morals and traditions of his people.
To accomplish this object, censorship alone was insufficient and a certain
national industry was essential. He agreed that there should be no
administrative measures for economic purposes and insisted that his
regulations had only cultural ends in view. He accused the United States of
using sanitary and pure food regulations to disguise economic purposes. He
denied analogy between films which had culture essence and other
commodities. He closed by stating that the regulations I referred to do not
now exist; that amended regulations are being prepared but repeated some
very similar regulations must continue to exist.
German delegate then made a speech pointing out that under decision of
Conference our terms of reference were interpreted in such a manner that
Conference could not make a decision in this matter. He agreed, however,
with many points of Serruys’ culture arguments and reserved Germany’s
right to impose measures in the future to protect Germany’s traditions.
Austria, Italy and India made similar declarations.
I have the conviction that the sense of the Conference, if a decision had
been possible, would have been that nations have a right to maintain some
form of protection for their culture and traditions.
WILSON

printed in Proceedings of the Conference, p. 86.

[Document 299]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
GENEVA, July 8, 1928—noon.
that at every stage of proceedings the attitude that I should take was clearly
indicated to me. Although I took a minor part in debate on ratification
conversation with my colleagues to persuade them that it was unnecessary
that the United States be included in the list. Probably as a result of these
conversations the French delegate twice urged the Conference vigorously
not to insist on the necessity of American ratification but was overruled by
the general opinion. I was not able to persuade certain of the delegates,
notably the German, Swiss and Japanese, that America should not be
included in the list. This particular matter has been debated to such an
extent that I am convinced that no useful purpose would be served by
further insistence on our part and might even give rise to suspicion of our
bona fides. I earnestly hope that the Department will not insist further in
this matter. I deplore, as you do, the complex nature of these clauses and
wish it had been possible [to] simplify the procedure, but it must be borne
in mind that what is adopted is much simpler than certain of the schemes
proposed and is a compromise reached after prolonged discussion.
WILSON

[Document 300]
The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation
(Wilson)
could have been expected and leaves your future course entirely to your
judgment.
KELLOGG

[Document 301]
The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary
of State
19. Supplementary agreement signed this morning by 27 States, i. e., all
those represented at Conference except the United States and Bulgaria.38
Moffat and I return to Berne this afternoon.
The entire delegation expresses its thanks for helpful and sympathetic
support.
WILSON

International
convention
of
the
Copyright Union, as revised and
signed at Rome, June 2, 192839
Convention of Berlin of 1908, see Union Internationale pour la protection
des oeuvres littéraires et artistiques. Actes de la conférence réunie a Rome
of 1908, see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. I, p. 217.
[302] The Italian Ambassador (De Martina) to the Secretary of State
Washington , August 2, 1927.
[303] The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (De Martino)
Washington, April 28, 1928.
[304] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[Document 302]
The Italian Ambassador (De Martina) to the Secretary of State
The Italian Ambassador presents his compliments to His Excellency the
Secretary of State and has the honor to inform him that during the month of
October 1927 there will be held in Rome an International Conference on
Copyright to which it is the earnest desire of the Royal Italian Government
that the Government of the United States send its delegates.
Whilst conveying this invitation, the Italian Ambassador has the honor to
communicate that this Conference is in pursuance of the Convention held in
Berne during the year 1886, when the desirability of periodical revisions of
the Convention was agreed upon, and he has further the honor to recall that
at the last Conference, held in Berlin in 1908, the proposal was
unanimously approved to have the next meeting within ten years in the City
of Rome. On account of the World War this event was postponed, but the
time is now considered ripe for it to take place.
With the occasion the Ambassador has the honor to call attention to the fact
that when the last Conferences took place in Paris (1896) and in Berlin
(1908) invitations to participate were extended also to many States not
belonging to the Union and that the delegates of these States who will
attend the Conference in Rome will enjoy full liberty of action and will be
able to follow its work and deliberations without however engaging
themselves in any way whatever.
The Royal Italian Government trusts that, irrespective of the present state of
legislation on Copyright in the various countries, the States not belonging to
the Union will also participate to the Conference and leaves it, of course, to
them to decide on the advisability of endowing their respective delegates
with full powers in case adherence to the International Copyright
Convention at Berne were desired.
WASHINGTON , August 2, 1927.

[Document 303]
The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (De Martino)
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: Referring to your note of August 2, 1927, inviting the Government
of the United States to participate in the International Conference on
Copyright to open at Rome on May 8 next,40 I have the honor now to
inform you that, after reconsideration, it has been decided to accept the
invitation and that the Honorable Henry P. Fletcher, American Ambassador
at Rome, Mr. Thorvald Soltterg, Register of Copyrights, Library of
Congress, and the Honorable Sol Bloom, Member of Congress, have been
designated to attend the Congress as delegates on the part of the United
States. The American Ambassador at Rome was instructed by cable on
April 2542 to advise your Government accordingly.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
40 The Conference had been postponed from October 1927.
42 Not printed.

[Document 304]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
ROME, July 25, 1928.
[Received August 10.]
No. 1797
advance copy of the Report of the United States Delegation to the
International Conference for the Revision of the Convention of Berlin of
1908 for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, as well as a copy of
the printed text of the Convention as signed here, together with a copy of
the Report of the Reporter General at the Conference, I now have the honor
to enclose the original Report of the United States Delegation to this
Conference.
The Report of the Delegation is accompanied by a corrected text of the
Convention signed here, in triplicate, which should be substituted for that
accompanying my despatch No. 1726 above mentioned. The corrections,
however, are merely typographical.
The Report is accompanied by:43
Appendix 1. A complete file of all papers issued by the
Secretariat General of the Conference, in the French language.
Appendix 5. Minutes of the closing session and signatures.

Appendix 6. Printed text of the Resolutions of the Conference.
Appendixes 7 and 8. Propositions, Counter-Propositions and
Amendments proposed.
The Department is thus in possession of a complete file of the Conference. I
understood from Representative Bloom that he was having English
translations made of the minutes of the various committee meetings. If he
has done this I have no doubt he would be glad to make translations
available to the Department.
I have [etc.]
HENRY P. FLOTCHER
[Enclosure]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
ROME, June 4, 1928.
SIR: The undersigned, appointed by the President as Delegates of the United
States of America to the International Conference for the Revision of the
Convention of Berlin of 1908 for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works, have the honor to submit the following report:
The Conference met at Rome on May 7th and concluded its labors on June
2, 1928. The following members of the Union were represented: Germany,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, Free City
of Danzig, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, Great Britain, Greece, Hungary,
India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxemburg, Morocco, Monaco, Norway, New
Zealand, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Rumania, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syria, Czechoslovakia, Tunisia. The following non-member countries were
also represented: Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Ecuador, United States of
America, Guatemala, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Nicaragua, Persia, Peru,
San Marino, Salvador, Yugoslavia, Siam, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela.
The delegates representing Union countries only were given the vote.
Representatives of non-Union countries were given every facility for

speaking but had no vote.
The official language of the Conference was French.
At the first plenary session a drafting committee was appointed and the
Conference sitting as a committee of the whole was in almost daily session.
More than one hundred proposals for the amendment of the Articles of the
Convention of Berlin of 1908 were suggested by delegates from the
different countries of the Union, debated at great length and very fully
considered. All the committee hearings were open to all delegates who
desired to be heard.
One or more members of the United States Delegation attended every
meeting of the various committees and the Delegation kept in close touch
with the debates and developments of the Conference. The United States
Delegation has at all times given full and careful consideration to all
suggestions received from time to time from representatives of American
interests. As occasion arose suggestions and explanations were made by our
Delegation when proposals were in debate which in our opinion if adopted
might injure American interests or hinder or prevent the eventual adhesion
of the United States to the Convention. The observations of members of the
American Delegation were at all times given careful consideration by the
Conference.
The official text of the Convention adopted by the Conference and signed in
Rome on June 2, 1928, is hereto attached, accompanied by an English
translation.
The proceedings of the Conference, reports of committees, and all
documents issuing from the Secretariat General also appear in the Appendix
to this Report.
Representatives of the following named countries signed the Convention:
Germany, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Denmark, Free City of
Danzig, Spain, Estonia, Finland, Great Britain, France, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, Ireland, India, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Luxemburg,
Morocco, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Rumania,
Sweden, Switzerland.

The Delegation wishes to call special attention to Paragraph 3 of Article 28
of the Rome Convention which, in translation, reads as follows:
“The countries not members of the Union may up to the 1st of
August 1931 join the Union by way of adhesion either to the
Convention signed at Berlin on the 13th of November 1908, or to
the present Convention. After the 1st of August 1931 they may
only adhere to the present (Rome) Convention.”
A Resolution was also adopted (Voeu VI) to the following effect:
“The Conference, bearing in mind the identity of general
principles and objects of the Berne Convention, as revised first at
Berlin and then at Rome, and of the Convention signed by the
American States in Buenos Aires in 1910,44 as revised at Havana
in February 1928;45 noting that most of the dispositions of the
two Conventions are in agreement: expresses the hope that
conformably with the suggestions made by the Brazilian and
French Delegations, the American Republics signatory to a
convention to which the non-American States are unable to
adhere, may, on the one hand, following the example of Brazil,
accede to the Berne Convention as revised in Rome, and that, on
the other hand, all the interested Governments may agree among
themselves with a view to preparing a general understanding
having as a base those rules of the two Conventions which are
similar and as an object the unification throughout the world of
the laws protecting intellectual production.”
The Delegation wishes to acknowledge the courteous consideration shown
by the Conference to the suggestions made by our Delegation and the
attentions and hospitalities received from the Italian Government and its
officials while in attendance upon the Conference.
Respectfully submitted,
HENRY P. FLETCHER
SOL BLOOM

THORVALD SOLBERG
WARREN D. ROBBINS
MOWATT M. MITCHELL
GEORGE R. CANTY
[Subenclosure—Translation]
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works Signed at Berne, September 9, 1886,
The President of the German Reich; the Federal President of the Republic
of Austria; His Majesty the King of the Belgians; the President of the
United States of Brazil; His Majesty the King of the Bulgarians; His
Majesty the King of Denmark; His Majesty the King of Spain; the President
of the Republic of Estonia; the President of the Republic of Finland; the
President of the French Republic; His Majesty the King of Great Britain,
Ireland and the British Dominions Beyond the Seas, Emperor of India; the
President of the Hellenic Republic; His Most Serene Highness the Regent
of the Kingdom of Hungary; His Majesty the King of Italy; His Majesty the
Emperor of Japan; Her Royal Highness the Grand Duchess of Luxemburg;
His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco; His Most Serene Highness the Prince
of Monaco; His Majesty the King of Norway; Her Majesty the Queen of the
Netherlands; the President of the Polish Republic in the name of Poland and
of the Free City of Danzig; the President of the Portuguese Republic; His
Majesty the King of Rumania; His Majesty the King of Sweden; the Federal
Council of the Swiss Confederation; the States of Syria and the Great
Lebanon; the President of the Czechoslovak Republic; His Highness the
Bey of Tunis—
Equally animated by the desire to protect in as efficacious and uniform a
manner as possible the rights of authors as to their literary and artistic
works,
Have resolved to revise and complete the Act signed at Berlin on November

They have, consequently, named as their plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, being thereunto duly authorized, have agreed upon the following:
ARTICLE 1
The Countries to which the present Convention applies shall be constituted
into a Union for the protection of the rights of authors in their literary and
artistic works.
ARTICLE 2
(1) The term “literary and artistic works” shall include all
productions in the literary, scientific, and artistic domain,
whatever the mode or form of expression, such as: books,
pamphlets, and other writings; lectures, addresses, sermons and
other works of like nature; dramatic or dramatico-musical works;
choreographic works and pantomimes, the staging (mise en scène)
of which is fixed in writing or otherwise; musical compositions
with or without words; drawings, paintings; works of architecture
and
sculpture;
engravings
and
lithographs;
illustrations;
geographical charts; plans, sketches, and plastic works relating to
geography, topography, architecture, or the sciences.
(2) Translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other
reproductions transformed from a literary or artistic work, as well
as compilations from different works, shall be protected as
original works without prejudice to the rights of the author of the
original work.
(3) The countries of the Union shall be bound to secure protection
in the case of the works mentioned above.
(4) Works of art applied to industry shall be protected so far as the
domestic legislation of each country allows.

ARTICLE 2 BIS
(1) The authority is reserved to the domestic legislation of each
country of the Union to exclude, partially or wholly, from the
protection provided by the preceding Article political discourses
or discourses pronounced in judicial debates.
(2) There is also reserved to the domestic legislation of each
country of the Union authority to enact the conditions under
which such lectures, addresses, sermons and other works of like
nature may be reproduced by the press. Nevertheless, the author
alone shall have the right to bring such works together in a
compilation.
ARTICLE 3
The present convention shall apply to photographic works and to works
obtained by any process analogous to photography. The countries of the
Union shall be bound to guarantee protection to such works.
ARTICLE 4
(1) Authors within the jurisdiction of one of the countries of the
Union shall enjoy for their works, whether unpublished or
published for the first time in one of the countries of the Union,
such rights, in the countries other than the country of origin of the
work, as the respective laws now accord or shall hereafter accord
to nationals, as well as the rights specially accorded by the
present Convention.
(2) The enjoyment and the exercise of such rights shall not be
subject to any formality; such enjoyment and such exercise are
independent of the existence of protection in the country of origin
of the work. Consequently, apart from the stipulations of the
present Convention, the extent of the protection, as well as the
means of redress guaranteed to the author to safeguard his rights,
shall be regulated exclusively according to the legislation of the
country where the protection is claimed.

(3) The following shall be considered as the country of origin of
the work: for unpublished works, the country to which the author
belongs; for published works, the country of first publication, and
for works published simultaneously in several countries of the
Union, the country among them whose legislation grants the
shortest term of protection. For works published simultaneously
in a country outside of the Union and in a country within the
Union, it is the latter country which shall be exclusively
considered as the country of origin.
(4) By “published works” (“oeuvres publiées”) must be
understood, according to the present Convention, works which
have been issued (“oeuvres éditées”). The representation of a
dramatic or dramatico-musical work, the performance of a
musical work, the exhibition of a work of art and the construction
of a work of architecture shall not constitute publication.
ARTICLE 5
Authors within the jurisdiction of one of the countries of the Union who
publish their works for the first time in another country of the Union, shall
have in this latter country the same rights as national authors.
ARTICLE 6
(1) Authors not within the jurisdiction of any one of the countries
of the Union, who publish their works for the first time in one of
the Union countries, shall enjoy in such Union country the same
rights as national authors, and in the other countries of the Union
the rights accorded by the present Convention.
(2) Nevertheless, when a country outside of the Union does not
protect in an adequate manner the works of authors within the
jurisdiction of one of the countries of the Union, this latter Union
country may restrict the protection for the works of authors who
are, at the time of the first publication of such works, within the
jurisdiction of the non-union country and are not actually
domiciled in one of the countries of the Union.

(3) Any restriction, established by virtue of the preceding
paragraph, shall not prejudice the rights which an author may
have acquired in a work published in one of the countries of the
Union before the putting into effect of this restriction.
(4) The countries of the Union which, by virtue of the present
article, restrict the protection of the rights of authors, shall notify
the fact to the Government of the Swiss Confederation by a
written declaration indicating the countries in whose case
protection is restricted, and indicating also the restrictions to
which the rights of authors within the jurisdiction of such country
are subjected. The Government of the Swiss Confederation shall
immediately communicate this fact to all the countries of the
Union.
ARTICLE 6 BIS
(1) Independently of the author’s copyright, and even after
assignment of the said copyright, the author shall retain the right
to claim authorship of the work, as well as the right to object to
every deformation, mutilation or other modification of the said
work, which may be prejudicial to his honor or to his reputation.
(2) It is left to the national legislation of each of the countries of
the Union to establish the conditions for the exercise of these
rights. The means for safeguarding them shall be regulated by the
legislation of the country where protection is claimed.
ARTICLE 7
(1) The duration of the protection granted by the present
Convention shall comprise the life of the author and fifty years
after his death.
(2) In case this period of protection, however, should not be
adopted uniformly by all the countries of the Union, its duration
shall be regulated by the law of the country where protection is
claimed, and it can not exceed the term fixed in the country of

origin of the work. The countries of the Union will consequently
not be required to apply the provision of the preceding paragraph
beyond the extent to which it agrees with their domestic law.
(3) For photographic works and works obtained by a process
analogous to photography; for posthumous works; for anonymous
or pseudonymous works, the term of protection shall be regulated
by the law of the country where protection is claimed, but this
term shall not exceed the term fixed in the country of origin of the
work.
ARTICLE 7 BIS
(1) The term of copyright protection belonging in common to
collaborators in a work shall be calculated according to the date
of the death of the last survivor of the collaborators.
(2) Persons within the jurisdiction of countries which grant a
shorter period of protection than that provided in paragraph 1 can
not claim in the other countries of the Union a protection of
longer duration.
(3) In any case the term of protection shall not expire before the
death of the last survivor of the collaborators.
ARTICLE 8
Authors of unpublished works within the jurisdiction of one of the countries
of the Union, and authors of works published for the first time in one of
these countries, shall enjoy in the other countries of the Union during the
whole term of the right in the original work the exclusive right to make or
to authorize the translation of their works.
ARTICLE 9
(1) Serial stories, tales and all other works, whether literary,
scientific, or artistic, whatever may be their subject, published in
newspapers or periodicals of one of the countries of the Union,

may not be reproduced in the other countries without the consent
of the authors.
(2) Articles of current economic, political, or religious discussion
may be reproduced by the press if their reproduction is not
expressly reserved. But the source must always be clearly
indicated; the sanction of this obligation shall be determined by
the legislation of the country where the protection is claimed.
(3) The protection of the present Convention shall not apply to
news of the day or to miscellaneous news having the character
merely of press information.
ARTICLE 10
As concerns the right of borrowing lawfully from literary or artistic works
for use in publications intended for instruction or having a scientific
character, or for chrestomathies, the provisions of the legislation of the
countries of the Union and of the special treaties existing or to be concluded
between them shall govern.
ARTICLE 11
(1) The stipulations of the present Convention shall apply to the
public representation of dramatic or dramatico-musical works and
to the public performance of musical works, whether these works
are published or not.
(2) Authors of dramatic or dramatico-musical works shall be
protected, during the term of their copyright in the original work,
against the unauthorized public representation of a translation of
their works.
(3) In order to enjoy the protection of this article, authors in
publishing their works shall not be obliged to prohibit the public
representation or public performance of them.
ARTICLE 11 BIS

(1) The authors of literary and artistic works shall enjoy the
exclusive right to authorize the communication of their works to
the public by broadcasting.
(2) It belongs to the national legislatures of the countries of the
Union to regulate the conditions for the exercise of the right
declared in the preceding paragraph, but such conditions shall
have an effect strictly limited to the country which establishes
them. They can not in any case adversely affect the moral right of
the author, nor the right which belongs to the author of obtaining
an equitable remuneration fixed, in default of an amicable
agreement, by competent authority.
ARTICLE 12
Among the unlawful reproductions to which the present Convention applies
shall be specially included indirect, unauthorized appropriations of a
literary or artistic work, such as adaptations, arrangements of music,
transformations of a romance or novel or of a poem into a theatrical piece
and vice-versa, etc., when they are only the reproduction of such work in
the same form or in another form with non-essential changes, additions or
abridgments and without presenting the character of a new, original work.
ARTICLE 13
(1) Authors of musical works shall have the exclusive right to
authorize: (1) the adaptation of these works to instruments serving
to reproduce them mechanically; (2) the public performance of
the same works by means of these instruments.
(2) The limitations and conditions relative to the application of
this article shall be determined by the domestic legislation of each
country in its own case; but all limitations and conditions of this
nature shall have an effect strictly limited to the country which
shall have adopted them.
(3) The provisions of paragraph 1 shall have no retroactive effect,
and therefore shall not be applicable in a country of the Union to

works which, in that country, shall have been lawfully adapted to
mechanical instruments before the going into force of the
Convention signed at Berlin, November 13, 1908; and, in the case
of a country which has acceded to the Union since that date, or
shall accede to it in the future, then when the works have been
adapted to mechanical instruments before the date of its
accession.
article and imported, without the authorization of the parties
interested, into a country where they would not be lawful, shall be
liable to seizure there.
ARTICLE 14
(1) Authors of literary, scientific or artistic works shall have the
exclusive right to authorize the reproduction, adaptation, and
public representation of their works by means of the
cinematograph.
(2) Cinematographic productions shall be protected as literary or
artistic works when the author shall have given to the work an
original character. If this character is lacking, the cinematographic
production shall enjoy the same protection as photographic
works.
(3) Without prejudice to the rights of the author of the work
reproduced or adapted, the cinematographic work shall be
protected as an original work.
(4) The preceding provisions apply to the reproduction or
production obtained by any other process analogous to
cinematography.
ARTICLE 15
(1) In order that the authors of the works protected by the present
Convention may be considered as such, until proof to the

contrary, and be admitted consequently before the courts of the
various countries of the Union to proceed against infringers, it
shall suffice that the author’s name be indicated upon the work in
the usual manner.
(2) For anonymous or pseudonymous works, the publisher whose
name is indicated upon the work shall be entitled to protect the
rights of the author. He shall, without other proof, be considered
the legal representative of the anonymous or pseudonymous
author.
ARTICLE 16
(1) All infringing works may be seized by the competent
authorities of the countries of the Union where the original work
has a right to legal protection.
(2) Seizure may also be made in these countries of reproductions
which come from a country where the copyright on the work has
terminated, or where the work has not been protected.
(3) The seizure shall take place in conformity with the domestic
legislation of each country.
ARTICLE 17
The provisions of the present Convention may not prejudice in any way the
right which belongs to the Government of each of the countries of the
Union to permit, to supervise, or to forbid, by means of legislation or of
domestic police, the circulation, the representation or the exhibition of
every work or production in regard to which competent authority may have
to exercise this right.
ARTICLE 18
(1) The present Convention shall apply to all works which, at the
time it goes into effect, have not fallen into the public domain of

their country of origin because of the expiration of the term of
protection.
(2) But if a work by reason of the expiration of the term of
protection which was previously secured for it has fallen into the
public domain of the country where protection is claimed, such
work shall not be protected anew.
(3) This principle shall be applied in accordance with the
stipulations to that effect contained in the special Conventions
either existing or to be concluded between countries of the Union,
and in default of such stipulations, its application shall be
regulated by each country in its own case.
(4) The preceding provisions shall apply equally in the case of
new accessions to the Union and where the protection would be
extended by the application of Article 7 or by the abandonment of
reservations.
ARTICLE 19
The provisions of the present Convention shall not prevent a claim for the
application of more favorable provisions which may be enacted by the
legislation of a country of the Union in favor of foreigners in general.
ARTICLE 20
The governments of the countries of the Union reserve the right to make
between themselves special treaties, when these treaties would confer upon
authors more extended rights than those accorded by the Union, or when
they contain other stipulations not conflicting with the present Convention.
The provisions of existing treaties which answer the aforesaid conditions
shall remain in force.
ARTICLE 21
(1) The international office instituted under the name of “Bureau
of the International Union for the Protection of Literary and

Artistic Works” (“Bureau de l’Union internationale pour la
protection des oeuvres littéraires et artistiques”) shall be
maintained.
(2) This Bureau is placed under the high authority of the
Government of the Swiss Confederation, which controls its
organization and supervises its working.
(3) The official language of the Bureau shall be French.
ARTICLE 22
(1) The International Bureau shall bring together, arrange and
publish information of every kind relating to the protection of the
rights of authors in their literary and artistic works. It shall study
questions of mutual utility interesting to the Union, and edit, with
the aid of documents placed at its disposal by the various
administrations, a periodical in the French language, treating
questions concerning the purpose of the Union. The governments
of the countries of the Union reserve the right to authorize the
Bureau by common accord to publish an edition in one or more
other languages, in case experience demonstrates the need.
(2) The International Bureau must hold itself at all times at the
disposal of members of the Union to furnish them, in relation to
questions concerning the protection of literary and artistic works,
the special information of which they have need.
(3) The Director of the International Bureau shall make an annual
report on his administration, which shall be communicated to all
the members of the Union.
ARTICLE 23
(1) The expenses of the Bureau of the International Union shall be shared in
common by the countries of the Union. Until a new decision, they may not
exceed one hundred and twenty thousand Swiss francs per year. This sum

may be increased when needful by the unanimous decision of one of the
Conferences provided for in Article 24.
(2) To determine the part of this sum total of expenses to be paid by each of
the countries, the countries of the Union and those which later adhere to the
Union shall be divided into six classes each contributing in proportion to a
certain number of units to wit:
Units
1st class
2nd class
3d class
4th class
5th class
6th class
(3) These coefficients are multiplied by the number of countries of each
class, and the sum of the products thus obtained furnishes the number of
units by which the total expense is to be divided. The quotient gives the
amount of the unit of expense.
(4) Each country shall declare, at the time of its accession, in which of the
above-mentioned classes it demands to be placed, but it may always
ultimately declare that it intends to be placed in another class.
(5) The Swiss Administration shall prepare the budget of the Bureau and
superintend its expenditures, make necessary advances and draw up the
annual account, which shall be communicated to all the other
administrations.
ARTICLE 24
(1) The present Convention may be subjected to revision with a
view to the introduction of amendments calculated to perfect the
system of the Union.
(2) Questions of this nature, as well as those which from other
points of view pertain to the development of the Union, shall be

considered in the Conferences which will take place successively
in the countries of the Union between the delegates of the said
countries. The administration of the country where a Conference
is to be held shall, with the cooperation of the International
Bureau, prepare the agenda of the same. The Director of the
Bureau shall attend the meetings of the Conferences and take part
in the discussions without a deliberative voice.
(3) No change in the present Convention shall be valid for the
Union except by the unanimous consent of the countries which
compose it.
ARTICLE 25
(1) The countries outside of the Union which assure legal
protection of the rights which are the object of the present
Convention, may accede to it upon their request.
(2) Such accession shall be communicated in writing to the
Government of the Swiss Confederation and by the latter to all
the others.
(3) The full right of adhesion to all the clauses and admission to
all the advantages stipulated in the present Convention shall be
implied by such accession and it shall go into effect one month
after the sending of the notification by the Government of the
Swiss Confederation to the other countries of the Union, unless a
later date has been indicated by the adhering country.
Nevertheless, such accession may contain an indication that the
adhering country intends to substitute, provisionally at least, for
Article 8 concerning translations, the provisions of Article 5 of
the Convention of the Union of 1886, revised at Paris in 1896, it
being of course understood that these provisions relate only to
translations into the language or languages of the country.
ARTICLE 26

(1) Each of the countries of the Union may, at any time, notify in
writing the Government of the Swiss Confederation that the
present Convention shall be applicable to all or to part of its
colonies, protectorates, territories under mandate or all other
territories subject to its sovereignty or to its authority, or all
territories under suzerainty, and the Convention shall then apply
to all the territories designated in the notification. In default of
such notification, the Convention shall not apply to such
territories.
(2) Each of the countries of the Union may, at any time, notify in
writing the Government of the Swiss Confederation that the
present Convention shall cease to be applicable to all or to part of
the territories which were the object of the notification provided
for by the preceding paragraph, and the Convention shall cease to
apply in the territories designated in such notification twelve
months after receipt of the notification addressed to the
Government of the Swiss Confederation.
(3) All the notifications made to the Government of the Swiss
Confederation, under the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
article, shall be communicated by that Government to all the
countries of the Union.
ARTICLE 27
(1) The present Convention shall replace in the relations between
the countries of the Union the Convention of Berne of September
9, 1886 and the acts by which it has been successively revised.
The acts previously in effect shall remain applicable in the
relations with the countries which shall not have ratified the
present Convention.
(2) The countries in whose name the present Convention is signed
may still retain the benefit of the reservations which they have
previously formulated on condition that they make such a
declaration at the time of the deposit of the ratifications.

(3) Countries which are at present parties to the Union, but in
whose name the present Convention has not been signed, may at
any time adhere to it. They may in such case benefit by the
provisions of the preceding paragraph.
ARTICLE 28
(1) The present Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications
shall be deposited at Rome not later than July 1, 1931.
(2) It shall go into effect between the countries of the Union
which have ratified it one month after that date. However, if,
before that date, it has been ratified by at least six countries of the
Union it shall go into effect as between those countries of the
Union one month after the deposit of the sixth ratification has
been notified to them by the Government of the Swiss
Confederation and, for the countries of the Union which shall
later ratify, one month after the notification of each such
ratification.
(3) Countries that are not within the Union may, until August 1,
1931, enter the Union, by means of adhesion, either to the
Convention signed at Berlin November 13, 1908, or to the present
Convention. After August 1, 1931, they can adhere only to the
present Convention.
ARTICLE 29
(1) The present Convention shall remain in effect for an
indeterminate time, until the expiration of one year from the day
when denunciation of it shall have been made.
(2) This denunciation shall be addressed to the Government of the
Swiss Confederation. It shall be effective only as regards the
country which shall have made it, the Convention remaining in
force for the other countries of the Union.
ARTICLE 30

(1) The countries which introduce into their legislation the term
of protection of fifty years provided for by Article 7, paragraph 1,
of the present Convention, shall make it known to the
Government of the Swiss Confederation by a written notification
which shall be communicated at once by that Government to all
the other countries of the Union.
(2) It shall be the same for such countries as shall renounce any
reservations made or maintained by them by virtue of Articles 25
and 27.
In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
DONE at Rome, the second of June, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-
eight, in a single copy, which shall be deposited in the archives of the Royal
Italian Government. One copy, properly certified, shall be sent through
diplomatic channels to each of the countries of the Union.
For Germany:
C. VON NEURATH.
GEORG KLAUER.
WILHELM MACKEBEN.
EBERHARD NEUGEBAUER.
MAXIMILIAN MINTZ.
MAX VON SCHILLINGS.
For Austria:
DR. AUGUST HESSE.
For Belgium:

CTE. DELLA FAILLE DE LEVERGHEM.
WAUWERMANS.
For the United States of Brazil:
F. PESSOA DE QUEIROZ.
J. S. DA FONSECA HERMES JR.
For Bulgaria:
G. RADEFF.
For Denmark:
I. C. W. KRUSE.
F. GRAAE.
For the Free City of Danzig:
STEFAN SIECZKOWSKI.
For Spain:
FRANCISCO ALVAREZ-OSSORTO.
For Estonia:
K. TOFER.
For Finland:
EMILE SETÄLÄ.
ROLF THESLEFF.
GEORGE WINCKELMANN.

For France:
BEAUMARCHAIS.
MARCEL PLAISANT.
P. GRUNEBAUM-BALLIN.
CN. DROTTETS.
GEORGES MAILLARD.
ANDRÉ RIVOIRE.
ROMAIN COOLUS.
A. MESSAGER.
For Great Britain and Northern Ireland:
S. J. CHAPMAN.
W. S. JARRATT.
A. J. MARTIN.
For Canada:
PHILIPPE ROY.
For Australia:
W. HARRISON MOORE.
For New Zealand:
S. G. RAYMOND.
For the Irish Free State:

[No signature.]
For India:
G. GRAHAM DIXON.
For the Hellenic Republic:
N. MAVROUDIS.
For Hungary:
ANDRE DE HORY.
For Italy:
VITTORIO SCIALOJA.
E. PIOLA CASELLI.
VICENZO MORELLO.
AMEDEO GIANNINI.
DOMENICO BARONE.
EMILIO VENEZIAN.
A. JANNONI SEBASTIANINI.
MARIO GHIRON.
For Japan:
M. MATSUDA.
T. AKAGI.
For Luxemburg:

BRUCK.
For Morocco:
BEAUMARCHAIS.
For Monaco:
R. SAUVAGE.
For Norway:
ARNOLD RAESTAD.
For The Netherlands:
A. VAN DER GOLS.
For Poland:
STEFAN SIECZKOWSKI.
FRÉDÉRIC ZOLL.
For Portugal:
ENRIQUE TRINDADE COELHO.
For Rumania:
THEODORE SOLACOLO.
For Sweden:
E. MARKS VON WÜRTEMBERG.
ERIK LIDFORSS.
For Switzerland:

WAGNIÈRE.
W. KRAFT.
A. STREULI.
For Syria and Great Lebanon:
BEAUMARCHAIS.
For Czechoslovakia:
Dr. V. MASTNT.
Prof. KAREL HERMANN-OTAVSEY.
For Tunis:
BEAUMARCHAIS.
42 Not printed.
43 Appendixes not printed.
45 Not printed.
46 Official text is in French; this translation is reprinted from S. Ex. Doc. E,
1934. For list of ratifications and adhesions, see League of Nations Treaty
Series, vol. CXXIII, pp. 235–239.

Adherence of the United States to the
slavery convention, signed at Geneva,
September 25, 192647
47 For previous correspondence concerning the slavery convention, see
Foreign Relations, 1926, vol.  I, pp. 247 ff.
[305] The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
[306] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington , May 22, 1928.
Done at Geneva the twenty-fifth day of September, one thousand nine
hundred and twenty-six, in one copy, which will be deposited in the
archives of the League of Nations. A certified copy shall be forwarded to
each signatory State.
Treaty Series No. 778

[Document 305]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
Geneva, May 19, 1927.
[Received June 13.]
SIR: The Assembly of the League of Nations, at its Seventh Ordinary
Session, approved a Slavery Convention bearing the date of the 25th
September, 1926, which is deposited in the archives of the League of
Nations.
By Article 11 of the Convention the Secretary-General of the League is
requested to “bring the present Convention to the notice of States which
have not signed it, including States which are not Members of the League
of Nations, and invite them to accede thereto”.
I have accordingly the honour to enclose a certified copy of the Convention,
and to invite the attention of the United States Government to the third
paragraph of the above-mentioned Article which provides that “a State
desiring to accede to the Convention shall notify its intention in writing to
the Secretary-General of the League of Nations and transmit to him the
instrument of accession, which shall be deposited in the archives of the
League”.
I may add that the Secretariat will be glad to give every assistance in its
power to your Government as regards the necessary formalities in
connection with the deposit of its act of accession to the Convention.
I have [etc.]
ERIC DRUMMOND

[Document 306]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
THE PRESIDENT: The undersigned, the Secretary of State, has the honor to lay
before the President, with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive
the advice and consent of that body to accession by this Government, if his
judgment approve thereof, a certified copy of the Slavery Convention
There are thirty-six signatories to the Slavery Convention which has been
ratified or acceded to by Australia, Austria, Belgium, the British Empire,
Bulgaria, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Haiti, Hungary, India, Latvia, Monaco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Portugal, Spain, South
Africa, Sweden and the Sudan.
The Convention was not signed on behalf of the United States. On May 19,
1927, however, the Secretary General of the League of Nations addressed a
note to the Government of the United States in accordance with Article 11
of the Convention which provides that the Secretary General shall bring the
Convention to the notice of States which have not signed it, including States
which are not members of the League of Nations, and invite them to accede
thereto.
In Article 11 of the Convention signed at St. Germain-en-Laye on
Contracting Parties agreed that they would endeavor to secure the complete
suppression of slavery in all its forms and of the slave trade by land and sea.
The United States is a Party to the General Act of Brussels of July 2, 1890,
for the Repression of the African Slave Trade50 and is a signatory of but has
not ratified the Revising Convention of September 10, 1919.
The purpose of the Convention herewith submitted is to find a means for
giving practical effect throughout the world to the intention of the

Contracting Parties to suppress the slave trade and slavery as expressed in
respect of certain territories in Africa in the international Acts of earlier
date. It embraces an undertaking on their part to take appropriate measures
in their respective territories to carry out this intention and likewise to take
all necessary measures to prevent compulsory or enforced labor from
developing into conditions analogous to slavery.
By a provision in Article 3 the High Contracting Parties undertake to
negotiate as soon as possible a general convention with regard to the slave
trade, which will give them rights and impose upon them duties of the same
nature as those provided for in certain Articles of the Convention for the
Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in
Convention was submitted to the Senate by the President on January 12,
1926, with a view to receiving the advice and consent of that body to
ratification, but has not yet been acted upon by the Senate.
references to the League of Nations. Under Article 7, the parties to the
Convention undertake to communicate to the Secretary General of the
League of Nations any laws and regulations which they may enact with a
view to the application of the provisions of the Convention; Article 10
provides that notices of denunciation of the Convention shall be given in
writing to the Secretary General of the League of Nations who will
communicate certified copies to other parties; Article 11 provides that
States desiring to accede to the Convention shall transmit their instruments
of accession to the Secretary General, that they shall be deposited in the
archives of the League, and that the Secretary General shall transmit
certified copies to the other Parties to the Convention. Article 12 provides
that instruments of ratification of the Convention shall be deposited in the
office of the Secretary General. As the functions exercised by the Secretary
General of the League of Nations under these Articles are merely those of a
depository and of a transmitting agency, it is not considered that it would be
necessary that accession to the Convention by the United States be made
subject to a reservation indicating the position of this Government with
respect to the League. If, however, the Senate should consider that a
reservation on this point is desirable one might be made.

Considering that the purposes sought to be attained by the Slavery
Convention are in accord with modern thought and humane measures taken
by civilized peoples with a view to the suppression of slavery and
conditions analogous to slavery, it is believed that the United States should
cooperate with other powers in the effort to eradicate these evils throughout
the world, and that its cooperation might well be expressed through
accession to the Convention. Accordingly, it is recommended that, if this
course meets with approval, the Senate be requested to take suitable action
advising and consenting to accession on the part of the United States to the
Respectfully submitted,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
WASHINGTON , May 22, 1928.
48 Infra.
recommendation by the Secretary of State, together with the convention,
and stated: “I concur in the recommendation by the Secretary of State.” See

Treaty Series No. 778
[Document 307]
Slavery Convention Signed at Geneva, September 25, 192653
Albania, Germany, Austria, Belgium, the British Empire, Canada, the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Union of South Africa, the Dominion of
New Zealand, and India, Bulgaria, China, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark,
Spain, Estonia, Abyssinia, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Liberia,
Lithuania, Norway, Panama, the Netherlands, Persia, Poland, Portugal,
Roumania, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Sweden,
Czechoslovakia and Uruguay,
Whereas the signatories of the General Act of the Brussels Conference of
1889–90 declared that they were equally animated by the firm intention of
putting an end to the traffic in African slaves;
Whereas the signatories of the Convention of Saint-Germain-en-Laye of
1919 to revise the General Act of Berlin of 1885 and the General Act and
Declaration of Brussels of 1890 affirmed their intention of securing the
complete suppression of slavery in all its forms and of the slave trade by
land and sea;
Taking into consideration the report of the Temporary Slavery Commission
appointed by the Council of the League of Nations on June 12th, 1924;
Desiring to complete and extend the work accomplished under the Brussels
Act and to find a means of giving practical effect throughout the world to
such intentions as were expressed in regard to slave trade and slavery by the
signatories of the Convention of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and recognising
that it is necessary to conclude to that end more detailed arrangements than
are contained in that Convention;
Considering, moreover, that it is necessary to prevent forced labour from
developing into conditions analogous to slavery,

Have decided to conclude a Convention and have accordingly appointed as
their Plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, having communicated their full powers, have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
For the purpose of the present Convention, the following definitions are
agreed upon:
(1) Slavery is the status or condition of a person over whom any
or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership are
exercised.
(2) The slave trade includes all acts involved in the capture,
acquisition or disposal of a person with intent to reduce him to
slavery; all acts involved in the acquisition of a slave with a view
to selling or exchanging him; all acts of disposal by sale or
exchange of a slave acquired with a view to being sold or
exchanged, and, in general, every act of trade or transport in
slaves.
ARTICLE 2
The High Contracting Parties undertake, each in respect of the territories
placed under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection, suzerainty or tutelage,
so far as they have not already taken the necessary steps:
(a) To prevent and suppress the slave trade;
(b) To bring about, progressively and as soon as possible, the
complete abolition of slavery in all its forms.
ARTICLE 3
The High Contracting Parties undertake to adopt all appropriate measures
with a view to preventing and suppressing the embarkation, disembarkation

and transport of slaves in their territorial waters and upon all vessels flying
their respective flags.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to negotiate as soon as possible a
general Convention with regard to the slave trade which will give them
rights and impose upon them duties of the same nature as those provided for
in the Convention of June 17th, 1925, relative to the International Trade in
II of Annex II), with the necessary adaptations, it being understood that this
general Convention will not place the ships (even of small tonnage) of any
High Contracting Parties in a position different from that of the other High
Contracting Parties.
It is also understood that, before or after the coming into force of this
general Convention, the High Contracting Parties are entirely free to
conclude between themselves, without, however, derogating from the
principles laid down in the preceding paragraph, such special agreements
as, by reason of their peculiar situation, might appear to be suitable in order
to bring about as soon as possible the complete disappearance of the slave
trade.
ARTICLE 4
The High Contracting Parties shall give to one another every assistance
with the object of securing the abolition of slavery and the slave trade.
ARTICLE 5
The High Contracting Parties recognise that recourse to compulsory or
forced labour may have grave consequences and undertake, each in respect
of the territories placed under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection,
suzerainty or tutelage, to take all necessary measures to prevent compulsory
or forced labour from developing into conditions analogous to slavery.
It is agreed that:
(1) Subject to the transitional provisions laid down in paragraph
(2) below, compulsory or forced labour may only be exacted for

public purposes.
(2) In territories in which compulsory or forced labour for other
than public purposes still survives, the High Contracting Parties
shall endeavour progressively and as soon as possible to put an
end to the practice. So long as such forced or compulsory labour
exists, this labour shall invariably be of an exceptional character,
shall always receive adequate remuneration, and shall not involve
the removal of the labourers from their usual place of residence.
(3) In all cases, the responsibility for any recourse to compulsory
or forced labour shall rest with the competent central authorities
of the territory concerned.
ARTICLE 6
Those of the High Contracting Parties whose laws do not at present make
adequate provision for the punishment of infractions of laws and
regulations enacted with a view to giving effect to the purposes of the
present Convention undertake to adopt the necessary measures in order that
severe penalties may be imposed in respect of such infractions.
ARTICLE 7
The High Contracting Parties undertake to Communicate to each other and
to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations any laws and regulations
which they may enact with a view to the application of the provisions of the
present Convention.
ARTICLE 8
The High Contracting Parties agree that disputes arising between them
relating to the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, if they
cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be referred for decision to the
Permanent Court of International Justice. In case either or both of the States
Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the Protocol of December
16th, 1920, relating to the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties and in accordance with

the constitutional procedure of each State, either to the Permanent Court of
International Justice or to a court of arbitration constituted in accordance
with the Convention of October 18th, 1907, for the Pacific Settlement of
International Disputes, or to some other court of arbitration.
ARTICLE 9
At the time of signature or of ratification or of accession, any High
Contracting Party may declare that its acceptance of the present Convention
does not bind some or all of the territories placed under its sovereignty,
jurisdiction, protection, suzerainty or tutelage in respect of all or any
provisions of the Convention; it may subsequently accede separately on
behalf of any one of them or in respect of any provision to which any one of
them is not a party.
ARTICLE 10
In the event of a High Contracting Party wishing to denounce the present
Convention, the denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, who will at once communicate a certified
true copy of the notification to all the other High Contracting Parties,
informing them of the date on which it was received.
The denunciation shall only have effect in regard to the notifying State, and
one year after the notification has reached the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations.
Denunciation may also be made separately in respect of any territory placed
under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection, suzerainty or tutelage.
ARTICLE 11
The present Convention, which will bear this day’s date and of which the
French and English texts are both authentic, will remain open for signature
by the States Members of the League of Nations until April 1st, 1927.
The Secretary-General of the League of Nations will subsequently bring the
present Convention to the notice of States which have not signed it,

including States which are not Members of the League of Nations, and
invite them to accede thereto.
A State desiring to accede to the Convention shall notify its intention in
writing to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations and transmit to
him the instrument of accession, which shall be deposited in the archives of
the League.
The Secretary-General shall immediately transmit to all the other High
Contracting Parties a certified true copy of the notification and of the
instrument of accession, informing them of the date on which he received
them.
ARTICLE 12
The present Convention will be ratified and the instruments of ratification
shall be deposited in the office of the Secretary-General of the League of
Nations. The Secretary-General will inform all the High Contracting Parties
of such deposit.
The Convention will come into operation for each State on the date of the
deposit of its ratification or of its accession.
In faith whereof the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention.
DONE at Geneva the twenty-fifth day of September, one thousand nine
hundred and twenty-six, in one copy, which will be deposited in the
archives of the League of Nations. A certified copy shall be forwarded to
each signatory State.
D. DINO
Albania
Dr. CARL VON SCHUBERT
Germany
EMERICH PFLÜGL
Austria
L. DE BROUCKÈRE
Belgium
British Empire

I declare that my signature does not bind India or any British Dominion
which is a separate member of the League of Nations and does not
separately sign or accede to the Convention.
CECIL
GEORGE EULAS FOSTER
Canada
J. G. LATHAM
Australia
J. S. SMIT
Union of South Africa*
J. C. PARR
New Zealand
India
Under the terms of Article 9 of this Convention I declare that my signature
is not binding as regards the enforcement of the provisions of Article 2,
territories; namely, in Burma: the Naga tracts lying West and South of the
Hukawng Valley, bounded on the North and West by the Assam boundary,
on the East by the Nanphuk River and on the South by the Singaling
Hkamti and the Somra Tracts; in Assam, the Sadiya and Balipara Frontier
Tracts, the tribal area to the East of the Naga Hills District, up to the Burma
boundary, and a small tract in the South of the Lushai Hills district; nor on
the territories in India of any Prince or Chief under the suzerainty of His
Majesty.
I also declare that my signature to the Convention is not binding in respect
of Article 3 in so far as that Article may require India to enter into any
Convention whereby vessels, by reason of the fact that they are owned,
fitted out or commanded by Indians, or of the fact that one half of the crew
is Indian, are classified as native vessels, or are denied any privilege, right
or immunity enjoyed by similar vessels of other States Signatories of the
Covenant or are made subject to any liability or disability to which similar
ships of such other States are not subject.
W. H. VINCENT
D. MIKOFF
Bulgaria

CHAO-HSIN CHU
China
FRANCISCO JOSÉ URRUTIA
Colombia
ARISTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHANCOURT
Cuba
HERLUF ZAHLE
Denmark
Spam
For Spain and the Spanish Colonies, with the exception of the Spanish
Protectorate of Morocco
MAURICIO LOPEZ ROBERTS
MARQUIS DE LA TORREHERMOSA
J. LAIDONER
Estonia
GUETATCHOU
Abyssinia
MAKONNEN
KENTIBA GEBROU
ATO TASFAE
RAFAEL ERICH
Finland
B. CLAUZEL
France
D. CACLAMANOS
Greece
V. DENDRAMIS
VITTORIO SCIALOJA
Italy
CHARLES DTTZMANS
Latvia
Liberia
Subject to ratification by the Liberian Senate
BON R. LEHMANN
VENCESLAS SIDZIKAUSKAS Lithuania
FRIDTJOF NANSEN
Norway
EUSEBIO A. MORALES
Panama
W. F. VAN LENNEP
Netherlands

Persia
Ad referendum and interpreting Article 3 as without power to compel Persia
to bind herself by any arrangement or convention which would place her
ships of whatever tonnage in the category of native vessels provided for by
the Convention on the Trade in Arms54
PRINCE ARFA
AUGUSTE ZALESKI
Poland
AUGTJSTO DE VASCONCELLOS
Portugal
N. TITULESCO
Roumania
M. JOVANOVITCH
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
EINAR HENNINGS
Sweden
FERDINAND VEVERKA
Czechoslovakia
B. FERNANDEZ Y MEDINA
Uruguay
[On February 25, 1929, adherence to the above convention by the United
States was advised by the Senate, subject to the following reservation:
“That the Government of the United States, adhering to its policy
of opposition to forced or compulsory labor except as a
punishment for crime of which the person concerned has been
duly convicted, adheres to the Convention except as to the first
subdivision of the second paragraph of article five, which reads as
follows:
“‘(1) Subject to the transitional provisions laid down in
paragraph (2) below, compulsory or forced labor may
only be exacted for public purposes.’”]
53 In English and French; French text not printed. Adherence advised by the
Senate, with reservation, Feb. 25, 1929; adherence declared by the
President, Mar. 1, 1929; declaration of adherence of the United States
1929.

* This signature applies to South-West Africa. [Footnote in the original.]
54 Translation made by the Secretariat of the League of Nations.

Ratification by the United States of the
convention relating to the liquor
traffic in Africa, signed at Saint
Germain-en-Laye, September 10, 1919
[308] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, May 22, 1928.
[309] Convention Relating to the Liquor Traffic in Africa, Signed at
Saint Germain-en-Laye, September 10, 1919
Done at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the tenth day of September, one thousand
nine hundred and nineteen, in a single copy which will remain deposited in
the archives of the Government of the French Republic, and of which
authenticated copies will be sent to each of the signatory Powers.
Treaty Series No. 779

[Document 308]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
THE PRESIDENT: The undersigned, the Secretary of State, has the honor to lay
before the President with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive
the advice and consent of that body to ratification, if his judgment approve
thereof, a certified copy of the Convention Relating to the Liquor Traffic in
Africa which was signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye on September 10, 1919
on behalf of the United States, Belgium, the British Empire, France, Italy,
Japan and Portugal. This Convention has been ratified by all the signatory
powers with the exception of the United States and Italy.
The purpose of the Convention is to continue the struggle against the
dangers of alcoholism to African natives through the prohibition of the
importation of trade spirits and of beverages injurious to health into the
territories in Africa under the control of the Contracting Parties, excepting
Algiers, Tunis, Morocco, Libya, Egypt and the Union of South Africa and
into islands lying within 100 nautical miles of the coast; by the imposition
of heavy duties on the importation of other distilled beverages into those
territories; and by the prohibition of the manufacture of distilled beverages
in the same regions and of the importation and possession of distilling
apparatus. Certain exceptions are made in regard to pharmaceutical alcohols
required for medical, surgical or pharmaceutical establishments and for
distilling apparatus for similar uses.
Article 7 of the Convention provides for the establishment of a
Central International Office placed under the control of the
League of Nations, for the purpose of collecting and preserving
documents exchanged by the Contracting Parties, pertaining to
the application of certain provisions of the Convention. This
Article also requires that each of the Contracting Parties shall
publish an annual report showing the quantities of spirituous
beverages imported or manufactured in the territories concerned
and the duties levied and that a copy of this report shall be sent to

the Central International Office and to the Secretary General of
the League of Nations. The provisions of Article 7 obviously
would have no application to the United States.
Article 8 provides that in the event of any dispute arising between
parties to the Convention relating to the application of the
Convention which cannot be settled by negotiation, the dispute
shall be submitted to an arbitral tribunal in conformity with the
Covenant of the League of Nations. As this country is not a
member of the League of Nations, it is suggested that in giving its
advice and consent to ratification the Senate may desire to make a
reservation providing for arbitral reference to some other tribunal.
The United States is a party to the Convention for the Regulation of the
Importation of Spirituous Liquors into certain regions of Africa, signed at
Brussels on June 8, 1899, and to the Convention signed at Brussels on
November 3, 1906, revising the duties imposed by the Brussels convention
repression of the African slave trade,56 to which the United States is also a
party, provides for the restriction of traffic in spirituous liquors.
The first paragraph of Article 11 of the Convention Relating to the Liquor
Traffic in Africa, signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye on September 10, 1919,
which is the subject of the present report, abrogates the provisions of former
general international conventions relating to the matters dealt with in the
present convention insofar as they are binding between the powers which
are parties to the present convention. Such provisions of those international
acts are therefore no longer in force between Belgium, the British Empire,
France, Japan and Portugal although they are still in force as respects the
United States.
While the present Convention would in its application impose definite
obligations only upon States having colonial possessions in Africa, it is in
harmony with the attitude of the United States with respect to the liquor
traffic in Africa as expressed in the earlier conventions. It is believed that
this Government should continue to give its moral support to efforts to
safeguard the natives of Africa from the dangers of uncontrolled liquor

traffic. By ratification of the present Convention it would place its
relationship to those matters on the basis now subsisting between Belgium,
the British Empire, France, Japan and Portugal in place of the provisions of
the older acts which have been so largely abandoned. It is recommended,
therefore, that the Senate be requested to give its advice and consent to
ratification of the Convention, subject to a reservation in respect of the
arbitration of disputes.
Accordingly, it is recommended that, if this course meets with your
approval, the Senate be requested to take suitable action advising and
consenting to ratification of the Convention of 1919 Relating to the Liquor
Traffic in Africa subject to a reservation that the United States reserves the
right to submit any dispute in which it may be concerned, relating to the
application of the Convention, by agreement with the other parties and in
accordance with the constitutional procedure of each State to a court of
arbitration constituted in accordance with The Hague Convention of
October 18, 1907,57 or to some other court of arbitration.
Respectfully submitted,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1928.
[Enclosure]
Draft of a Letter From President Coolidge to the Senate58
TO THE SENATE: To the end that I may receive the advice and consent of the
Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith a certified copy of the Convention
Relating to the Liquor Traffic in Africa, signed at Saint Germain-en-Laye
on September 10, 1919.
I further transmit for the information of the Senate a report from the
Secretary of State recommending that this Convention be ratified with a
reservation in regard to arbitral procedure.

Article 8 provides for the submission of disputes arising with respect to the
application of the Convention to an arbitral tribunal in conformity with the
provisions of the Covenant of the League of Nations. The Secretary of State
feels that this Government should not be bound by the procedure provided
for in that Article and suggests the adoption of a reservation to the effect
that any disputes in which the United States may be concerned, relating to
the application of the Convention, shall be submitted by agreement with the
other parties and in accordance with their constitutional procedure to a court
of arbitration constituted in accordance with The Hague Convention of
October 18, 1907, or to some other court of arbitration.
I concur in the recommendation made by the Secretary of State.
vol. II, pp. 1993 and 2205.

Treaty Series No. 779
[Document 309]
Convention Relating to the Liquor Traffic in Africa, Signed at
Saint Germain-en-Laye, September 10, 191959
The United States of America, Belgium, the British Empire, France, Italy,
Japan and Portugal;
Whereas it is necessary to continue in the African territories placed under
their administration the, struggle against the dangers of alcoholism which
they have maintained by subjecting spirits to constantly increasing duties;
Whereas, further, it is necessary to prohibit the importation of distilled
beverages rendered more especially dangerous to the native populations by
the nature of the products entering into their composition or by the
opportunities which a low price gives for their extended use;
Whereas, finally, the restrictions placed on the importation of spirits would
be of no effect unless the local manufacture of distilled beverages was at the
same time strictly controlled;
Have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
The High Contracting Parties undertake to apply the following measures for
the restriction of the liquor traffic in the territories which are or may be
subjected to their control throughout the whole of the continent of Africa,

with the exception of Algiers, Tunis, Morocco, Libya, Egypt, and the Union
of South Africa.
The provisions applicable to the continent of Africa shall also apply to the
islands lying within 100 nautical miles of the coast.
ARTICLE 2
The importation, distribution, sale and possession of trade spirits of every
kind, and of beverages mixed with these spirits, are prohibited in the area
referred to in Article 1. The local Governments concerned will decide
respectively which distilled beverages will be regarded in their territories as
falling within the category of trade spirits. They will endeavor to establish a
nomenclature and measures against fraud as uniform as possible.
ARTICLE 3
The importation, distribution, sale and possession are also forbidden of
distilled beverages containing essential oils or chemical products which are
recognised as injurious to health, such as thuyone, star anise, benzoic
aldehyde, salicylic ethers, hyssop and absinthe.
The local Governments concerned will likewise endeavor to establish by
common agreement the nomenclature of those beverages whose
importation, distribution, sale and possession according to the terms of this
provision should be prohibited.
ARTICLE 4
An import duty of not less than 800 francs per hectolitre of pure alcohol
shall be levied upon all distilled beverages, other than those indicated in
except in so far as the Italian colonies are concerned, where the duty may
not be less than 600 francs.
The High Contracting Parties will prohibit the importation, distribution, sale
and possession of spirituous liquors in those regions of the area referred to
in Article 1 where their use has not been developed.

The above prohibition can be suspended only in the case of limited
quantities destined for the consumption of non-native persons, and imported
under the system and conditions determined by each Government.
ARTICLE 5
The manufacture of distilled beverages of every kind is forbidden in the
area referred to in Article 1.
The importation, distribution, sale and possession of stills and of all
apparatus or portions of apparatus suitable for distillation of alcohol and the
redistillation of brandies and spirits are forbidden in the same area, subject
to the provisions of Article 6.
The provisions of the two preceding paragraphs do not apply to the Italian
colonies; the manufacture of distilled beverages, other than those specified
in Articles 2 and 3, will continue to be permitted therein, on condition that
they are subject to an excise duty equal to the import duty established in
Article 4.
ARTICLE 6
The restrictions on the importation, distribution, sale, possession and
manufacture of spirituous beverages do not apply to pharmaceutical
alcohols intended for medical, surgical or pharmaceutical establishments.
The importation, distribution, sale and possession are also permitted of:
(1) Testing stills, that is to say, the small apparatus in general use
for laboratory experiments, which are employed intermittently,
are not fitted with rectifying heads, and the capacity of whose
retort does not exceed one litre;
(2) Apparatus or parts of apparatus intended for experiments in
scientific institutions;
(3) Apparatus or parts of apparatus employed for definite
purposes, other than the production of alcohol, by pharmacists

holding a diploma, and by persons who can show good cause for
the possession of such apparatus;
(4) Apparatus necessary for the manufacture of alcohol for
industrial purposes, and employed by duly authorized persons,
such manufacture being subject to the supervision established by
the local administration.
The necessary permission in the foregoing cases will be granted by the local
administration of the territory in which the stills, apparatus, or portions of
apparatus are to be utilized.
ARTICLE 7
A Central International Office, placed under the control of the League of
Nations, shall be established for the purpose of collecting and preserving
documents of all kinds exchanged by the High Contracting Parties with
regard to the importation and manufacture of spirituous liquors under the
conditions referred to in the present Convention.
Each of the High Contracting Parties shall publish an annual report showing
the quantities of spirituous beverages imported or manufactured and the
duties levied under Articles 4 and 5. A copy of this report shall be sent to
the Central International Office and to the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations.
ARTICLE 8
The High Contracting Parties agree that if any dispute whatever should
arise between them relating to the application of the present Convention
which cannot be settled by negotiation, this dispute shall be submitted to an
arbitral tribunal in conformity with the Covenant of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 9
The High Contracting Parties reserve the right of introducing into the
present Convention by common agreement after a period of five years such
modifications as may prove to be necessary.

ARTICLE 10
The High Contracting Parties will use every effort to obtain the adhesion to
the present Convention of the other States exercising authority over
territories of the African Continent.
This adhesion shall be notified through the diplomatic channel to the
Government of the French Republic, and by it to all the signatory or
adhering States. The adhesion will come into effect from the date of the
notification to the French Government.
ARTICLE 11
All the provisions of former general international Conventions relating to
the matters dealt with in the present Convention shall be considered as
abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are
parties to the present Convention.
The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible.
Each Power will address its ratification to the French Government, which
will inform all the other signatory Powers.
The ratifications will remain deposited in the archives of the French
Government.
The present Convention will come into force for each signatory Power from
the date of the deposit of its ratification, and from that moment that Power
will be bound in respect of other Powers which have already deposited their
ratifications.
On the coming into force of the present Convention, the French
Government will transmit a certified copy to the Powers which under the
Treaties of Peace have undertaken to accept and observe it, and are in
consequence placed in the same position as the Contracting Parties. The
names of these Powers will be notified to the States which adhere.

In faith whereof, the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
Done at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the tenth day of September, one thousand
nine hundred and nineteen, in a single copy which will remain deposited in
the archives of the Government of the French Republic, and of which
authenticated copies will be sent to each of the signatory Powers.
[SEAL] FRANK L. POLK
[SEAL] HENRY WHITE
[SEAL] TASKER H. BLISS
[SEAL] HYMANS
[SEAL] VAN DEN HEUVEL
[SEAL] E. VANDERVELDE
[SEAL] ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR
[SEAL] MILNER
[SEAL] GEO. N. BARNES
[SEAL] A. E. KEMP
[SEAL] G. F. PEARCE
[SEAL] MILNER
[SEAL] THOS. MACKENZIE
[SEAL] SINHA OF RAIPUR
[SEAL] G. CLEMENCEAU
[SEAL] S. PICHON
[SEAL] L. L. KLOTZ
[SEAL] ANDRÉ TARDIEU
[SEAL] JULES CAMBON
[SEAL] TOM. TITTONI
[SEAL] VITTORIO SCIALOJA
[SEAL] MAGGIORINO FERRARIS
[SEAL] GUGUELMO MARCONI
[SEAL] S. CHINDA
[SEAL] K. MATSUI
[SEAL] AFFONSO COSTA
[SEAL] AUGUSTO SOARES

advice and consent to the ratification of the above convention, subject to the
following reservation: “Should any dispute whatever arise between any of
the high contracting parties and the United States relative to the application
of the present convention which can not be settled by negotiation, such
dispute shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The
Hague, established by the convention of October 18, 1907, or to such other
arbitral tribunal upon which the parties to the dispute may agree.”]
59 Signed in French; English translation reprinted from the Department of
State Treaty Series. Ratification advised by the Senate, with reservation,
1929; ratification of the United States deposited with the Government of the
1929.

Convention signed at Saint Germain-
en-Laye, September 10, 1919, revising
the General Act of Berlin of 1885 and
the General Act and Declaration of
Brussels of 189060
60 For text of the General Act of Berlin, in French, see British and Foreign
[310] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, May 22, 1928.
[311] Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin of 1885 and the
General Act and Declaration of Brussels of 1890, Signed at Saint
Germain-en-Laye, September 10, 1919
Done at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the 10th day of September, 1919, in a
single copy, which will remain deposited in the archives of the Government
of the French Republic, and of which authenticated copies will be sent to
each of the Signatory Powers.
Treaty Series No. 877

[Document 310]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
THE PRESIDENT: The undersigned, the Secretary of State, has the honor to lay
before the President, with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive
the advice and consent of that body to the ratification thereof, if his
judgment shall approve such action, a certified copy, with translation, of the
Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin, signed February 26, 1885,
and the General Act and the Declaration of Brussels, signed July 2, 1890,
which Convention was concluded at St. Germain-en-Laye on September 10,
1919.
The parties signatory to this Convention, which will be referred to herein as
the Revising Convention, are the United States of America, Belgium, the
British Empire, France, Italy, Japan and Portugal. With the exception of the
United States and of Italy, it has been ratified by all of the States signatory
to it.
The recommendation that the United States shall ratify the Revising
Convention is based primarily upon the following reasons:
(1) The Revising Convention provides for the maintenance of the Open
Door, in respect of the signatories thereof and of states members of the
League of Nations, throughout an immense region stretching across Africa
from the Atlantic Ocean to the Indian Ocean, which is potentially of
considerable importance to American commerce. The United States is a
party to the General Act of the International Conference of Algeciras,
signed April 7, 1906,60a which instrument provides for the Open Door and
with it the safeguarding of American commercial interests in Morocco. The
United States has recently concluded conventions with the countries
holding mandates for certain territories in Africa, by virtue of which it
receives in such territories the treatment accorded to states members of the
League of Nations. It is believed that similar safeguards should be provided

for in the important regions of Central Africa to which the Revising
Convention applies.
It may appropriately be added that American commercial policy is based
upon the conception of equality of treatment. Assurance of equality of
treatment in the regions under consideration can be most efficaciously and
conveniently maintained by ratifying the Revising Convention. There is
reason to be apprehensive of discrimination, especially in colonial areas,
which may become involved in systems of intra-imperial preference, unless
a positive guarantee is maintained.
American exports of merchandise and American shipping entering the ports
of the territories in question alike demand the promise afforded by the
Revising Convention that they will not be discriminated against.
(2) The provisions of the Revising Convention include articles for the
purpose of assuring religious freedom and protection of religious, charitable
and scientific institutions. American missionary organizations, as well as
other institutions which are interested in developing a higher degree of
welfare in Central Africa, have left no doubt whatever of the importance
which they attach to this provision. It is deemed especially important that
American nationals representing these institutions in Africa shall have the
protection afforded by American participation in the Revising Convention.
(3) Under the terms of the Revising Convention, the parties thereto will
shortly reassemble for the purpose of considering whether a further revision
may be useful. While it is possible that the United States might participate
in a conference for that purpose without having ratified the Convention, the
natural and easy way of assuring such participation, and with it the
opportunity to re-affirm and perhaps to extend the American policy of the
Open Door, is to accept the Convention prior to the Conference.
(4) The Revising Convention forms an essential part of a group of
instruments relating primarily to Africa, but in some cases of general
application, in all of which it appears to be important that the United States
become a participant. One of these, a Convention for the Supervision of the
International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War,
signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925,61 was transmitted by you to the Senate

on January 12, 1926, but has not as yet been acted upon by the Senate.
There are being forwarded at this time, with a view to their transmission to
the Senate, certified copies of the other two, namely, the Convention
Relating to the Liquor Traffic in Africa, signed at St. Germain-en-Laye on
September 10, 1919,62 and a certified copy of the Slavery Convention,
by the United States of these four Conventions will not only safeguard
American interests in important matters but will have a definitely helpful
moral influence upon the welfare of Central Africa in the matter of slavery,
the prohibition of alcoholic liquors and the suppression of the traffic in
arms. In respect of the traffic in arms and of slavery the provisions of the
conventions are, moreover, general in their scope.
(5) Finally, in view of the fact that the United States is a party to the
General Act of Brussels, which is revised by the Convention under
consideration, and since the Act of Brussels has been abrogated in respect
of Belgium, France, Great Britain, Japan and Portugal by virtue of their
acceptance of the Revising Convention, it is deemed highly desirable that
the United States, likewise, shall accept the Revising Convention and so
bring its position into line with the position of the other powers principally
interested, with consequent participation in the advantages which such
powers enjoy thereunder. For the United States to continue under
obligations arising from an instrument from which the parties of principal
interest have withdrawn, is deemed inexpedient. Hence the termination of
such obligations under the General Act of Brussels through becoming a
party to the Revising Convention is advisable for the United States. The
United States is not a party to the General Act of Berlin or to the
Declaration of Brussels.
It is necessary to call attention to the provisions of Article 12 of the
Revising Convention, relating to the arbitration of disputes arising under the
Convention. In view of the fact that the United States is not a member of
the League of Nations and the arbitral provisions presuppose reference to a
tribunal in conformity with the provisions of the Covenant, it seems
appropriate that this Government, in ratifying the Convention, should make
a reservation to the effect that it may submit disputes to some other arbitral
tribunal.

Accordingly, it is suggested that the Senate may appropriately give its
consent with the following reservation:
“The Senate consents to the ratification of the present Convention
subject to the understanding that, in the event of a dispute in
which the United States may be involved arising under the
Convention, such dispute shall, if the United States so requests,
be submitted to a court of arbitration constituted in accordance
with the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes, signed at The Hague on October 18, 1907,64 or to some
other court of arbitration.”
In accordance with the foregoing considerations, it is recommended that, if
such course meets with approval, the Senate be requested to take suitable
action consistent therewith for the purpose of advising and consenting to the
ratification of the Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin and the
General Act and the Declaration of Brussels.
Respectfully submitted,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1928.
[Enclosure]
Draft of a Letter From President Coolidge to the Senate65
To the end that I may receive the advice and consent of the Senate to
ratification, I transmit herewith a certified copy of the Convention signed at
St. Germain-en-Laye on September 10, 1919, Revising the General Act of
Berlin of February 26, 1885, and the General Act and Declaration of
Brussels of July 2, 1890.
I further transmit for the information of the Senate a report from the
Secretary of State recommending that the Revising Convention referred to
be ratified with a reservation in regard to arbitral procedure.

Article 12 provides for the submission of disputes arising with respect to
the application of the Convention to an arbitral tribunal in conformity with
the provisions of the Covenant of the League of Nations. The Secretary of
State feels that this Government should not be bound by the procedure
provided for in Article 12, and suggests that the advice and consent of the
Senate to ratification be given subject to a reservation to the effect that any
disputes in which the United States may be concerned may be submitted to
a court of arbitration constituted in accordance with The Hague Convention
of October 18, 1907, or to some other court of arbitration.
I concur in the recommendation of the Secretary of State.

Treaty Series No. 877
[Document 311]
Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin of 1885 and the
General Act and Declaration of Brussels of 1890, Signed at Saint
Germain-en-Laye, September 10, 191966
The United States of America, Belgium, the British Empire, France, Italy,
Japan, and Portugal,
Whereas the General Act of the African Conference, signed at Berlin on
February 26, 1885, was primarily intended to demonstrate the agreement of
the Powers with regard to the general principles which should guide their
commercial and civilizing action in the little known or inadequately
organized regions of a continent where slavery and the slave trade still
flourished; and
Whereas by the Brussels Declaration of July 2, 1890, it was found
necessary to modify for a provisional period of fifteen years the system of
free imports established for twenty years by Article 4 of the said Act, and
since that date no agreement has been entered into, notwithstanding the
provisions of the said Act and Declaration; and
Whereas the territories in question are now under the control of recognized
authorities, are provided with administrative institutions suitable to the local
conditions, and the evolution of the native populations continues to make
progress;
Wishing to ensure by arrangements suitable to modern requirements the
application of the general principles of civilization established by the Acts
of Berlin and Brussels,
Have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]

Who, after having communicated their full powers recognized in good and
due form,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
The Signatory Powers undertake to maintain between their respective
nationals and those of States, Members of the League of Nations, which
may adhere to the present Convention a complete commercial equality in
the territories under their authority within the area defined by Article 1 of
the General Act of Berlin of February 26, 1885, set out in the Annex hereto,
but subject to the reservation specified in the final paragraph of that article.
ANNEX
The trade of all nations shall enjoy complete freedom:
1. In all the regions forming the basin of the Congo and its affluents. This
basin is bounded by the watersheds (or mountain ridges) of the adjacent
basins, namely, in particular, those of the Niari, the Ogowé, the Shari, and
the Nile, on the north; by the eastern watershed line of the affluents of Lake
Tanganyika on the east; and by the watersheds of the basins of the Zambesi
and the Logé on the south. It therefore comprises all the regions watered by
the Congo and its affluents, including Lake Tanganyika, with its eastern
tributaries.
2. In the maritime zone extending along the Atlantic Ocean from the
parallel situated in 2° 30ʹ of south latitude to the mouth of the Logé.
The northern boundary will follow the parallel situated in 2° 30ʹ from the
coast to the point where it meets the geographical basin of the Congo,
avoiding the basin of the Ogowé, to which the provisions of the present Act
do not apply.
The southern boundary will follow the course of the Logé to its source, and
thence pass eastward till it joins the geographical basin of the Congo.

3. In the zone stretching eastward from the Congo Basin as above defined,
to the Indian Ocean from 5° of north latitude to the mouth of the Zambesi in
the south, from which point, the line of demarcation will ascend the
Zambesi to 5 miles above its confluence with the Shiré, and then follow the
watershed between the affluents of Lake Nyassa and those of the Zambesi,
till at last it reaches the watershed between the waters of the Zambesi and
the Congo.
It is expressly recognized that in extending the principle of free trade to this
eastern zone, the Conference Powers only undertake engagements for
themselves, and that in the territories belonging to an independent
Sovereign State this principle shall only be applicable in so far as it is
approved by such State. But the Powers agree to use their good offices with
the Governments established on the African shore of the Indian Ocean for
the purpose of obtaining such approval, and in any case of securing the
most favorable conditions to the transit of all nations.
ARTICLE 2
Merchandise belonging to the nationals of the Signatory Powers, and to
those of States, Members of the League of Nations, which may adhere to
the present Convention, shall have free access to the interior of the regions
specified in Article 1. No differential treatment shall be imposed upon the
said merchandise on importation or exportation, the transit remaining free
from all duties, taxes or dues, other than those collected for services
rendered.
Vessels flying the flag of any of the said Powers shall also have access to all
the coast and to all maritime ports in the territories specified in Article 1;
they shall be subject to no differential treatment.
Subject to these provisions, the States concerned reserve to themselves
complete liberty of action as to the customs and navigation regulations and
tariffs to be applied in their territories.
ARTICLE 3

In the territories specified in Article 1 and placed under the authority of one
of the Signatory Powers, the nationals of those Powers, or of States,
Members of the League of Nations, which may adhere to the present
Convention shall, subject only to the limitations necessary for the
maintenance of public security and order, enjoy without distinction the
same treatment and the same rights as the nationals of the Power exercising
authority in the territory, with regard to the protection of their persons and
effects, with regard to the acquisition and transmission of their movable and
real property, and with regard to the exercise of their occupations.
ARTICLE 4
Each State reserves the right to dispose freely of its property and to grant
concessions for the development of the natural resources of the territory, but
no regulations on these matters shall admit of any differential treatment
between the nationals of the Signatory Powers and of States, Members of
the League of Nations, which may adhere to the present Convention.
ARTICLE 5
Subject to the provisions of the present chapter, the navigation of the Niger,
of its branches and outlets, and of all the rivers, and of their branches and
outlets, within the territories specified in Article 1, as well as of the lakes
situated within those territories, shall be entirely free for merchant vessels
and for the transport of goods and passengers.
Craft of every kind belonging to the nationals of the Signatory Powers and
of States, Members of the League of Nations, which may adhere to the
present Convention shall be treated in all respects on a footing of perfect
equality.
ARTICLE 6
The navigation shall not be subject to any restriction or dues based on the
mere fact of navigation.
It shall not be held to any obligation in regard to landing, stopping,
warehousing, bulk breaking or enforced lay over.

No maritime or river toll, based on the mere fact of navigation, shall be
levied on vessels, nor shall any transit duty be levied on goods on board.
Only such taxes or dues shall be collected as may be in compensation for
services rendered to navigation itself. The tariff of these taxes or duties
shall not admit of any differential treatment.
ARTICLE 7
The affluents of the rivers and lakes specified in Article 5 shall in all
respects be subject to the same rules as the rivers or lakes of which they are
tributaries.
The roads, railways or lateral canals which may be constructed with the
special object of obviating the innavigability or correcting the imperfections
of the water route on certain sections of the rivers and lakes specified in
Article 5, their affluents, branches and outlets, shall be considered, in their
quality of means of communication, as dependencies of these rivers and
lakes, and shall be equally open to the traffic of the nationals of the
Signatory Powers and of the States, Members of the League of Nations,
which may adhere to the present Convention.
On these roads, railways and canals only such tolls shall be collected as are
calculated on the cost of construction, maintenance and management, and
on the profits reasonably accruing to the undertaking. As regards the tariff
of these tolls, the nationals of the Signatory Powers and of States, Members
of the League of Nations, which may adhere to the present Convention,
shall be treated on a footing of perfect equality.
ARTICLE 8
Each of the Signatory Powers shall remain free to establish the rules which
it may consider expedient for the purpose of ensuring the safety and
supervision of navigation, on the understanding that these rules shall
facilitate, as far as possible, the circulation of merchant vessels.
ARTICLE 9

In such sections of the rivers and of their affluents, as well as on such lakes,
as are not necessarily utilized by more than one riparian State, the
Governments exercising authority shall remain free to establish such
systems as may be required for the maintenance of public safety and order,
and for other necessities of the work of civilization and colonization; but
the regulations shall not admit of any differential treatment between vessels
or between nationals of the Signatory Powers and of States, Members of the
League of Nations, which may adhere to the present Convention.
ARTICLE 10
The Signatory Powers acknowledge their obligation to maintain in the
regions under their control actual authority and police forces sufficient to
insure protection for persons and property and, if the case should arise,
freedom for commerce and transit.
ARTICLE 11
The Signatory Powers exercising sovereign rights or authority in African
territories will continue to see to the preservation of the native populations
and the improvement of their moral and material conditions. They will, in
particular, endeavor to secure the complete suppression of slavery in all its
forms and of the black slave trade by land and sea.
They will protect and favor, without distinction of nationality or of religion,
the religious, scientific or charitable institutions and undertakings created
and organized by the nationals of the other Signatory Powers and of States,
Members of the League of Nations, which may adhere to the present
Convention, which aim at leading the natives in the path of progress and
civilization. Scientific missions, their outfits and their collections, shall
likewise be the objects of special solicitude.
Freedom of conscience and the free exercise of all forms of religion are
expressly guaranteed to all nationals of the Signatory Powers and to those
of the States, Members of the League of Nations, which may become
parties to the present Convention. Accordingly, missionaries shall have the
right to enter into, and to travel and reside in, African territory with a view
to pursuing their religious work.

The application of the provisions of the two preceding paragraphs shall be
subject only to such restrictions as may be necessary for the maintenance of
public security and order, or as may result from the enforcement of the
constitutional law of any of the Powers exercising authority in African
territories.
ARTICLE 12
The Signatory Powers agree that if any dispute whatever should arise
between them relating to the application of the present Convention which
cannot be settled by negotiation, this dispute shall be submitted to an
arbitral tribunal in conformity with the provisions of the Covenant of the
League of Nations.
ARTICLE 13
Except in so far as the stipulations contained in Article 1 of the present
Convention are concerned, the General Act of Berlin of 26th February,
accompanying Declaration of equal date, shall be considered as abrogated,
in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are Parties to the
present Convention.
ARTICLE 14
States exercising authority over African territories, and other States,
Members of the League of Nations, which were parties either to the Act of
Berlin or to the Act of Brussels or the Declaration annexed thereto, may
adhere to the present Convention. The Signatory Powers will use their best
endeavors to obtain the adhesion of these States.
This adhesion shall be notified through the diplomatic channel to the
Government of the French Republic, and by it to all the Signatory or
adhering States. The adhesion will come into force from the date of its
notification to the French Government.
ARTICLE 15

The Signatory Powers will reassemble at the expiration of ten years from
the coming into force of the present Convention, in order to introduce into it
such modifications as experience may have shown to be necessary.
The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible.
Each Power will address its ratification to the French Government, which
will inform all the other Signatory Powers.
The ratifications will remain deposited in the archives of the French
Government.
The present Convention will come into force for each Signatory Power
from the date of the deposit of its ratification, and from that moment that
Power will be bound in respect of other Powers which have already
deposited their ratifications.
On the coming into force of the present Convention, the French
Government will transmit a certified copy to the Powers which, under the
Treaties of Peace, have undertaken to accept and observe it. The names of
these Powers will be notified to the States which adhere.
In faith whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
Done at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the 10th day of September, 1919, in a
single copy, which will remain deposited in the archives of the Government
of the French Republic, and of which authenticated copies will be sent to
each of the Signatory Powers.
[SEAL] FRANK L. POLK
[SEAL] HENRY WHITE
[SEAL] TASKER H. BLISS
[SEAL] HYMANS
[SEAL] J. VAN DEN HEUVEL
[SEAL] E. VANDERVELDE
[SEAL] ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR

[SEAL]
[SEAL] MILNER
[SEAL] G. N. BARNES
[SEAL] A. E. KEMP
[SEAL] G. F. PEARCE
[SEAL] MILNER
[SEAL] THOS. MACKENZIE
[SEAL] SINHA OF RAIPUR
[SEAL] G. CLEMENCEAU
[SEAL] S. PICHON
[SEAL] L. L. KLOTZ
[SEAL] ANDRÉ TARDIEU
[SEAL] JULES CAMBON
[SEAL] TOM. TITTONI
[SEAL] VITTORIO SCIALOJA
[SEAL] MAGGIORINO FERRARIS
[SEAL] GUGLIELMO MARCONI
[SEAL] S. CHINDA
[SEAL] K. MATSUI
[SEAL] H. IJUIN
[SEAL] AFFONSO COSTA
[SEAL] AUGUSTO SOARES
advice and consent to the ratification of the treaty, contained the following
understanding: “that in the event of a dispute in which the United States
may be involved arising under the convention such dispute shall, if the
United States so requests, be submitted to a court of arbitration constituted
in accordance with the convention for the pacific settlement of international
disputes signed at The Hague on October 18, 1907, or to some other court
of arbitration.”]
66 Signed in French; English translation reprinted from the Department of
State Treaty Series. Ratification advised by the Senate, with an
President, subject to the said understanding, Apr. 11, 1930; ratification of

the United States deposited with the Government of the French Republic,

Interest of the United States in efforts
of the League of Nations to control the
traffic in narcotic drugs67
67 For previous correspondence concerning efforts to control traffic in
narcotic drugs, see Foreign Relations, 1926, vol.  I, pp. 250 ff.
[312] The Secretary of State to Senator Reed Smoot
Washington, March 23, 1928.
[313] The Acting Secretary of State to Four American Insurance
Companies
Washington, March 27, 1928.
[314] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[315] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

[316] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[317] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
Washington, December 8, 1928—noon.
[318] The Consul at Geneva (Band) to the Secretary of State
[319] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 312]
The Secretary of State to Senator Reed Smoot68
WASHINGTON, March 23, 1928.
SIR: Replying to your letter of March 12, 1928,69 inquiring concerning the
policy of this Government with regard to the control of the traffic in
narcotic drugs, I have the honor to state that this subject is one in which this
Department continues to be deeply interested.
The policy of the Government, domestically and internationally in
cooperation with the other governments, has been and continues to be to
seek the eradication of the abuse of opium and coca leaves and their
derivatives. To this end it initiated the movement resulting in the calling of
the International Opium Commission at Shanghai in 1909.70 It participated
in the conference called at The Hague which resulted in The Hague Opium
Convention of 1912,71 and when the League of Nations called the two
conferences held at Geneva in 1924 and 192572 this Government
participated in the second of those conferences under the authorization
contained in the Joint Resolution of Congress of May 15, 1924, which
directed our representatives not to sign any agreement which did not “fulfill
the conditions necessary for the suppression of the habit-forming narcotic
drug traffic as set forth in the preamble” of that resolution which interpreted
the purposes of The Hague Opium Convention of 1912 in the following
way:
“1. If the purpose of the Hague Opium Convention is to
be achieved according to its spirit and true intent, it
must be recognized that the use of opium products for
other than medical and scientific purposes is an abuse
and not legitimate.
“2. In order to prevent the abuse of these products, it is
necessary to exercise the control of the production of

raw opium in such manner that there will be no surplus
available for non-medical and non-scientific purposes.”
The American Delegation to the second opium conference withdrew from
that conference before the completion of its work, because it was forced to
the conclusion that the convention which was being drawn up did not
conform to the principles and policy laid down in the Joint Resolution
under which they were instructed to act for this Government. Their reasons
were set forth in the memorandum which was attached to the letter of
February 6, 1925, addressed by the Honorable Stephen G. Porter, Chairman
of the American Delegation, to the President of the Second Opium
Conference. Copies of the memorandum and of the text of the Joint
Resolution (Public Resolution No. 20—68th Congress) are attached for
your information.73
It has furthermore been and continues to be the policy of this Government,
both in regard to its domestic situation and internationally in cooperation
with the other Powers, to seek the enactment of pharmacy laws and
regulations which will limit the manufacture, the sale and the use of
morphine, cocaine and their respective salts to the medical needs of the
world. (Cf. Hague Convention, Chapter III, Article 9.) With this in view,
this Government on October 14, 1926, addressed an instruction to the
American diplomatic representatives in the countries signatory to The
Hague Convention directing them to bring to the attention of those
Governments the steps which have been taken for the control of the
manufacture of and traffic in narcotic drugs within the territorial limits of
the United States pursuant to the requirements of The Hague Convention
and to point out the need for similar control in other countries, particularly
those producing opium derivatives, if the illicit international traffic in these
drugs is to be eradicated. A copy of this instruction with its enclosures is
transmitted herewith for your information.74 Since the instruction of
October 14, 1926, was issued, in order to perfect its system of control, this
Government has adopted a new form of import certificates for narcotic
shipments and has revised the regulations issued in pursuance of the
Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act. A set of the new import forms and a
copy of the revised regulations, which become effective April 1, 1928, are
attached.75 Moreover, Treasury Department Regulations No. 35 on the

subject of narcotic control have been replaced by Regulations No. 5,
As a further means of meeting this situation and because of the increasing
evidence that illicit narcotics found within the territorial limits of the United
States by the preventive forces of this Government originated from sources
outside of the territorial limits of the United States, the Department, in
December, 1927, directed its representatives at various capitals75a to
arrange with the governments concerned for the direct exchange of
information, relating to persons and organizations engaged in the illicit
international traffic in narcotic drugs, between the officers directly
concerned with the control of that traffic in the United States and the
corresponding officers in such foreign Governments. Arrangements have
already been effected for such a direct exchange of information with the
Governments of Great Britain, France, Germany and The Netherlands, and
it is hoped that arrangements will be made with the following countries to
all of which the Department’s proposal has been communicated:
Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Portugal, Spain,
Rumania, Free City of Danzig, Japan, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes, Turkey and Greece.
On April 12 there is to be held in Geneva a meeting of the Advisory
Committee on Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs of the League of
Nations. I am instructing Mr. John K. Caldwell, a Foreign Service Officer
who has been attached to the Consulate at Geneva and Mr. Pinkney Tuck,
American Consul at Geneva, to attend this meeting as unofficial observers,
as Mr. Tuck has done at previous meetings of the above mentioned
Committee.
I have [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
68 Chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance.
69 Printed in Establishment of Two Federal Narcotic Farms: Hearings
Before the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, 70th

(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1928).
73 The memorandum is quoted in Mr. Porter’s undated telegram to the
Department of State, Foreign Relations, 1924, vol.  I, p. 125. The resolution
is printed in 43 Stat. 119.
75 Not printed.
75 Not printed.
75a Instructions of December 1927 not printed.

[Document 313]
The Acting Secretary of State to Four American Insurance
Companies
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1928.
SIRS: For many years the United States has been keenly alive to the necessity
of eradicating the illicit trade in narcotic substances. With this end in view
the Government has not only enacted domestic legislation but has
undertaken commitments in conjunction with other nations, the general
policy of narcotic control being based upon the principles laid down in the
Hague Opium Convention of 1912, to which the United States is a
signatory. Despite the measures of control adopted by the United States and
by certain other countries, the illegitimate trade in narcotics is widespread,
to the serious detriment of the people of this and other nations.
In 1926 there was brought to the attention of this Government an agreement
made by the British Government with Lloyds and the members of the
London Underwriters’ Association, which was designed to prevent facilities
being given for the insurance of consignments of opium or other dangerous
drugs intended for illicit purposes. The danger was pointed out of
underwriters, unaware of the fact that shipments were destined for illicit
purposes, issuing policies which were subsequently used to borrow funds to
finance the illicit business. The British met this situation by inserting a
clause in all maritime policies which provides that no losses will be paid on
narcotic shipments unless each shipment is covered by an import permit
from the country to which it is consigned, or by an export permit from the
country from which the goods are exported. It is required also that the route
of shipment be usual and customary, that the drugs be declared such in the
policy and that the policy indicate the country from which and to which the
shipment is consigned.
This alteration in maritime insurance policies is in harmony with the efforts
of this Government to give practical effect to the principles of the Hague

Opium Convention and with its action in requiring, in pursuance of the
Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act of 1922, that shipments of narcotics
to and from this country be covered by import and export certificates. It is
realized that such a voidance of maritime insurance for inadequately
controlled narcotic shipments would cause illicit traffickers to have
recourse to the insurance companies of countries in which the ban is not in
force. This Government has been gratified to observe the willingness of
seventy-two of the companies represented in the American Institute of
Marine Underwriters voluntarily to adopt this so-called “Dangerous Drug
Clause” in their contracts. It is understood that your company is one of four
companies which have not yet given their assent to the inclusion of this
clause, and the matter is brought to your attention in the belief that, with the
above explanation of the nature and purpose of the proposed clause before
you, you will not hesitate to indicate your willingness to join with the other
American companies in adopting it.
In view of the traditional attitude of the Government of the United States
concerning the suppression of the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs, as
evidenced by its participation in the conferences at Shanghai in 1909 and at
the Hague in 1912, together with the steps which have been taken, by
domestic legislation and by cooperation with other powers, to bring about
the control of the traffic contemplated by the Hague Convention of 1912, it
would be most unfortunate if the United States should appear to be less
willing than other countries to adopt any measure designed to reduce, in any
degree, the menace of narcotic drug addiction. I should very much
appreciate receiving some indication of your attitude, which I feel confident
will be favorable, in regard to this matter.
A similar letter is being addressed to the other three companies which have
not yet signified their acceptance of the proposal.76
ROBERT E. OLDS
76 The four replies received indicated no agreement as to a new clause in
these insurance policies.

[Document 314]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 12:34 p.m.]
89. Following note, dated September 5, received from Sir Eric
Drummond:77
“I have the honor to inform you that the Council of the League of
Nations at a meeting held on August 31, 1928, took note of the
fact that the Geneva Opium Convention of February 19, 1925,78
will come into force on the 25th of this month. The Council
agreed to determine at its next session, towards the end of
September, the question of the procedure to be adopted with
regard to the appointment of the Permanent Central Board
provided for under article 19 of the Convention, and to appoint
the board at its subsequent (53d) session.
In conformity with the terms of article 19 of the Convention the
Council decided at the same time to invite the United States of
America to nominate a person to participate in the appointment of
the Permanent Central Board. In accordance with the instructions
of the Council I have the honor to convey this invitation to your
Government. I have the honor to inform you further of the desire
of the Council that the Government of the United States of
America if it so wishes should take full part in the settlement of
the procedure for appointing the Permanent Central Board. The
Council would cordially welcome any views which the United
States might wish to express on this matter, either by written
communication or through a representative who should take part
in the Council’s discussion on the question.”
WILSON

77 Secretary General of the League of Nations.
78 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. LXXXI, p. 317.

[Document 315]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
usual informal manner the following communication to the Secretary
General of the League of Nations in acknowledgment of his communication
of September 5, 1928:
“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note of the Secretary
General of the League of Nations dated September 5, 1928,
stating that, in conformity with Article 19 of the Geneva Opium
Convention of February 19, 1925, the Council of the League of
Nations had decided to invite the United States of America to
nominate a person to participate in the appointment of the
Permanent Central Board, and stating further that it was the desire
of the Council that the Government of the United States of
America if it so wishes should take full part in the settlement of
the procedure for appointing the Permanent Central Board.
The Secretary of State of the United States of America desires to
express his appreciation of this invitation, but regrets that the
Government of the United States does not find it possible to
participate in the selection of the Permanent Central Board set up
by the Geneva Convention of February 19, 1925.
Although in the matter of manufactured drugs and the control of
transportation the Geneva Convention may be regarded as an
improvement over the Hague Convention of 1912, yet in the
opinion of this Government the Geneva Convention is
unsatisfactory in certain respects of sufficient importance to
preclude this Government from adhering to the Convention and

from participating in the selection of the Board provided for by
the Convention. Among the matters which this Government
regards as not adequately dealt with in the Geneva Convention
are the limitation of the production of raw opium and coca leaves
to the medicinal and scientific needs of the world and the control
of the production and distribution of all opium and coca leaf
derivatives. Furthermore, the Geneva Convention tends to destroy
the unity of purpose and joint responsibility of the Powers
accomplished by the Hague Convention and which this
Government regards as essential to an effective control of the
traffic in narcotic drugs. The American Government believes that,
until there can be devised some substitute for the Hague
Convention more satisfactory than the Geneva Convention, the
eradication of the abuse of narcotic drugs would be more likely to
be achieved by strict observance of the provisions of the Hague
Convention.
However, the United States recognizes that the traffic in narcotic
drugs can be controlled only by international cooperation and, in
continuation of its efforts toward that end, will, in addition to
observing its obligations under the Hague Convention, endeavor
to furnish such information as the Permanent Central Board may
KELLOGG

[Document 316]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, October 18, 1928.
[Received November 2.]
No. 627
honor to transmit herewith the text of Sir Eric Drummond’s note dated
October 16, in which he inquired, on behalf of the Assembly of the League
of Nations, whether the American Government would permit a Commission
of inquiry into the use of opium prepared for smoking to visit the Philippine
Islands and inform itself of the experience of the system of prohibition in
operation there.
I have [etc.]
HUGH R. WILSON
[Enclosure]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the American Minister in
Switzerland (Wilson)
GENEVA, October 16, 1928.
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the Ninth Assembly of the League
of Nations, at a meeting held on September 24th, 1928, passed the
following resolution:

“That the Assembly recommend the Council to appoint a
Commission of three persons to enquire into and report upon the
situation in the Far-Eastern territories of the Governments which
agree to such an enquiry as regards the use of opium prepared for
smoking; the measures taken by the Governments concerned to
give effect to the obligations undertaken in Chapter II of the
Hague Opium Convention of 1912 and in the Geneva Opium
Agreement of February 1925; the nature and extent of the illicit
traffic in opium in the Far East and the difficulties which it causes
to the fulfilment of those obligations; and to suggest what action
should in the circumstances be taken by the Governments
concerned and by the League of Nations.
“That the Assembly also expresses the hope that the Government
of the United States will permit the Commission to visit the
Philippines and inform itself of the experience of the system of
prohibition in operation there.”
In accordance with the resolution of the Assembly, I have the honour to
bring to the attention of your Government the hope expressed by the
Assembly that your Government will permit the Commission to visit the
Philippines and inform itself of the experience of the system of prohibition
in operation there.
In taking this action, I venture to place before you, for the information of
your Government, certain facts which are set out in the Report of the Fifth
Committee to the Assembly (A.82.1928.XI) and which explain the origin
and purpose of the proposed Commission:
The proposal originated in a memorandum on the control of
opium-smoking in the Far East communicated by the British
Government in a letter, dated August 1st, 1928, to the Secretary-
General for transmission to the Council of the League. This
proposal was examined by the Council at its meeting on August
31st, and referred to the Assembly for its consideration.
As the report of the Fifth Committee to the Assembly indicates,
the proposal had arisen out of the difficulties with which the

British Government finds itself confronted in the attempt to carry
out the undertaking into which it has entered in the Hague
Convention “to take measures for the gradual and effective
suppression of the use of prepared opium with due regard to the
varying circumstances of each country concerned”. The British
memorandum explains in detail the nature of these difficulties
which arise from the existence of a large illicit traffic in opium in
the Far East, and hamper or even nullify the efforts of the
Governments concerned to control and restrict the consumption.
These difficulties existed already in 1924–25, when the First
Geneva Conference was held. Since that Conference they have
not diminished, but have actually increased. The memorandum
refers specially to the difficulties experienced in Hong-Kong,
where the Government of the Colony estimates the consumption
of illicit opium to be many times that of the Government
monopoly opium. But the difficulties are considerable also in
Malaya, and it would appear from the proceedings of the Opium
Advisory Committee of the League that other Governments have
experienced similar difficulties.
The British Government states further that it has proceeded with
the measures agreed upon by the Conference of 1924–25, but the
present situation appears to it to be such as to call for a fresh
examination and review on the spot, especially in view of the fact
that under the terms of the Agreement of the First Geneva
Conference a further Conference is due to be held not later than
next year. The memorandum suggests that it is most desirable that
an unbiassed statement of the actual position made by a
completely independent Commission appointed by the League, to
which is entrusted by the Covenant the supervision of the traffic,
should be laid before the world. Such a Commission might further
be able, as a result of its enquiries, to make valuable suggestions
as to the measures to be adopted in the present circumstances.
The enquiry would thus provide the material on which the next
Conference would be able to base its work.

I should be grateful if the Government of the United States found it possible
to inform me of its reply to the request set out in this letter not later than
December 10th, on which date the Council will meet for its 53rd session,
and will take a final decision as to the sending of the Commission and its
composition. As regards the latter point, it is understood that the three
members of the Commission will be chosen from nations which are not
directly concerned in the problems to be investigated.
I have the honour to send you, for the information of your Government, the
relevant documents dealing with this matter.80 These are:
1) The letter and memorandum respecting the control of opium-
smoking in the Far East, with appendix, communicated by the
British Government, together with an extract from the Minutes of
2) Provisional minutes of the Fifth Committee of the Ninth
Ordinary Session of the Assembly (containing the discussions on
3) Report of the Fifth Committee to the Assembly on the proposal
by the Government of Great Britain for a Commission of Enquiry
into
the
control
of
opium-smoking
in
the
Far
East.
4) Verbatim Record, Ninth Ordinary Session of the Assembly,
I have [etc.]
ERIC DRUMMOND
79 Not printed.
80 Enclosures not printed.

[Document 317]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
WASHINGTON, December 8, 1928—noon.
1. You may inform the Secretary General of the League of Nations, in reply
to his note to you of October 16,82 that the Commission referred to therein
will be made welcome in the Philippine Islands and that the Governor
General of the Philippine Islands will render all possible assistance to it in
connection with its investigations. You may add that this Government will
appreciate receiving a copy of any report that may be rendered by the
proposed Commission. Please inform Department personnel of Commission
and dates when it will visit Philippines immediately you can obtain
information.
2. [Paraphrase.] Although the United States Government, in principle,
would not be disposed to object to any American serving on the Permanent
Central Board, manifestly this Government could not suggest, in view of its
inability to take part in electing the Board, that an American be elected to it,
nor take any action which could be construed as recommending or
endorsing any individual American for a Board position.
The Secretary General of the League of Nations should, therefore, be
informed by you that the matter is one in regard to which the Department of
State would prefer to express no opinion. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG
81 Not printed.
82 Supra.

[Document 318]
The Consul at Geneva (Band) to the Secretary of State
The Council of the League has appointed May83 (American) a member of
the Central Board provided for by the Geneva Opium Convention of 1925.
Full report by mail.81
RAND
83 Herbert L. May, of Pittsburgh.
81 Not printed.

[Document 319]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:05 p.m.]
Drummond text of memorandum adopted by Council on December 14
which will be released to press this afternoon. Text follows:
“The Council of the League of Nations wishes to express its
appreciation of the directness and frankness of the reply of the
Secretary of State of the United States of America to its invitation
to participate in the selection of the Permanent Central Board
provided for by the Geneva Convention of February 1925. It feels
sure that the Government of the United States would wish it to
reply in the same spirit of frankness and with the same desire to
promote effective international understanding and cooperation in
this most difficult work.
The Council regrets that the United States Government does not
find it possible to accept its invitation. It cordially welcomes
however the statement that the Government, in addition to
observing its obligations under The Hague Convention, will
endeavor to furnish such information as the Permanent Central
Board may request. It also notes with pleasure that in the view of
the United States Government the Geneva Convention ‘in the
matter of manufactured drugs and the control transportation’ may
be regarded as an improvement over The Hague Convention of
1912.
At the same time the Secretary of State put forward specific
criticisms of the Geneva Convention. In regard to the first of
these criticisms the Council would merely point out that the

provisions as regards ‘the limitation of the production of raw
opium and coca leaves to the medical and scientific needs of the
world, and the control of the production and distribution of all
opium and coca leaf derivatives’ which are referred to as
inadequate, represented the maximum of progress upon which
agreement could be reached in 1925 by an international
conference composed of the accredited representatives of forty-
one powers after exhaustive discussions extending over a period
of three months.
As to the second criticism made by the Secretary of State the
Council desires to emphasize its complete agreement with the
opinion of the Government of the United States that the unity of
purpose and joint responsibility of the powers is essential to an
effective control of the traffic in opium and narcotic drugs. But it
cannot share the view that the Geneva Convention tends to
destroy the unity of purpose and joint responsibility of the powers
accomplished by The Hague Convention. In the judgment of the
Council the Geneva Convention should be regarded as
supplementary to The Hague Convention. The obligations of the
latter remain undiminished. Indeed it is the purpose of the Geneva
Convention, as its preamble sets forth, to complete and strengthen
the provisions of The Hague Convention. Moreover the Council,
having for years pressed for the ratification of The Hague
Convention until now it is nearly universally accepted, believes
that the effective method of preserving and strengthening such
unity of purpose and joint responsibility as exist today amongst
the nations is to continue to press for the widest possible
ratification of the Geneva Convention in addition to the strictest
enforcement of the provisions of The Hague Convention.
The Council has steadily adhered to this view and has striven to
give effect to it during the last three years. In doing so it has
accepted the advice offered to it by its opium advisory committee.
At every session held during the last three years the advisory
committee on traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs has

urgently and unanimously pressed upon the attention of the
Council their judgment on this matter. The nature and gravity of
that judgment [are] indicated in the following passage from a
recent report by the committee to the Council: ‘The committee
regards the immediate ratification and the rigid enforcement of
the Geneva Convention of 1925 as the most valuable single step
which can at present be taken to combat the illicit traffic. It is glad
that this view has been unanimously indorsed by the Council and
the Assembly, and it desires to reiterate it. A close examination of
all the material connected with the illicit trade which has come
before it since its last session serves to confirm the correctness of
its views. Time after time, in case after case, the committee has
been forced irresistibly to the conclusion that, until the Geneva
Convention comes into operation, it will be difficult to secure the
effective application of measures which experience has shown to
be essential if the illicit traffic is to be effectively checked.’
(Report to the Council on the work of the tenth session of the
In the light of such a judgment the Council while firmly
convinced that there ought to be the strictest adherence to the
provisions of The Hague Convention cannot share the view of the
American Government that ‘until there can be devised some
substitute for The Hague Convention more satisfactory than the
Geneva Convention the eradication of the abuse of narcotic drugs
will be more likely to be achieved by strict observance of the
provisions of The Hague Convention.’
The Geneva Convention incorporates at least part of the
accumulated experience of several years effort in this field such
as for instance the import certificate system and the extension of
the system of control to crude cocaine, ecgonine, coca leaves and
Indian hemp and the provision of definite machinery for still
further extension to other drugs; it has been accepted by many
states as offering a valuable advance on The Hague Convention
and it has already been definitely ratified or adhered to by twenty-
seven governments. The Council cannot but feel that the

experience gained through its application may determine at no
distant date a still further advance towards that goal which the
United States in common with other nations has in view.
The Council desires in conclusion to return once more to the point
emphasized so strongly by the Secretary of State in his
communication—the fact that the traffic in narcotic drugs can be
controlled only by international cooperation and by the fullest
possible recognition by the powers of their joint responsibility.
The Council highly appreciates the cooperation already given by
the United States in particular by the transmission of annual
reports and by [seizure?] reports, drawn up in accordance with the
forms agreed upon by the advisory committee, by the adoption
and enforcement of the import certificate system as prescribed by
the Geneva Convention, by its interest in the work of the advisory
committee and finally by the acceptance of the invitation of the
League of Nations to include the Philippines within the scope of
the commission of inquiry into the control of opium smoking in
the Far East.
The Council earnestly hopes that even if there be no complete
agreement on all points the United States Government will
continue to extend so far as possible the practical collaboration
which thus happily exists.”85
WILSON
Switzerland, announced that John K. Caldwell, Consul General, assigned to
the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, for special work in
connection with the control of traffic in narcotic drugs since June 13, 1928,
would “attend unofficially” the 12th session of the Advisory Committee on
Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs, at Geneva, beginning Jan.

Participation of the United States in
the
International
Telegraph
Conference at Brussels, September 10–
[320] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Harrison)
Washington, July 31, 1928.
[321] The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic
Representatives in Mexico and Central and South America
[322] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium
(Gibson)
[323] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State

[Document 320]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Harrison)
WASHINGTON, July 31, 1928.
No. 74
SIR: During the International Radio Conference held in Washington from
consider what action should be taken with respect to the report drawn up at
Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, in 1926, by the “Committee for the Study of
Code Language”, provided for by the International Telegraph Conference
held at Paris in 1925.87
At its fourth plenary session the International Radio Conference adopted the
following resolution:
“1. The Washington Conference is not qualified to deal
with the question of code language previously studied
by the Committee of Cortina d’Ampezzo;
“2. In view of the provisions of Article 15 of the
International Telegraph Convention of St. Petersburg88
and the reservation formulated by some telegraph
administrations not represented at Washington, the
Committee
constituted
by
the
Radiotelegraph
Conference can not transform itself into an International
Telegraph Conference to deal with the question of code
language.
“Because the solution to be given to the proposals of the Cortina
Committee is of an urgent character, the recommendation is
expressed that the next International Telegraph Conference, which
is to meet at Brussels in 1930, be advanced in accordance with the

rules of Paragraph 88 of the International Telegraph Regulations
the question of code language shall be treated there.”
As the French Government is charged with the handling of matters relating
to the International Telegraph Union this Government advised the French
Government of the action taken on the subject at the Washington
Conference and the French Government, through the International Bureau
of the Telegraph Union at Berne, requested members of the Union to advise
the French Government and the International Bureau whether they desired
that the Brussels Conference be advanced from 1930 to 1928.
The American Minister at Berne reported on April 23, 1928,91 that he had
been advised by the International Bureau that the necessary ten countries
had requested that the Brussels Conference be held in 1928. The Minister at
Berne further stated, on April 28, 1928,91 that it was believed that the
Conference at Brussels would be convened in September or October next.
The Ambassador of Belgium at this Capital, in a note dated July 18, 1928,91
stated that the Conference would be held at Brussels beginning September
10, 1928, and on behalf of his Government extended an invitation to this
Government to send representatives to the Conference.
As the Conference to be held at Brussels will consider the report of the
Special Committee drawn up at Cortina d’Ampezzo in 1926, dealing with
the question of the use of code language and the related question of the
rates to be charged in connection with the use of code language, American
concerns engaged in export and import business will be seriously affected
by the results of the Conference. This is particularly true since some of the
proposals involve the raising of rates for the handling of telegrams. It was
believed, therefore, that it would be highly desirable for the United States to
participate in the Conference and, accordingly, the invitation issued by the
Belgian Government was accepted.91
The Department recommended to the President that the American
delegation consist of yourself as chairman, Mr. John Goldhammer, vice
president of the Commercial Cable Company, and Mr. Charles Henry

Shedd, Department Manager for Swift and Company, Chicago.91 The
President replied on July 26, 1928,91 and stated that he approved the
appointment of the persons named as the American representatives to the
Brussels Conference.
It is expected that the other representatives will be accompanied by Mr.
William B. Vallance, of this Department, Lieutenant E. M. Webster, United
States Coast Guard, Major William F. Friedman, War Department and Mr.
Harry F. Coulter, Department of Commerce, as technical advisors, Mr.
Fernand L. J. Dumont as translator and possibly four clerical assistants. The
delegation probably will sail from New York on August 25, 1928, and
should arrive in Brussels in sufficient time to confer with you before the
Conference is convened.
You are instructed to proceed to Brussels and you should arrange the
departure from your post so that you may arrive at Brussels not later than
September 8, 1928. You will, of course, be allowed your transportation
expenses and subsistence at the rate of fifteen dollars per day for the time
that you are away from your post in connection with this Conference.
For your information the Department encloses a copy of Documents of the
Committee on the Study of Code Language; a translation of the final report
of that Committee; a copy of a report by Major William F. Friedman
entitled “Report on the history of the use of Codes and Code Language, the
International Telegraph Regulations pertaining thereto, and the bearing of
this history on the Cortina Report”; a copy of the Stenographic Report of
the Hearing on July 25, 1928, regarding the Cortina report and a copy of a
letter dated June 29, 1928, and a questionnaire which was sent to a number
of the large users of the telegraph, cable and radio communication
facilities.92 The report of the Cortina Committee constitutes the agenda for
the Conference.
Specific instructions to govern the American delegation at the Conference
will be prepared and sent to you as soon as possible.

For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
86 For radiotelegraph convention, see Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, p.
91 Not printed.
91 Not printed.
91 Not printed.
91 Not printed.
91 Not printed.
91 Not printed.
92 Enclosures not printed.

[Document 321]
The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic
Representatives in Mexico and Central and South America
Department sending delegation to Brussels for representation in
International Telegraph Conference beginning there September 10.
Proposals of majority of representatives of European Governments
recommend changing maximum length of code word from ten letters to five
letters and reducing charges by only 25 to 40 per cent. This will result in
very considerable increase in costs of international communication for large
code users throughout the world and American delegation is being
instructed to endeavor to maintain status quo as regards method of counting
words and rates. Department understands British and Canadian delegations
will receive similar instructions.
Bring foregoing informally to attention of Government to which you are
accredited. Ascertain whether it will have representatives at the Brussels
Conference and if so, endeavor to have similar instructions issued to them.
Telegraph report.93
CASTLE
93 Reports not printed.

[Document 322]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium
(Gibson)
61. For Harrison. For your information: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay and Venezuela apparently only Latin
American countries which signed International Telegraph Convention
signed at Paris in 1925.
Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay have not yet replied to Department’s circular
telegram.
Honduras, Paraguay and Peru stated they will not be represented at
conference.
Panama states that it is sympathetic with Department’s desires but may not
be represented at conference.
Costa Rica, Guatemala and Haiti have not received invitations. They state
however that if they are represented their delegations will be instructed to
vote to maintain status quo.
Department understands that: Cuba, Dominican Republic, Mexico,
Nicaragua and Salvador although apparently not signatories to Paris
Convention expect to be represented and to support status quo. Cuba and
Mexico will appoint their Ministers at Brussels as delegate and observer,
respectively. Dominican Consul at Brussels will represent his Government.
Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela will vote to maintain
status quo. Bolivia and Venezuela will be represented by their Ministers at
Brussels; Chile will be represented by its Chargé d’Affaires ad interim at

Brussels and its Consul at Antwerp; and Colombia will be represented by
its Chargé d’Affaires ad interim at Brussels.
Please inform Vallance.
CLARK

[Document 323]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS [undated].
7. Eighth and last plenary session Telegraph Conference Saturday ended
with signing of protocol containing amendments to Paris regillations
effective October 1929. New regulations maintain ten-letter code word at
present rate and definitely state conditions to which they must conform.
New conditions will not cause scrapping present codes. Amended
regulations also provide for new category of five-letter code words with no
restrictions as to formation at two-thirds present charge in extra European
regime and three-fourth present charge in European regime. Under latter
category unions of plain-language words in five-letter groups also admitted.
Amended regulations will therefore not increase cost telegraphic
communication to anybody, if anything slight decrease may result from new
class five-letter words. Full report being prepared and work of delegation
will be completed by September 27. Report will be forwarded by next
Embassy pouch.94 Account crowded conditions Embassy unable to arrange
return passage earlier than October 5th and has approved allowance
subsistence to that date.
AM[ERICAN] DEL[EGATION]
94 Published by the Department of State under title of Report of the
American Delegation to the International Telegraph Conference of
Office, 1929).

Proposed disposition of property held
by the Alien Property Custodian95
[324] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 4, 1928.
[325] The Swiss Minister (Peter) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 17, 1928.
[326] The Secretary of State to the Swiss Minister (Peter)
Washington, January 23, 1928.
[327] The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 23, 1928.
[328] The Secretary of State to Senator Reed Smoot

Washington, January 24, 1928.
[329] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)
Washington, January 28, 1928.
[330] The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 13, 1928.
[331] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 19, 1928.
[332] The Hungarian Minister (Széchényi) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 25, 1928.
[333] The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
Washington, May 9, 1928.
[334] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 11, 1928.
[335] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 12, 1928.
[336] The Alien Property Custodian (Sutherland) to the Secretary of
State
Washington, May 23, 1928.
[337] The Secretary of State to the Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi)
Washington, June 1, 1928.
[338] The Department of State to the British Embassy
Washington , June 16, 1928.
[339] The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
Washington, June 22, 1928.
[340] The Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 26, 1928.
[341] The Secretary of State to the Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi)
Washington, August 3, 1928.
[342] The Acting Secretary of State to the First Secretary of Embassy
in France (Wilson)
Washington, August 21, 1928.
[343] The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State
[344] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, October 6, 1928.
[345] The Chargé in Rumania (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

[346] The Alien Property Custodian (Sutherland) to the Secretary of
State
Washington, October 15, 1928.
[347] The British Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , October 30, 1928.

[Document 324]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 4, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: This Legation has obtained information that one of the reasons, if
not the chief one, for the delay experienced in the framing of a bill dealing
with the return of Austrian property was the lack of sufficient particulars as
to the nature and extent of potential claims, which Austrian citizens may
have against the United States Government from seized patents, copyrights
If the legislation pertaining to the return of Austrian property is to be
framed along the lines as envisaged by my Government, suggested to Your
Excellency, and discussed by me with Judge Parker96 and Mr. Mills,97 I do
not see, how the question of potential Austrian claims could in any way
interfere with the passage of a legislative measure authorizing the Alien
Property Custodian to release Austrian property under certain stipulated
conditions—unless the members of the Ways and Means Committee had the
German analogue in mind, overlooking or not being aware of quite a
different construction contemplated in our case.
In the German case a sort of clearing between American claims against
Germany and German claims against America had to be resorted to to
enable provisions for payment of the awards of the Mixed Claims
Commission, the chief prerequisite for the return of property. In the German
case the creation of a special fund for the payment of such awards was
under consideration and this question could only be solved by retaining part
of seized private property, by alloting the unallocated interest and by
crediting to Germany a certain amount in compensation for seized ships,
radios, patents etc. For this reason it was necessary to estimate and settle on
an approximate amount of counter claims in connection with the Bill.

In the Austrian case, however, the American claims against Austria are
entirely divorced from the potential Austrian claims against the United
States. The awards of the Tripartite Claims Commission will be fully paid
by the Austrian Government with Government funds and no request for the
return of property is made prior to a moment when the United States
Treasury in agreement with Judge Parker is in a position to declare that the
Government property already in said Department’s Custody and an
additional cash amount to be deposited by the Austrian Government are
sufficient to cover all American claims.
Austria has always maintained the standpoint that awarded American
claims constitute a liability against the Austrian Government to be settled
with Government funds and that this settlement in no way should interfere
with the liquidation of private claims between the two countries. No matter,
whether and when Austrian citizens will obtain redress or compensation for
seized patents etc., or when the unallocated interest will be returned to the
rightful Austrian owners, the Austrian Government is ready to provide for
the payment of American claims awarded by the Tripartite Claims
Commission.
Of course, the Austrian Legation could not, for the mere reason of
simplifying matters, waive for private citizens of Austria whatever rights
they may have or obtain to claim under similar conditions as provided for in
the German Bill certain indemnities for seized and used patents. In fact such
a waiver would be embarrassing and unacceptable to your Government and
Congress as it would create a case of discriminative legislation.
This Legation must, therefore, reiterate its request to have an appropriate
clause inserted in the Austrian Bill which would reserve to Austrian owners
of patents, copyrights etc. under like or similar conditions the same rights
which Congress is willing to grant to German citizens. May I recall in this
connection that the Mills Bill when under advice during the last session of
Congress actually contained such a provision in favor of Austria although it
otherwise exclusively dealt with German property.
As there is no intention on our part to have whatever claim Austrian citizens
may possess credited against the liability incurred by the awards of the
Tripartite Claims Commission the question of determining these claims

should not interfere with the passage of a Bill for the return of property.
Like in the German case a special arbitration procedure shall determine,
what if any Austrian claims of aforementioned nature exist, and whether
and to what extent they shall be recognized. But as awards against the
Austrian Government will be settled by the same regardless whatever the
outcome of these arbitration proceedings may be, I see no reason why the
potential claims of Austrian citizens should cause a delay in the passage of
an act returning Austrian property.
The same applies to the unallocated interest which accrued from Austrian
property. We expect and hope that these interest[s] will be returned to the
rightful Austrian owners with the seized property, but we do not request that
this amount should be computed in or deducted from the total awards to be
charged by the Tripartite Claims Commission against the Austrian
Government.
Austria, with other words, offers an exchange of securities—Government
property for private property—it is anxious to make with Government funds
such “other suitable provisions” which Congress stipulated as a prerequisite
for the return of seized private property.
Your Excellency would greatly oblige me by bringing the aforesaid to the
attention of Congress.98
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
96 Commissioner, Tripartite Claims Commission.
97 Under Secretary of the Treasury.
of the Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives.

[Document 325]
The Swiss Minister (Peter) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 17, 1928.
SIR: It has been brought to my knowledge that a Bill concerning the return of
alien property seized during the war and at present held by the Alien
Property Custodian has already passed the House of Representatives of the
United States and is now being considered by the Committee of Finance of
the Senate. In this connection, I beg to invite Your Excellency’s attention to
the following:
In pursuance to the enemy trading legislation of the United States, enacted
on October 6, 1917,99 assets in the United States of certain Swiss
individuals and corporations were seized by the Alien Property Custodian. I
understand such measures were justified by the United States on account of
the allegation that such individuals and corporations were doing business
with firms and persons within those countries with which the United States
was at war. During the last years, numerous proceedings were instituted by
the Legation and myself with the Department of State and the Alien
Property Custodian, in order to obtain the release of those assets, inasmuch
as they were owned by individuals and corporations of a neutral State.
The Trading with the Enemy Act was amended by Congress on June 5,
1920,1 to permit such neutral individuals to recover property seized by the
Custodian, but up to the present time no legislation has been enacted
relieving certain neutral corporations, and among them certain Swiss
corporations, from the enemy status imposed by the Trading with the
Enemy Act, and the consequent seizure of their property.
Under the laws of the United States and of Switzerland, the corporate entity
is recognized, and the assets belong to it and not to the individuals who
might own the shares at any given time: Particularly, following the
interpretation of the Trading with the Enemy Act by the Supreme Court of

corporate entity is considered a person and its nationality that of the country
where it is organized and existing, irrespective of the nationality of the
stockholders therein. In that case, which concerned a British corporation,
the Supreme Court held that the seizure of the corporate assets in the United
States by the Alien Property Custodian on the ground that the shares were
owned by Germans was an erroneous construction of the law. Such
corporations are subject to the usual obligations imposed by the State and
are likewise entitled to the equal protection of the laws.
The proposed legislation now pending in the Senate provides in effect, in
paragraph 13, on page 27 thereof, that such neutral corporations, in order to
recover their property still held by the Alien Property Custodian, shall be
obliged, as provided in Section (m) of the proposed Bill, to file a consent
that 20% of their property may be retained by the United States, in other
words, Section 13 of the proposed legislation makes no distinction between
a corporation organized and existing within the countries with which the
United States was formerly at war and certain corporations organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of Switzerland.
If such proposed legislation is finally enacted into law, certain Swiss
corporations and in consequence Swiss shareholders therein, will suffer
substantial losses. The interested parties are entitled by international law to
demand a return of their possessions, and they have the right to expect an
immediate and full restitution, as no claims remain to be made as far as they
are concerned.
I consequently have the honor, by instruction of my Government and with
reference to the treaty of November 25, 1850, between Switzerland and the
United States of America,2 to request Your Excellency to take such steps as
may be appropriate to safeguard the rights of the Swiss corporations and
Swiss nationals, particularly with the view of assuring the complete release
of Swiss properties which are still held by the Alien Property Custodian.
Accept [etc.]
MARC PETER

2 Hunter Miller (ed.), Treaties and Other International Acts of the United
States of America, vol. 5, p. 845.

[Document 326]
The Secretary of State to the Swiss Minister (Peter)
WASHINGTON, January 23, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of January 17,
1928, in which you request, by instruction of your Government, and with
reference to the Treaty of November 25, 1850, between the United States
and Switzerland, the complete release of Swiss properties which are still
subjected to sequestration measures.
In reply it gives me pleasure to inform you that a copy of your note under
acknowledgment has been transmitted to the Chairman of the Committee on
Finance of the Senate,3 to which body there has been referred an Act (H. R.
which contains inter alia provisions for the disposition of property held by
the Alien Property Custodian.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, JR.
3 By letter of Jan. 23, not printed.

[Document 327]
The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 23, 1928.
No. 5
SIR: I beg to refer to previous correspondence concerning compensation for
German merchant vessels seized by the United States during the world war
and belonging to residents of North Slesvig, who later became citizens of
Denmark, lastly your note of April 20, 1926 and the note from this Legation
of April 23, 1926,5 and to state as follows:
As you no doubt are aware there is now before the U. S. Senate a bill on
this subject (H. R. 7201), which was passed by the House on December 20,
1927. The provisions regarding merchant ships are to be found inter alias in
These provisions would however appear to have regard only to German
nationals, as defined in Section 17, and to have for purpose to indemnify
such German Nationals within certain limits and on certain conditions, on
which point it is argued that whatever legal rights for compensation the
original owners may have had, were wiped out by the provisions of the
treaty of Versailles adopted by the treaty of Berlin,6 see Report No. 17 of
December 15, 1927 from the Committee on Ways and Means of the House
page 8.
In these circumstances I beg to suggest that these Danish citizens were not
bound by the treaty of Berlin, and that full and unqualified compensation
should be granted to them, and I venture to ask you to be so good as to
submit this suggestion to the Committee of the Senate. This Committee
appears to be about ready to report the bill, and I would be greatly obliged

to you if my request could be communicated to the Committee as soon as
convenient, in order that an amendment covering the aforesaid Danish
interests might be proposed and passed, if deemed proper.
For your convenience I beg to enclose copies of the bill and report in
question.7
I have [etc.]
C. BRUN
5 Neither printed.
Relations, 1921, vol.  II, p. 29.
7 Enclosures not printed.

[Document 328]
The Secretary of State to Senator Reed Smoot8
WASHINGTON, January 24, 1928.
MY DEAR SENATOR: It has been brought to my attention informally that some of
the members of the Committee on Finance are considering the question
whether the Committee should recommend amendments to the “Settlement
of War Claims Act of 1928” (H. R. 7201) now being discussed before the
Committee for the purpose of providing for the return, under certain
conditions, of the Austrian and Hungarian property sequestrated by the
Alien Property Custodian.
Early last month the Chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means
informed me that his Committee was giving attention to that question, and
requested for the information of the Committee a statement outlining the
considerations involved therein. Under date of December 10, 1927, I wrote
Mr. Green at some length on this subject and transmitted several documents
bearing thereon, and since it appears that your Committee is likely to
interest itself in the same matter, I feel that you should have before you the
same information that I furnished to the Committee on Ways and Means.
Accordingly, I take pleasure in transmitting a copy of my letter to Mr.
Since sending the enclosed letter to Mr. Green I have been informed by the
Austrian Minister that his Government has no objection to the publication
the last paragraph of my letter of December 10, 1927, to the effect that the
communications from the Austrian and Hungarian Legations be treated as
confidential is now applicable only to the memorandum which the

FRANK B. KELLOGG
8 Chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance.

[Document 329]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Claudel)
WASHINGTON, January 28, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to your Excellency’s note of October 3,
1927,12 regarding the claims of certain Alsace-Lorrainese filed with the
Alien Property Custodian to secure certain shares of stock in the Baltimore
and Ohio Railroad held in sequestration, and to state that I am in receipt of
a communication from the Alien Property Custodian dated January 4, 1928,
concerning the matter.12
The Alien Property Custodian informs me that the standing of such
claimants will not be affected by the enactment of the pending legislation
for the return of this sequestrated property, excepting that these claimants
will not be obliged to prove pre-war ownership. It is added that, however,
unless reciprocity is accorded by France to the claims of American citizens,
this property can not be returned under the proposed act.
It is also observed by the Alien Property Custodian that he has no present
means of identification of the individual claimants to be included in such
category nor indication of their citizenship. In these circumstances the
claimants would have to await their turn in the administration of claims in
excess of thirty-eight thousand.
In order to facilitate an early consideration of the claims of Alsace-
Lorrainese, now French citizens, for the release of their property, it is
suggested that the Department be supplied with a list of the names of the
claimants with a notation of the shares of stock claimed and the basic facts
of their present French citizenship.
Accept [etc.]


12 2 \°t Printed

[Document 330]
The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 13, 1928.
No. 14
SIR: Referring to previous correspondence concerning compensation for
German merchant vessels seized by the United States during the world war
and belonging to residents of North Slesvig, who later became citizens of
Denmark, lastly the note from your Department of January 28, 1928,13 I
beg to state as follows:
It appears from the enclosed Report No. 273 from the Committee on
Finance of the United States Senate,13 with regard to the bill H. R. 7201,
that under Section 19 an amendment has now been adopted by the
Committee granting compensation to the owners of the two vessels Carl
Diederichsen and Johanne within certain limits and under certain
conditions. This however does not seem to accord the full and unqualified
compensation to which the Danish owners seem to be entitled and which I
took the liberty to claim by my note to you of January 23, 1928. I also beg
to observe that Danish claims exist not only with regard to the two named
vessels, but also with regard to the S/S Maja, of Flensborg, which was
seized in New York harbor in April 1917. These claims were laid before
behalf of respectively Mr. Harald Smith (Romø) for a share equal to 1/60 or
in the said steamship, see the notes from your Department of August 29,
And of course there is a possibility of further similar Danish claims, which
have not yet come to the notice of this Legation.

For this reason I did not specify the vessels Carl Diederichsen and Johanne
in my note to you of January 23rd, which on the contrary was intended to
cover all such cases.
In these circumstances I beg to suggest that the attention of the Committee
of the Senate should be called to my present note, in order that the
amendment may be so worded as to cover all Danish claims of this order
and grant full and unconditional compensation, if deemed proper.
I have [etc.]
C. BRUN
13 Not printed.
13 Not printed.
14 Neither printed.
14 Neither printed.

[Document 331]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 19, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: Section 10, subsection d, of the “Settlement of War Claims Act of
1928” provides that all money and other property be held to be owned by
the German Government if no claim thereto has been filed with the Alien
Property Custodian prior to the expiration of one year from the date of the
enactment of the aforementioned legislature.
Under the afore referred to provision certain trusts held by the Alien
Property Custodian for owners of Austrian citizenship could become
property of the German Government, if, for some reason or other, they
should be held not properly claimed within the meaning of the law. With
other words, the afore referred to stipulation of the “Settlement of War
Claims Act” is apt to deprive Austrian rightful owners of their property, if
not special care is taken to protect them from such loss.
In order to be able to fully safeguard the interests of Austrian owners of
property seized and held by the Alien Property Custodian, this Legation
would highly appreciate Your Excellency’s intermediary in having this
office enlightened by an authentic statement as to certain points which are
doubtful to me, viz.
1.) If an owner had already previously filed a claim for return of
that portion of his property, which could be released under the
terms of the “Winslow Act”,15 does he now have to file a new
claim to protect himself against the application of the above cited
stipulation of the Settlement of War Claims Act, or will the filing
of the claim in the first instance be considered an act intended to
establish his right of ownership to his whole property? With other

words, has an owner filed a claim to his whole property within the
meaning of the law, when he claimed a portion thereof under the
Winslow Act.
2.) Will the Alien Property Custodian in due course and after
fulfillment of the prerequisites of the law of 1928, ex officio
release the remainder of the property held by him in trust for
owners who already had claimed and obtained part of it under the
Winslow Act, or will such owners have to make a special
application for the release of the remainder of their property?
With other words, will the Alien Property Custodian only act on
filing of an application by the owner?
In the latter case, what are the forms to be observed by the
applicants? Will the Alien Property Custodian furnish this
Legation with the rules and regulations to be followed by
applicants and with the pertaining application blanks and printed
forms?
3.) How will the interest accrued from the time of seizure up to
March 4, 1923 (unallocated interest) be returned to such owners
who already have claimed and obtained return of their property
under the Winslow Act? Will such owners have to file a special
claim for release of above referred to interest, or will the Alien
Property Custodian, ex officio allocate the so-called unallocated
interest to the trusts already released by him under the Winslow
Act?
4.) Some of Austrian owners have property held by the Alien
Property Custodian under different trusts. When they made
application for return of part of their property under the Winslow
Act (up to $10,000), they filed only their claims against as many
of the trusts recorded in their name as seemed sufficient to cover
the maximum sum allowed under said law, i. e. $10,000– Such
owners may be under the impression that they already have
established their right of ownership to all the trusts held in their
name by having claimed part of their property under the Winslow

Act, and they may await further action by the Alien Property
Custodian.
Are they justified in above supposition, or would the other trusts, for the
return of which they failed to make an application be held unclaimed and
thus become property of the German Government?
For instance: A owns $62,000 held by the Alien Property Custodian in four
passage of the Winslow Act he merely filed claim for the return of the first
trust ($10,000) as it would have been useless for him to claim the others.
Has now A within the meaning of the law claimed his right of ownership to
all the four trusts by having under the Winslow Act filed a claim for the
return of one of them (the $10,000 one), or will he lose the other three trusts
to the German Government if he fails to file special claims for each of the
remaining three trusts before March 9, 1929?
The afore cited technical and other reasons may in strength of section 10,
subsection d, of the Settlement of War Claims Act result in losses to rightful
Austrian owners. Besides there may be the one or other case where a claim
was not filed in proper time because the owner died and the heirs were
ignorant of the existence of some property in trust with the Alien Property
Custodian to which they would have a rightful claim.
It would seem to me highly important and I would greatly appreciate if
Your Excellency would ask the Alien Property Custodian to cause a list of
all unclaimed property recorded as Austrian owned to be furnished to this
Legation at the earliest possible convenience. This Legation foresees a great
deal of work requiring a considerable time in locating the rightful owners of
unclaimed property, the more so as the cooperation of the authorities of the
Succession States will in all likelihood have to be resorted to, in order to
establish beyond doubt the present citizenship of the owners concerned.
It is for this reason that I take the liberty to ask for an early compliance with
this request.

Finally I would be thankful for an advice as to the modus of procedure to be
followed by those Austrian owners, who as yet have not filed claims under
the Winslow Act and for whatever other suggestions the Alien Property
Custodian could offer to this Legation for a full protection of the rights of
Austrian claimants.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 332]
The Hungarian Minister (Széchényi) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 25, 1928.
No. 340/R
“Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928” was enacted by the Senate and
House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress
assembled. In section 10 of said Act, bearing the title “Investment of Funds
by Alien Property Custodian”, on pages 16 and 17, subsection (d) contains
the following provision:
“The Alien Property Custodian is authorized and directed (after
the payment of debts under section 9) to transfer to the Secretary
of the Treasury, for deposit in such special deposit account, all
money and the proceeds of all property, including all income,
dividends, interest, annuities, and earnings accumulated in respect
thereof, owned by the German Government or any member of the
former ruling family. All money and other property shall be held
to be owned by the German Government (1) if no claim thereto
has been filed with the Alien Property Custodian prior to the
expiration of one year from the date of the enactment of the
Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928, or (2) if any claim has
been filed before the expiration of such period (whether before or
after the enactment of such Act), then if the ownership thereof
under any such claim is not established by a decision of the Alien
Property Custodian or by a suit in court instituted, under section
9, within one year after the decision of the Alien Property
Custodian, or after the date of the enactment of the Settlement of
War Claims Act of 1928, whichever date is later. The amounts so
transferred under this subsection shall be credited upon the final

payment due the United States from the German Government on
account of the awards of the Mixed Claims Commission.”
While the Act in question is a unilateral act of Congress, and therefore
could not have bearing upon the Trianon Peace Treaty as incorporated in the
Treaty Between the United States and Hungary, proclaimed on December
Agreement entered into between the United States, Austria and Hungary on
nevertheless in order to enable me to deliver a report on this question to my
Government, 3 beg to call Your Excellency’s kind attention to the
following:
According to the opinions of the legal experts of the Tripartite Claims
Commission, and the German counsels, it is clear that section 10 of the
Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928, amending the Trading with the
Enemy Act by adding thereto section 25, follows the intention, in
subsection (d) of the new section 25, to turn over all unclaimed property to
the German special deposit account, (1) if no claim has been filed with the
been filed prior to March 10, 1929, then if title to the property is not
established by decision of the Alien Property Custodian or by a suit in court
instituted under section 9, within one year after the decision of the Alien
Property Custodian, or after the date of the enactment of the Settlement of
War Claims Act, whichever date is later. The legal effect of the above
provision seems to be that a Hungarian national who fails to make claim
with the Alien Property Custodian prior to March 10, 1929, loses his
property once and for all. It should be noted that although the Senate report
makes reference on page 26 to the “undisclosed trusts”, the provisions of
subsection (d) of section 25 of the Trading with the Enemy Act apply
without distinction of any kind to all property of individuals held by the
Alien Property Custodian, whether in the undisclosed enemy trusts or not.
According to the opinion of my legal expert, the German national is under
the same liability; however, there seems to be a certain discrimination in
favor of the German Government as against that of Hungary.

For the time being I have no information whatever with regard to the so-
called “undisclosed enemy trusts”, but, according to a literal interpretation
of said provision, it seems that in cases where a Hungarian national fails to
make claim with the Alien Property Custodian prior to March 10, 1929, his
property—although actually known to have been owned by an identified
Hungarian national—would have to become part of the German special
deposit account, which procedure would appear to be injurious to Hungary.
This situation might have resulted as a consequence of the fact that the
provisions referring to the settlement of war claims against Austria and/or
Hungary, or their respective nationals, were incorporated into said Act only
by an Amendment made before the Finance Committee of the Senate, and
perhaps it was omitted through an oversight to insert the necessary special
Hungarian property. However, in view of the foregoing, I should greatly
appreciate it if Your Excellency would kindly inform me at your early
convenience regarding the correct interpretation of the provisions of section
10, subsection (d).
Accept [etc.]
SZÉCHÉNYI

[Document 333]
The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
WASHINGTON, May 9, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to your note of April 19, 1928, in relation to
the possible effect of the provisions of Subsection d, Section 10, of the
“Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928”, upon Austrian owned property
and to inform you that the Department has just received a letter from the
Alien Property Custodian18 in which he expresses the opinion that the
provisions of Section 25 of the Trading With The Enemy Act as amended
by the legislation in question, has reference to German owned property and
does not relate to Austrian property. He observes that Austrian owned
property may be credited where the citizenship of the persons is not stated
or shown. The specific questions raised by you in your letter of April 19,
are answered by the Alien Property Custodian as follows:
(1) If the claimant had described all of his property in the old
notice of claim no new claim would be required of an Austrian
citizen. However, if the claimant has failed to describe his
property it would be better that he file a new claim or an amended
claim.
(2) Question number one answers question number two, with the
exception of that part relating to forms for filing claims and
instructions relative thereto. Since there is no deduction of 20% to
be made on Austrian property new forms will not be required
where the claimant is a citizen of Austria. We shall be glad to
furnish any new forms you may desire but since there has been no
change in the form for an Austrian claimant I take it that no new
blanks will be desired.
(3) With reference to interest which accrued prior to March 4,
1923, interest will be returned on the claim which has heretofore

been filed.
(4) If an Austrian citizen has property in more than one trust and
has filed claim under the Winslow Act for $10,000, but has failed
to describe all of his property held in the various trusts it will be
necessary for him to file an amended claim describing all of the
property.
The Alien Property Custodian states that his office is not in a position at this
time to furnish a list of Austrian owners of property, but that he will be glad
in due course to cooperate in the matter.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
18 Letter not printed.

[Document 334]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 11, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s note
of May 9th, 1928, transmitting to me a communication received by your
Department concerning certain questions connected with the Settlement of
War Claims Act of 1928.
I take due notice of the Alien Property Custodian’s opinion stating that the
provisions of Section 25 of the Trading with the Enemy Act, as amended by
section 10 d of the Settlement of War Claims Act 1928 has reference to
German owned property and does not relate to Austrian property.
The following statement of the Alien Property Custodian viz: “He observes
that Austrian owned property may be credited where the citizenship of the
persons is not stated or shown” is not perfectly clear to me. As I understand
this means, that Austrian owned property, as far as no claim thereto has
been filed with the Alien Property Custodian prior to the expiration of one
year from the date of the enactment of the Settlement of War Claims Act or
if any claim has been filed and if the ownership thereof has not been
established by the Alien Property Custodian or by suit in court instituted,
this property will be credited to the Austrian special deposit account created
by section 7 of the Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928.
I should be very obliged to Your Excellency if you could inform me, if this
my interpretation is in accordance with the opinion of the Alien Property
Custodian.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 335]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1928.
No. 104/R
EXCELLENCY: Section (7), subsection (b) of the “Settlement of War Claims Act of
1928” makes the release of Austrian property dependent upon two
conditions:
(1) that the amounts deposited in the Austrian special deposit
account are sufficient to make the payments in respect of awards
against Austria and that the Commissioner certifies this fact to the
Secretary of the Treasury.
(2) that the Commissioner fix the rate of exchange at which
interlocutory judgments shall be converted into money of the
United States, and the rate of interest applicable to such
judgments.
The second condition has been fulfilled by the Act of the Commissioner of
April 9th, 1928.
In order to make the release of Austrian property possible I have by order of
my Government the honor to solicit Your Excellency’s kind intermediary to
obtain a statement by the competent authorities, what conditions they would
consider appropriate to issue the certificate provided for by the War Claims
Settlement act.
The Austrian Agent has prepared an opinion on the maximum amounts to
be paid by Austria on judgments and interlocutory judgments of the
Tripartite Claims Commission, of which I beg to enclose a copy.19 His
estimate which seems to me to take into consideration a basis of calculation
that will in a high degree exceed the actual payments, totals $1,257,485.77.

On the other side, the Undersecretary of the Treasury, Mr. Ogden S. Mills,
has informed me, by letter of December 2nd, 1927, that the seized property,
belonging to the Austrian Federal Government and held under Trust No.
$1,389,000.
The Austrian Government are therefore of the opinion that the
aforementioned trusts should seem sufficient to cover the maximum
possible awards against Austria and that the release of Austrian property
could be entered in a short time.
I should be highly obliged to Your Excellency to cause that this question be
taken into earliest possible examination and I avail [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
19 Not printed.

[Document 336]
The Alien Property Custodian (Sutherland) to the Secretary of
State20
WASHINGTON, May 23, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to reply to your letter of May 21,21 in which you
enclosed a copy of a communication from the Minister of Austria.22
The Minister desires to know what will become of property seized as
belonging to Austrian citizens if no claim is filed within a year or if proof is
not submitted as to ownership, as provided in the Settlement of War Claims
Act of 1928, and he asks whether or not it would be credited to the Austrian
Government under Section 7, of the said Act.
You are advised that it is the view of this office that there is no law
authorizing the transfer of said sums. Subsection (g) of Section 2523 is
specific as to what sums should be transferred to this account and it
mentions none other than Austrian property or that of a corporation in
which all of the stock is owned by the Austrian Government.
Respectfully,
HOWARD SUTHERLAND
20 On June 15, the Secretary of State transmitted a copy of this
21 Not printed.

[Document 337]
The Secretary of State to the Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi)
WASHINGTON, June 1, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Minister’s note of April 25, 1928, in
relation to the provisions of Subsection d, Section 10, of the “Settlement of
War Claims Act of 1928”, as possibly affecting the interests of Hungarian
owners of property seized and held by the Alien Property Custodian and to
inform you that the Alien Property Custodian has advised the Department,
in respect to the construction which should be placed upon Subsection d of
Section 25 of the Trading with the Enemy Act, as amended by the
“Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928”, that where the office of Alien
Property Custodian holds property to the credit of a citizen of Hungary and
the records of that office so disclose his citizenship such property would not
be credited to the German Government.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

[Document 338]
The Department of State to the British Embassy
MEMORANDUM
On March 10, 1921, the British Ambassador addressed a communication to
the Secretary of State24 in which he stated, among other things, that the
British Government was desirous of effecting an arrangement under which
the British Public Trustee would be able to secure the registration in his
own name of the stock of American companies vested in him as enemy
property. The note dealt with both bearer and registered stock certificates.
As to the former it was suggested that the “situs of the property” in the
shares of stock followed the situs of the certificates, and as to the latter it
was stated that, although these shares were described and registered, they
were in fact endorsed in blank and transferable in practice by delivery of the
certificates without any transfer on the register of the company, and that the
Public Trustee had been advised that American law appeared to recognize
that the situs of the property in such shares was the situs of the certificates.
The note proceeded to suggest a method by which the Public Trustee might
complete his title in the United States through a decision of the Alien
Property Custodian under Section 9 of the Trading with the Enemy Act to
the effect that the shares in question vested in the Public Trustee. This, it
was suggested, might have the effect of divesting the Alien Property
Custodian of the shares. It was added that the British Government would be
willing to reciprocate on such basis of settlement.
Later, by a memorandum of April 20, 1921,24 the Embassy referred to the
practice of the British Public Trustee in dealing with claims advanced by
American citizens and to the attitude of the American Alien Property
Custodian and the Attorney General with respect to the consideration of
British claims. It was stated that the then existing situation caused
numerous difficulties, and that there were also various other questions
pending between the Embassy and the Alien Property Custodian’s office for
which no satisfactory solution had been found by correspondence and it was

suggested that, under the circumstances, it would be desirable to have direct
conferences between representatives of the Embassy and the Alien Property
Custodian.
The Department of State replied by a communication of May 4, 1921,24 to
the effect that no objection was perceived to such conferences or to
interviews generally between members of the Alien Property Custodian’s
office or of the Department of Justice, and representatives of the Embassy.
The British Ambassador inquired whether it would be agreeable to the
Government of the United States for a representative of the British
Custodian to come to Washington to confer with the Alien Property
Custodian, to which reply was made in the affirmative.
In the early part of October, 1921, conferences were held between the
Honorable P. F. Swain, representative of the British Public Trustee, and the
Alien Property Custodian. A satisfactory understanding appears to have
been reached with respect to the handling of claims of nationals of the
respective Governments on account of enemy property seized by the other,
and also with respect to the conflict of interests in enemy-owned securities.
Mr. Swain requested the aid of the Alien Property Custodian in securing a
transfer on the books of American corporations of certificates held by the
British Public Trustee where no demand of the Alien Property Custodian
had issued. The Alien Property Custodian agreed that all bearer securities in
the hands of the Public Trustee which were the obligations of companies
incorporated in the United States should be the property of the Public
Trustee for England and Wales, and to lend his assistance in effecting a
transfer on the books of the companies. Mr. Swain agreed that, where the
British Public Trustee held certificates of stock and the Alien Property
Custodian had demanded of the companies the right, title and interest in the
shares represented thereby, the Public Trustee should forward such
certificates to the Alien Property Custodian for his use and benefit. The
results of the conferences were later the subject of several exchanges of
notes between the British Embassy and the Department of State. Particular
British Ambassador to the Secretary of State,26 enclosing two memoranda
embodying Mr. Swain’s understanding of the arrangement reached between
him and the Alien Property Custodian and requesting “confirmation of the

Embassy stated:
“Owing to technical considerations, which have been explained to
the Alien Property Custodian, His Majesty’s Government are
anxious that these understandings should be confirmed at the
earliest possible date.”
The understanding was confirmed by a note which the Secretary of State
addressed to the British Ambassador under date of May 5, 1922,28 in which
were set forth comments received from the Alien Property Custodian and
the Department of Justice with respect to the subject. The memoranda
submitted with the British Ambassador’s note of December 16, 1921,
covered two principal subjects, namely, (1) enemy-owned shares in
American companies claimed by the Public Trustee and by the Alien
Property Custodian, and (2) claims by nationals of the respective
Governments for the release of property seized by the other as enemy
property. The memorandum with respect to shares of stock contained three
paragraphs reading as follows:
“1. The Alien Property Custodian on behalf of the
United States Government concedes that all bearer
securities in the hands of the Custodian and being the
obligations of Companies incorporated in the United
States shall be the property of the Custodian for
England and Wales.
“2. The Alien Property Custodian recognizes on behalf
of the United States Government the right of the
Custodian for England and Wales to complete his title
on the registers of the American Companies to any
shares, the certificates of which were deposited in his
jurisdiction and have subsequently become vested in
him, provided that such shares have not already been
claimed by the Alien Property Custodian who, by virtue
of the powers vested in him, has placed himself upon

the register of certain companies in respect of the shares
which he has claimed.
“3. The Alien Property Custodian’s agreement to
Clause 2 is made conditional on the Custodian for
England and Wales surrendering to the Alien Property
Custodian in due course all certificates which he holds
which represent shares claimed by the Alien Property
Custodian as disclosed by his printed list.”
As to this memorandum the Alien Property Custodian stated:
“The memorandum submitted with your letter of January 17,
1922,29 embodies most of the points discussed by Mr. Swain and
myself. Referring to the memorandum of Mr. Swain, I beg to
advise that in connection with the enemy owned shares in
American Companies,
(1) This paragraph is too broad and should be worded as follows:
‘The Alien Property Custodian concedes that all bearer
securities in the hands of the British Public Trustee and
being the obligations of Companies incorporated in the
United States, shall be the property of the British Public
Trustee for England and Wales, where that official for
England and Wales holds the actual certificates.’
The Alien Property Custodian did not take over any interest in the
bearer securities unless the certificates themselves could be
secured. Therefore, where the British Public Trustee holds the
certificates for such securities, his claim thereto does not conflict
with any rights secured by the Alien Property Custodian, nor is
there any objection whatever to the British Public Trustee’s
ownership in such certificates.
(2) It was recognized by the British Public Trustee that title in the
Alien Property Custodian was vested by virtue of his demand
where such demand was registered on the books of the companies

even though the British Public Trustee might have possession of
the certificates themselves. This, of course, does not relate to
bearer certificates but only to such securities as were registered in
enemy names or in which enemies had a beneficial interest
determined by the Alien Property Custodian.
(3) As the ownership of the Alien Property Custodian in the
certificates mentioned under (2) was recognized by the British
Public Trustee, the Birtish Public Trustee then agreed that it was
proper for him to surrender to the Alien Property Custodian such
certificates as he held representing securities demanded by the
Alien Property Custodian.”
This statement was incorporated in the above-mentioned note of May 5,
1922, addressed by the Secretary of State to the British Ambassador.
It will be seen from the foregoing that conflicting interests resulting from
the seizures of stock certificates in England and the registering by the Alien
Property Custodian of demands for the beneficial interest in the same stock
on the books of the companies in the United States were settled. The British
Public Trustee recognized, with respect to other than bearer certificates, that
title to the stock vested in the Alien Property Custodian by virtue of his
demands, where such demands had been registered on the books of the
companies, even though the Public Trustee might have possession of the
certificates themselves, and agreed that such certificates should be
surrendered by the Public Trustee to the Alien Property Custodian.
By a letter dated June 21, 1922, from the Public Trustee to the Alien
Property Custodian,30 the former advised that he was taking steps to deliver
the certificates held by him which represented shares claimed by the
Custodian and inquired as to the manner in which the Custodian would like
delivery to be made. Later, by a letter dated August 21, 1922, the Public
Trustee advised the Alien Property Custodian30 that he had issued
directions that shares of stock in American companies, the certificates of
which were deposited in England, were to be dealt with in accordance with
the Custodian’s wishes and that the certificates were to be surrendered in
due course.

Considerable correspondence later passed between the Public Trustee and
the Alien Property Custodian, the details of which are not essential to an
understanding of the present situation. It would seem to be sufficient to say
that there was entire agreement between the Public Trustee and the Alien
Property Custodian with respect to the securities here in question, as is
shown by the fact that large quantities of certificates falling within the
category mentioned were subsequently turned over by the British Public
Trustee and his successor, the Comptroller of the Clearing House (Enemy
Debts) London, on the basis of a list furnished by the Alien Property
Custodian of the securities with respect to which demands had been
registered by him on the books of the American companies.
On his part the Alien Property Custodian assisted the Public Trustee in
perfecting his claim to stock with respect to which no demand had been
made by the Alien Property Custodian on the books of the companies. He
also turned over to the Public Trustee certificates issued by a British
corporation where demand for the stock had been made by the Public
Trustee on the company.
The Public Trustee has now filed three Bills of Complaint (February 24,
Columbia against Howard Sutherland, Alien Property Custodian, et al., to
recover securities turned over by him pursuant to the above-mentioned
arrangement. The court actions are understood to be based on the theory
that the Public Trustee was under a misapprehension as to his rights under
the law with respect to these securities. It apparently is now his intention to
contest the principle formerly accepted by him, namely, that by demanding
the beneficial interests on the books of the companies, the Alien Property
Custodian acquired all interest in the shares as against the Public Trustee
who held the certificates. The British Public Trustee apparently regards as
favorable to his contention that he is entitled to have the securities returned
to him the decision of the Supreme Court in 1925 in the case of the
Disconto-Gesellschaft v. U. S. Steel Go. (267 U. S. 22), which had to do
with certificates of shares in the U. S. Steel Corporation, endorsed in blank
and owned and held by German corporations, which were seized in London
during the war by the British Public Trustee. While the court held in that
case that, under the laws of New Jersey, under which the corporation was

organized, as well as the law of England, an endorsement in blank
authorizes anyone who is the lawful owner of the paper to write in a name
and thereby entitle the person so named to demand registration as owner in
his turn on the corporation’s books, and that the question as to who is the
owner of the paper depends upon the law of the place where the paper is,
the court also made the following additional significant statement:
“If the United States had taken steps to assert its paramount
power, as in Miller v. Kaliwerke Asehersleben Aktien-
Gesellsehaft, 283 Fed. 746, a different question would arise that
we have no occasion to deal with. The United States has taken no
such steps. It therefore stands in its usual attitude of indifference
when title to the certificate is lawfully obtained. There is no
conflict in matter of fact or matter of law between the United
States and England and therefore Baker v. Baker, Eccles & Co.,
242 U. S. 394, does not apply.”
It is important to observe, moreover, that following the rendition of this
decision the matter was the subject of fresh discussions between the
Comptroller of the Clearing House (Enemy Debts), who had succeeded to
the duties of the Public Trustee, and the Alien Property Custodian, and it
was agreed that the decision of the Supreme Court did not in any way alter
the situation. The Comptroller, by a communication of February 10, 1925,
addressed to the Alien Property Custodian,32 referring to the understanding
arrived at between the Public Trustee and the Alien Property Custodian,
stated:
“In the case of registered securities, where, under the United
States Trading with the Enemy Legislation, you had already
seized on the register of an American Corporation ex-enemy
holdings therein the certificates of which were in the possession
of the Public Trustee, it was understood that such certificates
should be surrendered to you, and on the other hand, where no
such seizure had taken place, no objection would be raised by you
to their sale by the Public Trustee under the charge imposed upon
enemy property by virtue of the permissive provisions of the
various Treaties of Peace.”

The Comptroller added that, as administrator of Austrian, Hungarian and
Bulgarian property, he had discharged duties analogous to those theretofore
performed by the Public Trustee in relation to German property, and that he
considered himself “honourably bound to give effect to the above
arrangement even in cases where the certificates were never in the
possession of the Public Trustee but came direct to me as Administrator
from other sources”, and requested the Alien Property Custodian to furnish
him with an authoritative list revised to date of enemy-owned securities
seized by the Alien Property Custodian in the circumstances stated above.
He further stated;
“In view of the decision of the U. S. Supreme Court in the recent
Appeal by the Disconto Gesellschaft and the Bank fuer Handel
und Industrie, the rights of holders of endorsed certificates have
recently been authoritatively determined, and it may be that in
view thereof, you will not desire the delivery of these certificates
even if they are in fact amongst those in respect of which you had
registered demands with these Corporations, but that is a matter
for your consideration. So far as I am concerned, I am prepared to
give effect to the understanding between you and the Public
Trustee referred to above, irrespective of whether but for such an
understanding, you would have been entitled to such delivery.”
In replying to this communication the Alien Property Custodian, by letter of
March 14, 1925,32 observed with respect to the decision of the Supreme
Court that:
“This case did not deal with any shares in which the American
custodian had demanded any interest, and consequently there is
no necessity for modifying in any manner the arrangement which
has existed between this office and the British Public Trustee.
The recent Supreme Court case concerned only shares in
American corporations held abroad by other than the rightful
owner, in which shares the American custodian claimed no
interest.

We trust that the arrangements heretofore existing between your
predecessor in office and the American Custodian may be
continued, and we assure you of our willingness to cooperate in
any way that will advance our mutual interests.”
This latter communication was acknowledged by the Comptroller of the
Clearing House by letter dated April 21, 1925,33 in which with respect to
the court decision in question he stated:
“I note, and[,] if I may respectfully say so, concur in, the view
you express that the recent decision of your Supreme Court does
not apply to cases where you, as representing your Government,
had intervened, to claim the interest over the ex-enemy holdings
in American Corporations even though the certificates themselves
were held outside the United States. In such cases, purely as an
expression of my personal opinion, I am disposed to agree that,
by virtue of the right of eminent domain, a Government has
supreme power over its Corporations as against all comers. I am
therefore prepared to subscribe to the arrangement come to by
you with Mr. Simpkin, the British Public Trustee.”
It is worthy of mention that this construction of the law and of the decision
of the Supreme Court is advanced and relied upon in an action recently
instituted in Canada by the Canadian Alien Property Custodian against the
American Alien Property Custodian and others, in which the situation
presented in the actions filed by the Public Trustee is reversed, i. e., the
Canadian Custodian claims title by virtue of vesting orders to securities of
Canadian corporations as against the American Custodian who had seized
the stock certificates actually in this country. The contentions of the
Canadian Custodian in the Canadian action are diametrically opposed to
those of the Public Trustee in the actions filed in the District of Columbia. It
is understood that Coudert Brothers of New York represent both the
Canadian Custodian and the British Public Trustee.
Following the despatch of his letter of April 21, 1925, the Comptroller of
the Clearing House delivered certificates to the Alien Property Custodian
who surrendered them to the companies and obtained from the latter new
certificates registered in his name.

The British Public Trustee is a corporation sole. It is at the same time an
arm of the British Government to the same extent and in the same manner
that the Alien Property Custodian is a governmental agency. The
arrangement, therefore, between the Public Trustee (and later the
Comptroller of the Clearing House) on the one hand, and the Alien Property
Custodian, on the other hand, was an arrangement between official agencies
of the two Governments and had the sanction of the two Governments, as is
shown by the fact that the principal correspondence was conducted between
the Department of State and the British Embassy.
In view of these facts and the further fact that the arrangement was carried
out in good faith on both sides, it would seem that it should now be
observed. The court action is in effect a suit by the British Government
against the Government of the United States.
The Public Trustee states as a reason for the suit that at the time he entered
into the arrangement with the Alien Property Custodian he had been misled
by a mistaken interpretation by the Custodian of American law, and that
relying upon such interpretation he delivered the securities to the Alien
Property Custodian. The authorities of the United States do not admit that
the arrangement was effected as a result of any alleged mistaken
interpretation of the law, or that a mere mistake, if there was one, on the
part of the Public Trustee as to his rights under the law is sufficient, in the
absence of some element of fraud, to entitle him to repudiate an
arrangement which was reciprocal in character and which has been fully
executed.
Generally speaking, the Government of the United States favors appeal to
the courts for the settlement of justiciable questions, but it feels that the
facts in this case hardly warrant the action which has been taken. There is,
apparently, no allegation that the Alien Property Custodian took advantage
of the Public Trustee. No fiduciary relationship existed. They were
endeavoring to settle conflicting interests according to legal principles and
on an equal footing, and neither should now be heard to complain that he
failed to inform himself of his rights under the law.
It is suggested that the British Government may desire to consider whether,
under the circumstances, the Public Trustee should be instructed to

discontinue the court actions. If the actions are prosecuted, the Government
of the United States will, of course, be under the necessity of showing in
defense that the action of the Public Trustee is in repudiation of an
arrangement entered into in good faith and scrupulously observed by the
Alien Property Custodian. This might conceivably prove embarrassing to
both Governments.
WASHINGTON , June 16, 1928.
24 Not printed.
24 Not printed.
24 Not printed.
26 Not printed.
27 None printed.
28 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
30 Not found in Department files.
30 Not found in Department files.
32 Not printed.
32 Not printed.
33 Not printed.

[Document 339]
The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
WASHINGTON, June 22, 1928.
SIR: The Department refers to your note of May 12, 1928, in relation to your
desire to obtain a statement from the proper authorities regarding the
fulfillment of conditions necessary to the certification by the Commissioner,
Tripartite Claims Commission, of the amounts deposited in the Austrian
Special Deposit Account as a precedent to the payment of awards made by
the Commission in respect of claims filed with the Commission, and is
pleased to furnish you with the following statement, dated June 5, 1928, of
the Commissioner, the Honorable Edwin B. Parker, in reply to a letter
addressed to him by the American Agent, Tripartite Claims Commission:
“Replying to your letter of this date and returning herewith the
note dated May 12, 1928, addressed by the Austrian Minister at
Washington to the Honorable Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of
State, with copy of the memorandum of the Austrian Agent
before this Commission dated May 10, 1928, which accompanied
same, I beg to advise:
“(1) Practically all of the cases against Austria
submitted to the Commissioner have been decided by
him.
“(2) Memorials against Austria have been filed in 119
cases not yet submitted to the Commissioner
(throughout this letter treats each separate part of a
docket number as a case).
“(3) Claims against Austria have been filed in 104 cases
in which no memorial or agreed statement of facts has
yet been filed.

“(4) As the Austrian Minister points out, the return to
Austrian nationals of property in the hands of the Alien
Property Custodian of the United States is conditioned
upon the Commissioner first certifying to the Secretary
of the Treasury that the amount deposited in the
Treasury of the United States in the Austrian Special
Deposit Account is sufficient to pay the judgments of
this Commission and also its interlocutory judgments
converted at the rate of exchange with interest
prescribed by the act of the Commissioner of April 9,
1928.
“(5) It is manifestly impossible for the Commissioner to
make the certificate mentioned in the foregoing
paragraph numbered 4 without accurate knowledge of
the maximum of the judgments or interlocutory
judgments which can be rendered against Austria in the
claims
mentioned
in
the
foregoing
paragraphs
numbered 2 and 3.
“(6) The Austrian Agent has stated to me this afternoon
that he is convinced that all save a small percentage of
the cases mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs
numbered 2 and 3 can be submitted to the
Commissioner on either (a) an agreed statement of facts
by the two Agents or (b) a statement of facts by the
American Agent. If this is correct, then it is hoped that
such submissions can be made prior to or shortly after
July 1st next, and that memorials will be promptly filed
in the few remaining cases.
“(7) With a view to facilitating this work on the part of
the
respective
Agents
and
their
staffs,
the
Commissioner is having prepared a list of all docketed
cases not yet submitted and will call this docket at a
meeting of the Commission to be held at 10 o’clock
a.m. on next Friday, June 8, at which time the

respective Agents and their counsel should be prepared
to give the status of each case and when and in what
form it will be ready for submission to the Commission.
“The Commissioner is doing everything within his power to
complete the work of the Commission at the earliest possible
moment. He is anxious to facilitate and hasten the payment both
of the amounts claimed by Austrian nationals held by the Alien
Property Custodian and the amounts to be paid to the American
nationals in pursuance of the provisions of the Settlement of War
Claims Act of 1928. To that end the Commissioner bespeaks the
wholehearted cooperation of both Governments and their
respective Agents.”
The Commissioner adds:
“The foregoing statement does not include cases pending before
this Commission against Hungary only. A separate docket of such
cases will be prepared and called at the meeting mentioned in
paragraph 7 hereof, to be held Friday morning next.”
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS

[Document 340]
The Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 26, 1928.
No. 492/R
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the note of the Secretary of State of June 1,
1928, to the effect that the Alien Property Custodian has advised the
Department of State in respect to the construction which should be placed
upon Subsection d of Section 25 of the “Trading with the Enemy Act”, as
amended by the “Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928,” that where the
office of the Alien Property Custodian holds property to the credit of a
citizen of Hungary and the records of that office so disclose his citizenship,
such property would not be credited to the German Government.
I beg to assure your Excellency that my Government will greatly appreciate
the assurance given in your above communication. The construction placed
upon Subsection d of Section 25 by the Alien Property Custodian, however,
opens two questions of great interest to my Government, namely, what time
limit, if any, is fixed by the Act in question within which claims for return
of property by Hungarian nationals must be filed, and what disposition does
the Act require shall be made of unclaimed property of persons admittedly
Hungarian nationals? I should be happy if you would ascertain the views of
the Alien Property Custodian on these two questions.
In connection therewith may I ask your Excellency to be good enough to
ascertain from the Alien Property Custodian:
the total amount of Hungarian property now held by the Alien
Property Custodian;
the trust numbers and the respective amounts entered on same;

the amount of the so-called unallocated interest which has been or
will be allocated to the total of Hungarian trusts.
Accept [etc.]
JOHN PELÉNYI

[Document 341]
The Secretary of State to the Hungarian Chargé (Pelényi)
WASHINGTON, August 3, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to your note of June 26, 1928, in relation to
your desire to obtain further information in regard to the construction
placed by the Alien Property Custodian upon Subsection (d) of Section 25
of the “Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928” and with regard to certain
other matters and to inform you that the Alien Property Custodian has
advised the Department that property held by his office to the credit of
Hungarian citizens will not be credited to the German Government and that
there is no time limit in which to file a claim for a Hungarian citizen.
With reference to the other questions raised, the Alien Property Custodian
informs the Department that he will be glad to furnish to the Hungarian
Government a list of persons for whom his office holds assets and the
amounts thereof when the release of Hungarian property is begun, but at the
present time his office does not have a sufficient force to give the matter
appropriate attention.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, JR.

[Document 342]
The Acting Secretary of State to the First Secretary of Embassy in
France (Wilson)34
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1928.
DEAR MR. WILSON: I enclose a copy of a letter and memorandum dated August
18, 1928, from the Office of the War Claims Arbiter under Settlement of
War Claims Act of 1928,35 requesting replies to nine queries calling for
information which, would be helpful to the Arbiter in determining the value
of seized German shipping. The Arbiter is holding the first public hearing in
this matter on September 17 and his office requests that replies to the
queries be in its hands, if possible, by September 15.
You are requested to transmit to the Department such information
responsive to the Arbiter’s queries as may be possible within the time
limitation indicated.
W. R. CASTLE, JR.
34 Edwin C. Wilson was also Acting American Observer on the Reparation
Commission at Paris.
35 Not printed.

[Document 343]
The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, September 7, 1928.
[Received September 15.]
Reparation
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s letter
(EA) dated August 21, 1928, enclosing a copy of a letter and memorandum
from the office of the War Claims Arbiter under the Settlement of War
Claims Act of 1928, requesting replies to nine queries concerning the
valuation of German shipping by the Reparation Commission.
After search through the Commission’s records and consultation with the
competent officials I beg to transmit as hereinafter replies to the queries of
the War Claims Arbiter.
was given Germany on a lump sum basis without placing a value upon each
separate ship. The lump sum valuation was adopted by the Reparation
Commission on the basis of a memorandum submitted by Mr. Boyden
(Annex 1079).36 Debits to the Allied Powers were passed, in the case of
Great Britain, on the basis of the actual price realized by the sales of the
vessels; in the case of other Allied Powers, on the basis of prices realized by
the sale of similar ships on the British market.
As regards post-May 1, 1921, deliveries, both credit to Germany and debits
to the Allied Powers were given on the basis of the actual sales price of the
vessels.
Detailed accounts showing the calculation of the debits to the Allied Powers
were circulated in the form of statements Nos. 1–19, and were transmitted

depreciation charges, costs of repairs, etc.
II. Queries 5–9 inclusive. No ships were completed and delivered by
Germany under paragraph 5 of Annex III of the Treaty.38 The two ships
laid down in Germany but construction was subsequently suspended
(presumably following the Ruhr occupation). After the Dawes Plan entered
into force new contracts were made for the completion of the ships in
question and for payments out of the Dawes Annuities. The value of the
two orders amounted to the same sums as those mentioned in Annex 1508 a
thousand gold marks. It is understood that these ships have been completed
and delivered and that payment therefore has been made from the
Annuities.
As to the two ships ordered for Italian account under Annexes 1703 a–d,36
it appears that they were never built. Their construction was either not
begun at all or was suspended at an early stage because of the Ruhr
occupation (a search of the Commission’s records does not reveal definite
information as to whether construction of these ships was ever actually
begun but it is certain that they were never completed and delivered).
The records of the Commission indicate that the only orders passed for
construction of ships under paragraph 5 of Annex III of the Treaty were
those referred to above.
I have [etc.]
For the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim:
EDWIN C. WILSON
36 Not printed.
37 None printed.
vol. III, pp. 3329, 3430.

39 Not printed.
36 Not printed.

[Document 344]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 6, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: Sect. 7 of the “Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928” provides for
the creation of an Austrian special deposit account and authorizes the Alien
Property Custodian to transfer into said account all property of the Austrian
Government including a trust held by him in the name of the K. K.
Österreichische Tabak Regie (Austrian Tobacco Monopoly).
The said Act furthermore provides for the release of Austrian property
under the provision that the Commissioner of the Tripartite Claims
Commission certifies to the Secretary of the Treasury, that the amounts
deposited in the said Austrian special account are sufficient to make the
payments authorized by subsection (b) of Section 5 in respect of awards
against Austria.
Whereas a number of awards were passed by the Commissioner and are
awaiting payment out of funds in the Austrian special deposit account; and
whereas the work of the Tripartite Claims Commission is nearing that point
of progress where the Commissioner will be in a position to determine the
maximum total of American claims against Austria and form an opinion
whether the same seems to be sufficiently covered by whatever amount is
deposited in said Austrian account, I have the honor to solicit on behalf of
my Government Your Excellency’s kind intermediary with a view of having
at the earliest possible convenience transferred to the Austrian special
deposit account all property of the Austrian Government seized by the
Alien Property Custodian in accordance with the Trading with the Enemy
Act, including the trust held in the name of K. K. Österreichische Tabak
Regie (Austrian Tobacco Monopoly).

An early compliance with this request will be highly appreciated by my
Government.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 345]
The Chargé in Rumania (Patterson) to the Secretary of State
BUCHAREST, October 6, 1928.
[Received October 29.]
No. 643
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and translation of a note,
Finance40 asking that steps be taken to hasten the release of the assets of the
Austro-Hungarian Bank seized by the Alien Property Custodian in order
that the portion of these assets assigned to Rumania might be available to it
as soon as possible.
It appears that the property of the Austro-Hungarian Bank in the United
States was taken over by the Alien Property Custodian during the war, and
that under the treaty of peace between the United States and Austria41 no
disposition can be made thereof until the Austro-Hungarian Government or
its successors shall have made suitable provision for the satisfaction of all
claims against these governments by citizens of the United States. A
commission was appointed in Washington to determine the amount of the
guarantees to be given by Austria and Hungary as a condition for the
release of the property seized, but this commission, it appears, has not as
yet rendered a decision and the property cannot therefore be disposed of.
The Rumanian Government claims $80,000 as its share of the proceeds of
the bank’s liquidation in the United States and is very anxious to realize on
this amount. The Ministry of Finance has therefore asked the Legation to
bring this matter to the attention of the Department in the hope that the
decision of the special commission may be hastened and the funds released.
I have [etc.]

Roserr R P ATTERSON
#2 Not printed.

[Document 346]
The Alien Property Custodian (Sutherland) to the Secretary of
State
WASHINGTON, October 15, 1928.
SIR: Replying to your communication of October 13th,42 with which you
enclosed a copy of the communication from His Excellency, the Austrian
Minister,43 which has reference to the transferring of funds belonging to the
Austrian Government, including the K. K. Oesterreichische Tabak Regie
(Austrian Tobacco Monopoly).
You are advised that I have ordered the necessary procedure to be taken to
comply with this request.
Very truly yours,
HOWARD SUTHERLAND
42 Not printed.

[Document 347]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The memorandum communicated to His Majesty’s Embassy by the State
Department of the United States on the 16th June last respecting the test
suits instituted in the United States Courts with a view to determining the
proper disposal of certain ex-enemy securities now held by the Alien
Property Custodian was duly submitted to His Majesty’s Government, who
have now furnished their observations thereon.
That document appears to disclose a mistaken conception of the character
of the negotiations which took place between Mr. P. F. Swain, of the Public
Trustee’s Department, the Alien Property Custodian and the Department of
Justice in October 1921. It is suggested in the memorandum that these
negotiations resulted in something in the nature of an agreement between
the two governments which involved mutual concessions, and it is further
suggested that, in bringing the present suit against the Alien Property
Custodian, the Public Trustee is endeavouring to repudiate an arrangement
entered into in good faith and scrupulously observed by the Alien Property
Custodian. His Majesty’s Government regret that they are unable to concur
in the construction placed by the Government of the United States upon the
discussions between Mr. Swain and the Alien Property Custodian and they
must repudiate the suggestion that there has been any breach of faith on the
part of the Public Trustee. The issue, indeed, does not appear to be one
involving legal or theoretical interpretation but appears rather to have been
defined by a clear and unambiguous declaration made by the Secretary of
State of the United States at the time when the negotiations took place. In
his note of May 5th, 1922 to His Majesty’s Embassy Mr. Secretary Hughes
was at pains to leave it beyond doubt that the negotiations were not to be
considered as in any respect an endeavour to reach an agreement between
the two Governments, but were to be regarded solely as “efforts … to
explain the law”. The Secretary of State proceeded:—

“You will of course understand that the Department in
transmitting this information does not undertake to enter into any
agreement on behalf of the Government of the United States
respecting the interpretation or the execution of the law of this
country, relating to sequestered property, the administration of
which rests with the Attorney General and the Alien Property
Custodian. However, in accordance with your request, I take
pleasure in setting forth the understanding of officials of the
Department of Justice and the Alien Property Custodian with
regard to the efforts made by them and by the representative of
the British Public Trustee to explain the law of their respective
Governments with regard to the return of sequestered property.
“The American officials concerned point out that they did not
undertake to enter into any agreement at the conference with Mr.
Swain, but that the purpose of the conference was merely to
clarify the provisions of the law and regulations of Great Britain
and the United States respectively, with regard to enemy property
and applications for its return”.
As a result of this communication His Majesty’s Embassy at Washington
telegraphed to the Foreign Office on May 10th, 1922 as follows:—
“I have now received State Department’s reply.… It repudiates
idea that Mr. Swain’s conference can be said to have resulted in
an ‘agreement’ and contends that their object was merely to
clarify the provisions of existing laws and regulations on both
sides”.
This express disclaimer of any intention to enter into an agreement was
reiterated in a letter from the Alien Property Custodian to Mr. Hughes dated
28th June, 1922,44 in which he said:—
“This (memorandum) was not an agreement between this office
and the British Government, but was merely a conference to
arrive at a thorough understanding as to procedure.

“As I heretofore stated the conference was not for the purpose of
entering into an agreement but merely for the purpose of
clarifying the provisions of the Law of the various Governments
with regard to enemy property. The memoranda which were
drawn up are merely statements of the explanations rendered in
connexion therewith and the procedure adopted by the two
Offices. An official approval, if you so desire, may be given to
the British Embassy, but such approval need not be in the form of
an agreement, but merely a statement that the understanding of
this Office and of the British Public Trustee as to the
conversations had is correct”.
Having regard to the above declarations on the part of the United States
Government themselves and of their officials, His Majesty’s Government,
as stated above, cannot agree that the present claim by the Public Trustee
constitutes in any way whatsoever a repudiation of an agreement
honourably entered into or a breach of good faith as between the two
Governments or their representatives. On the contrary, the suit is merely an
attempt to obtain from the United States Courts, having jurisdiction in the
matter, a definite interpretation of the legal position having regard to
pronouncements of the law which occurred subsequently to the above-
mentioned negotiations, and which have placed a quite different legal
interpretation upon the facts under consideration.
It may be added that all the allegations contained in the memorandum under
reply as to the existence of an agreement have been raised as a legal issue in
the pending suits. There is no reason to apprehend that the eminent judges
of the United States Courts, before whom the case will come, will not find a
satisfactory solution to this issue, as well as the other issues raised by the
respective parties.
While it is not necessary in the circumstances to enter into a detailed
discussion of the various subsidiary questions raised in the memorandum,
attention may be usefully drawn to the following points:—
(1) Not only do the United States Government appear to be under a
misapprehension in assuming the existence of an agreement, but they are
also apparently labouring under some misapprehension when the suggestion

is made in their memorandum that any concessions or considerations of
value were furnished by the Alien Property Custodian. It is sufficient again
to cite a declaration by the Alien Property Custodian on this point. In a
letter to Senator Borah on 27th July, 1926, the then Alien Property
Custodian wrote:—
“Colonel Miller (the former Alien Property Custodian) did not
waive any rights of the United States Government by his
agreement not to issue demands for those shares of stock, the
actual certificates of which were held by the British Public
Trustee, and for which no demand had been issued by this Office.
At the time he made this agreement this Office had no right or
authority to issue demands for any property not already the
subject matter of a demand. Had he issued demands at this time
he would have acquired nothing. His act would have been nullity.
He simply agreed to do that which under the law he was bound to
do.
“He waived no right he was not compelled to waive by law”.
The Alien Property Custodian is evidently referring to the fact that his right
to make further seizures of enemy property terminated on July 2nd, 1921.
In these circumstances, it is clear that any assistance which the Alien
Property Custodian may thereafter have rendered to the Public Trustee by
informing American Corporations that he (the Alien Property Custodian)
made no claim to various securities then in the hands of the Public Trustee
(which the Public Trustee desired to have transferred on the books of the
Corporations) was a matter purely of voluntary courtesy and was not
required by the actual terms of the correspondence.
In point of fact the various Corporations, whether so requested or not,
refused not unnaturally to enter the Public Trustee upon their registers
unless and until he had established in the Supreme Court of the United
States his legal right to be registered.

(2) It is stated in the State Department’s memorandum that the Alien
Property Custodian handed over to the Public Trustee certificates issued by
a British Corporation where demand for the stock had been made by the
Public Trustee on the Company. The Administrator of German Property has
been unable to trace the delivery by the Alien Property Custodian to the
Public Trustee of the certificates relating to any stock or shares in British
Corporations which had been seized by both Custodians. In this connexion,
it may be pointed out that the certificates of registered stock or shares
issued by British Corporations differ from those issued by American
Corporations in that they contain no endorsement of a transfer, and thus,
unlike those of American Corporations, confer no title upon and are of no
value to the person into whose possession they may come.
Moreover, even if there were any shares in British Corporations claimed by
the Alien Property Custodian as well as by the Public Trustee, the seizure
by the British Custodian would, owing to the fact of the earlier entry of
Great Britain into the war, have been prior to the claim of the Alien
Property Custodian. The legal right of the British Government to priority
with respect to such securities was therefore quite clear and this principle
has been expressly recognised in the present claim by the Public Trustee,
who has refrained from making any claim to American securities which had
been seized by the Alien Property Custodian prior to the seizure of the
certificates by the Public Trustee. The delivery by the Alien Property
Custodian of securities to which he had no title, even if effected, could,
therefore, have constituted no consideration for the delivery by the British
Public Trustee of securities to which he had a legal title and which he was
therefore under no obligation to surrender.
(3) Reference is made in the memorandum of the State Department to the
suit now pending in Canada between the Alien Property Custodian of the
United States and the Canadian Custodian, in which the situation presented
in the action brought by the Public Trustee is, it is alleged, reversed, the
Canadian Custodian claiming title by virtue of vesting orders to securities
of Canadian corporations as against the American Alien Property
Custodian, who has seized the certificates situated in the United States. The
memorandum claims that the contentions of the Canadian Custodian are
diametrically opposed to those of the Public Trustee. Such a claim appears

to overlook the fact that this argument is equally applicable to the Alien
Property Custodian, as the contentions of the Alien Property Custodian, vis-
a-vis the Public Trustee, are diametrically opposed to his contentions in the
case which he has instituted in the Canadian Courts. This fact only throws
into stronger relief the desirability of securing a definitive legal decision on
these difficult and highly abstruse questions of jurisprudence. It may be
remarked here, however, that there is one not unimportant difference
between the position in the Canadian case and that in the case brought by
the Public Trustee. In the memorandum of the State Department it is stated
that Mr. Swain agreed that, where the Public Trustee held certificates of
stock and the Alien Property Custodian had demanded of the companies the
right, title and interest in the shares represented thereby, the Public Trustee
should forward such certificates to the Alien Property Custodian “for his
use and benefit.” So long as the Government of the United States were
holding all German property as security for the claims of United States
nationals against Germany, His Majesty’s Government might have felt
impelled to permit the situation to stand, however mistakenly created and
however unevenly it may have operated against British interests. The
United States Government have, however, been directed by Congress to
return the proceeds in question to German nationals, and His Majesty’s
Government, therefore, now find themselves in the position of having,
under a mistake as to their title, delivered the possession of the securities
for the ultimate benefit of German nationals and not “for the use and benefit
of” the Alien Property Custodian. No parallel situation exists in the case of
the Canadian securities, for these are claimed by the Canadian Custodian as
subject to the charge imposed pursuant to the Treaty of Versailles, and there
is no question of the property being claimed with a view to its ultimate
release to German nationals.
In the action which he has taken, the Public Trustee is merely exercising
the, same right which might be exercised by a citizen of the United States or
by certain classes of neutrals who desired to claim that some particular
property, which was in the physical possession of the Alien Property
Custodian, was not, in fact, enemy property. The whole procedure under the
American Trading with the Enemy Acts was based upon the theory that the
Alien Property Custodian was entitled to possession of anything that he
might see fit to demand, but that all questions of title were reserved for the

ultimate determination of the Court upon the application of any interested
party.
In the circumstances referred to above, the Public Trustee delivered certain
securities to the Alien Property Custodian, who does not appear to have
given any legal consideration for or to have changed his position in any way
by reason of such delivery. The decision of the United States Supreme
Court in the case of Direction der Disconto Gesellschaft versus United
States Steel Corporation, Public Trustee, et al indicates that a large part of
the securities so delivered were not enemy owned at the time when the
Alien Property Custodian made claim to them, or even at the time when the
United States entered the war. The Public Trustee has accordingly brought a
suit for the purpose of determining which securities or which categories of
securities had been divested of all enemy character, either before the entry
of the United States into the war or before the enactment of the American
Trading with the Enemy legislation or before the American Custodian, in
fact, made any claim. The submission of these questions to the American
Court especially charged by the Trading with the Enemy Act with the
function of determining all questions of title under that Act cannot, in the
view of His Majesty’s Government, be properly regarded as departing in
any way from any agreement or understanding existing between the two
governments. His Majesty’s Government have given the matter most
careful consideration but, for the reasons explained above, they regret that
they do not see their way to instruct the Public Trustee to discontinue the
Court actions.
WASHINGTON , October 30, 1928.
44 Not printed.

Proposals to European countries for
agreements and treaties regarding
naturalization, dual nationality, and
military service
[348] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Stephen G. Porter
Washington, March 1, 1928.
[349] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)
Washington, December 1, 1928.
[350] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, December 1, 1928.
[351] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Estonia (Sussdorff)
Washington, December 1, 1928.

[Document 348]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Stephen G. Porter45
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. PORTER: I have received your letter of February 2346 enclosing a
copy of H. J. Res. 195, introduced by Mr. Kelly on February 7, and asking
for a report or recommendation of the Department concerning the same.
The Resolution in question provides as follows:
“That the President be, and he is hereby, authorized and requested
to at once begin negotiations looking to agreements and treaties
with the other nations that persons born in the United States of
foreign parentage, and naturalized American citizens of foreign
birth, who have possessed certificates of citizenship for more than
five years, shall not be held liable for military service or any other
act of allegiance during a stay not exceeding one year in duration
in the territory subject to the jurisdiction of such nations.”
It seems desirable to consider separately the cases of persons of foreign
birth who have acquired citizenship of the United States through
naturalization and persons who are born in the United States of alien
parents and who claim citizenship of the United States under the provision
of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution.
As to the cases of naturalized citizens attention is called to the fact that
there are at present valid treaties of naturalization between the United States
and certain foreign countries, under which the latter have agreed to
recognize the American nationality of their former nationals who have
obtained naturalization in this country. Under the provisions of these
treaties it is possible for naturalized American citizens to visit their
countries temporarily without molestation, although they may be punished
for offenses committed before their emigration. Most of these treaties,
however, contain provisions to the effect that, if a naturalized citizen

resumes residence of a permanent character in the country of his origin, he
shall be deemed to have abandoned his naturalization.
The countries with which the United States has treaties of naturalization are
as follows: Belgium, Denmark, Great Britain, Sweden, Norway, Haiti,
Portugal, Honduras, Peru, Salvador, Uruguay, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Brazil
and Bulgaria. The United States is also a party to the Pan American
Convention of 1906 concerning the status of naturalized citizens who again
take up their residence in the country of their origin,47 which has also been
adhered to by Ecuador, Paraguay, Colombia, Honduras, Panama, Peru,
Salvador, Costa Rica, Mexico, Guatemala, Uruguay, the Argentine
Republic, Nicaragua, Brazil and Chile. This Convention is similar in
substance to the provisions contained in the naturalization treaties
mentioned above concerning the status of naturalized citizens who resume
residence of a permanent character in the countries of their origin. The
United States formerly had treaties of naturalization with the German States
and Austria-Hungary, which treaties were terminated as a result of the
World War. However, the United States, under provisions in the Treaties of
Peace with Germany, Austria and Hungary, is entitled to the advantage of
the provisions contained in the Treaties of Versailles, St. Germain and
Trianon, under which Germany, Austria and Hungary agreed to recognize
the naturalization of their former nationals under the laws of the Allied and
Associated Powers.
Since the close of the World War the Government of the United States has
endeavored to conclude naturalization treaties with a number of European
countries, but so far has succeeded in concluding such a treaty only with
Bulgaria.48 Efforts in this direction will be continued. As the principal
complaints on account of impressment into the military service of foreign
countries in cases of persons naturalized in this country have been received
from persons of Italian and French origin, special efforts have been made to
procure naturalization treaties with Italy and France.
It is the opinion of this Department that it would not be advisable to enter
into agreements of the kind proposed in the Resolution concerning
naturalized citizens, since an agreement to the effect that such persons
might visit their countries of origin for a period of one year without

molestation under the military service laws would seem to carry an
inference that they could properly be regarded as having retained their
original allegiance and that they could be compelled to perform military
service after a stay of more than one year in their countries of origin. This
would seem contrary to the principle of the right of expatriation as declared
by Congress in the Joint Resolution of July 27, 1868, and subsequently
embodied in Sections 2000–2001, inclusive, of the Revised Statutes.
As to the provision in the Joint Resolution concerning persons born in the
United States of foreign parentage, it may be observed that, while such
persons are citizens of the United States under the provision of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, they may also be regarded as
citizens of the countries of their parents’ nationality under the laws thereof,
thus having dual nationality. It is obvious that the United States is not in a
position to deny the right of the foreign countries concerned to claim such
persons as their nationals, in view of the fact that persons born abroad of
American fathers may be claimed by this country as American nationals
under the provision of Section 1993 of the Revised Statutes.
The Department’s attention is daily called to numbers of cases in which
persons born in the United States of foreign parentage are impressed into
the military service of the countries of their parents’ nationality. The
greatest number of cases of this kind are those of persons of Italian
parentage, although many cases of the same kind relate to persons of Polish,
Czechoslovak, Greek, Portuguese, French, Turkish and Yugoslav parentage.
It has been estimated that between three and four thousand cases of the kind
mentioned are brought to the attention of the Department each year, of
which over one-half are cases of persons of Italian parentage.
It is important to observe, however, that most of the persons concerned
were taken during childhood to the countries of their parents’ nationality
and have remained there ever since, although the Department’s attention is
called to numbers of cases in which persons born in the United States of
foreign parentage are compelled to perform military service in foreign
countries while upon temporary visits thereto, although they have
maintained their residence in the United States. It appears to be cases of the
latter kind that are contemplated by the Joint Resolution. It is believed that

the desideratum in this matter would be the conclusion of international
agreements, supplemented by such legislation as might be necessary, under
which the anomalous condition of dual nationality would be definitely
terminated, under certain specified conditions, when the persons concerned
reach the age of majority or shortly thereafter. In this relation attention is
However, there would seem to be no objection to the conclusion, if feasible,
of agreements such as those contemplated by the Joint Resolution, to be
applicable to persons who still retain dual nationality.
As of possible interest in connection with the consideration of the Joint
Resolution there are enclosed herewith a “Notice to Bearers of Passports,”
Sections III and IV of which relate to the status of naturalized American
Cabot Lodge,49 relating to the status of persons born in the United States of
alien parents and of foreign born persons naturalized in this country, and a
copy of a letter of August 18, 1915, to Messrs. Hubbard and Hubbard of
Wheeling, West Virginia,50 concerning the liability for military service in
Italy of Italians in this country who have obtained or intend to obtain
naturalization.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
45 Chairman of the Committee on Immigration and Naturalization of the
House of Representatives.
46 Not printed.
1352.
50 Not printed.

[Document 349]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)51
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1928.
No. 167
SIR: Your attention is called to the Joint Resolution of Congress, approved
by the President May 28, 1928, reading as follows:
“That the President be, and he is hereby, respectfully requested to
endeavor as soon as possible to negotiate treaties with the
remaining nations with which we have no such agreement,
providing that persons born in the United States of foreign
parentage, and naturalized American citizens, shall not be held
liable for military service or any other act of allegiance during a
stay in the territory subject to the jurisdiction of any such nation
while citizens of the United States of America under the laws
thereof.”
You are instructed to bring the above Resolution to the attention of the
Belgian Government with a view to the conclusion of an appropriate
convention between the United States and Belgium.
It does not seem reasonable to ask the Belgian Government to enter into an
engagement concerning persons born in the United States of foreign parents
and desiring to visit the countries of their parents’ nationality, unless it is
coupled with a reciprocal engagement by this Government. You are
therefore instructed to propose to the Belgian Government agreement upon
an article reading as follows:
“A person born in the territory of one party of parents who are
nationals of the other party, and having the nationality of both
parties under their laws, shall not, if he has his habitual residence,

that is, the place of his general abode, in the territory of the state
of his birth, be held liable for military service or any other act of
allegiance during a temporary stay in the territory of the other
party.”
If the Belgian Government should consider that the term “temporary stay”
is too vague and requires definition, you are authorized to add the following
proviso to the proposed article:
“Provided, That, if such stay is protracted beyond the period of
one year, it may be presumed to be permanent, in the absence of
sufficient evidence to the contrary.”
In view of the provisions of the existing Naturalization Treaty between the
United States and Belgium,52 it is obviously unnecessary to enter into a new
agreement concerning natives of either country who, after acquiring
naturalization in the other, desire to visit their native country.
Pending the conclusion of a treaty to carry out the provision of the Joint
Resolution of Congress, you are instructed to endeavor to obtain an
informal agreement with the Belgian Government in accordance with the
Joint Resolution, which would be applicable to persons born in the United
States of Belgian parents, in order that such persons, while maintaining
their residence in the United States, may be able to visit Belgium
temporarily without molestation.
You are further instructed to inquire of the Belgian Government whether it
would be willing to consider the adoption of an agreement for the
termination of one nationality or the other in cases of dual nationality
arising at birth, upon attainment by the persons concerned of a prescribed
age, and if so, what suggestions in that direction it sees fit to propose. It is
expected that this question will come before Congress during the coming
session in connection with a proposed amendment of the nationality laws of
the United States. It has been suggested that the nationality, after attainment
of majority, of a person born with dual nationality should be determined by
the domicile of such person at the time when he reaches majority or upon
the termination of the period of one year thereafter, and a provision based
upon this theory is found in Section 8 of a bill introduced into the House of

seems to the Department desirable to consider the whole problem of dual
nationality in connection with the proposed agreement, and suggestions by
the Belgian Government concerning its solution will be appreciated. It is
not deemed desirable, however, to delay the conclusion of a treaty to carry
out the provision of the Joint Resolution of Congress until an agreement can
be reached concerning the termination of dual nationality.
For the Secretary of State:
NELSON TRUSLER JOHNSON
51 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the chiefs of diplomatic
missions in Bulgaria (No. 276), Denmark (No. 128), Great Britain (No.

[Document 350]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)53
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1928.
SIR: [Here follow four paragraphs, the same, mutatis mutandis, as the first
four paragraphs of instruction No. 167 to the Ambassador in Belgium,
printed supra.]
With reference to this matter your attention is called to the draft of a
proposed Naturalization Treaty, which accompanied the Department’s
the Embassy and the Department. If the French Government is willing to
conclude a Naturalization Treaty it might be desirable to include therein the
proposed article concerning dual nationality existing in cases of persons
born in either country of parents having the nationality of the other. In such
case it would, of course, be necessary to make an appropriate change in the
preamble of the proposed Naturalization Treaty. It might be amended to
read as follows:
“The Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Republic of France, being desirous of
regulating the nationality of those persons who have emigrated or
who may emigrate from the United States of America to France,
and from France to the United States of America, and the liability
for military service and other acts of allegiance of such persons
and all persons born in the territory of either state of persons
having the nationality of the other, have resolved to conclude a
treaty on this subject and for that purpose have appointed their
plenipotentiaries, etc.”

[Here follow two paragraphs, the same, mutatis mutandis, as the last two
paragraphs of instruction No. 167 to the Ambassador in Belgium, printed
supra.]
For the Secretary of State:
NELSON TRUSLER JOHNSON
53 Similar instructions on the same date to the chiefs of missions in Greece
Yugoslavia (No. 165).
54 Not printed.
54 Not printed.

[Document 351]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Estonia (Sussdorff)56
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1928.
No. 583
SIR: Your attention is called to the Joint Resolution of Congress, approved
by the President May 28, 1928, reading as follows:
“That the President be, and he is hereby, respectfully requested to
endeavor as soon as possible to negotiate treaties with the
remaining nations with which we have no such agreement,
providing that persons born in the United States of foreign
parentage, and naturalized American citizens, shall not be held
liable for military service or any other act of allegiance during a
stay in the territory subject to the jurisdiction of any such nation
while citizens of the United States of America under the laws
thereof.”
You are instructed to bring the above Resolution to the attention of the
Estonian Government with a view to the conclusion of an appropriate
convention between the United States and Estonia.
It will be observed that the Joint Resolution relates to two classes of
persons. First, those born in foreign countries and naturalized as citizens of
the United States, and second, those born in the United States of alien
parents. While this Government does not admit that a person of foreign
origin who has lawfully acquired naturalization as a citizen of the United
States can properly be regarded as still owing allegiance to the country of
which he was formerly a national, it is obliged to admit the existence of
dual nationality in the cases of persons who are born in the United States of
alien parents and who, although they are born citizens of the United States
under the provision of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, are

also regarded as nationals of the countries of which their parents are
nationals under the laws thereof. Nevertheless, it seems only reasonable
that, when persons of the class last mentioned have a permanent residence
in one of the two countries concerned, they should be able to visit the other
temporarily without being arrested and held for military or other national
services.
I enclose herewith, for submission to the Estonian Government a draft
treaty concerning naturalization and military service, designed to carry out
the provisions of the Joint Resolution. As you will observe, the first three
articles of the treaty relate to the status of naturalized citizens and closely
resemble the first three articles of the Naturalization Treaty of 1924
between the United States and Bulgaria.57 The fourth article, as you will
observe, relates to liability for military or other national services in cases of
persons born in either country of parents having the nationality of the other.
In presenting the draft treaty to the Estonian Government you will call
attention to the fact that the Government of the United States endeavors
consistently to observe two principles with regard to the status and right to
protection in foreign countries of persons of foreign origin who have
obtained naturalization as citizens of the United States under the laws of
this country. The first is that such persons, having left their countries of
origin and established themselves permanently in this country, and having
solemnly foresworn allegiance to their former sovereigns while at the same
time taking an oath of permanent allegiance to the United States, should be
regarded as owing allegiance to the United States only. The second is that
this Government will not extend its protection abroad to a person of foreign
origin who has obtained naturalization as a citizen of this country
fraudulently or, although his naturalization may have been obtained in good
faith, has abandoned his ties with the United States and established himself
permanently in the country of his former nationality. In this relation you
will direct especial attention to the provisions of the second paragraph of
cancellation of the naturalization, as void ab initio, of naturalized citizens
who establish a residence of a permanent character abroad within five years
after naturalization, and the provision of the second paragraph of Section 2
of the Expatriation Act of March 2, 1907,59 under which the presumption of

loss of American citizenship arises against a naturalized citizen who has
resided for two years in his native land. Under the provisions of the statute
first mentioned, this Department has forwarded to the Attorney General in
recent years hundreds of reports received from consular officers concerning
naturalized American citizens of foreign origin who established residences
of permanent nature in a foreign country within five years after
naturalization; and also the Department has refused to grant American
passports or consular registration certificates to large numbers of
naturalized citizens who have brought upon themselves the presumption of
expatriation under the provisions of the Act of March 2, 1907, because of
their protracted residence in their native land. These statutory provisions
and the action taken under them show clearly that this Government, while it
desires to extend full protection to naturalized citizens who appear to have
obtained their naturalization in good faith and to have maintained their ties
with the United States, has no desire to extend its protection to those who
fail to meet these conditions. It is believed that the proposed naturalization
treaty, while it is, of course, intended to guarantee due protection to
naturalized American citizens of Estonian origin who wish to visit their
native land for legitimate objects, makes due allowances for the just
demands of Estonia, and thus tends to foster friendly and mutually
beneficial intercourse between the two countries.
Especial attention is called to the provision of Article 2 of the proposed
treaty to the effect that nationals of either country naturalized in the territory
of the other shall not, upon returning to the country of origin, be punished
“for failure to respond to calls for military service accruing after bona fide
residence was acquired in the territory of the country whose nationality was
obtained by naturalization”. It seems obvious that unless a provision to this
effect is included in the treaty it will be of little or no value.
With reference to article four of the draft it will be observed that it does not
seem reasonable to ask the Estonian Government to enter into an
engagement concerning persons born in the United States of foreign parents
and desiring to visit the countries of their parents’ nationality, unless it is
coupled with a reciprocal engagement by this Government. You are
therefore instructed to propose to the Estonian Government agreement upon
an article reading as follows:

“A person born in the territory of one party of parents who are
nationals of the other party, and having the nationality of both
parties under their laws, shall not, if he has his habitual residence,
that is, the place of his general abode, in the territory of the state
of his birth, be held liable for military service or any other act of
allegiance during a temporary stay in the territory of the other
party.”
If the Estonian Government should consider that the term “temporary stay”
is too vague and requires definition, you are authorized to add the following
proviso to the proposed article:
“Provided, That, if such stay is protracted beyond the period of
one year, it may be presumed to be permanent, in the absence of
sufficient evidence to the contrary.”
[Here follow two paragraphs, the same, mutatis mutandis, as the last two
paragraphs of instruction No. 167 to the Ambassador in Belgium, printed on
For the Secretary of State:
NELSON TRUSLER JOHNSON
[Enclosure]
Draft Treaty of Naturalization Between the United States and Estonia60
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of
Estonia, being desirous of regulating the nationality of those persons who
have emigrated or who may emigrate from the United States of America to
Estonia, and from Estonia to the United States of America, and the liability
for military service and other acts of allegiance of such persons and all
persons born in the territory of either state of persons having the nationality
of the other, have resolved to conclude a treaty on this subject and for that
purpose have appointed their plenipotentiaries, that is to say:
The President of the United States of America: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and the
Government of the Republic of Estonia: . . . . . . . . . . . . . Who, having

communicated to each other their full powers, found to be in good and due
form, have agreed upon the following Articles:
ARTICLE I
Nationals of the United States who have been or shall be naturalized in
Estonian territory, shall be held by the United States to have lost their
former nationality and to be nationals of Estonia.
Reciprocally, nationals of Estonia who have been or shall be naturalized in
territory of the United States shall be held by Estonia to have lost their
original nationality and to be nationals of the United States.
The foregoing provisions of this Article are subject to any law of either
country providing that its nationals do not lose their nationality by
becoming naturalized in another country in time of war.
The word “national”, as used in this convention, means a person owing
permanent allegiance to, or having the nationality of, the United States or
Estonia, respectively, under the laws thereof.
The word “naturalized” refers only to the naturalization of persons of full
age, upon their own applications, and to the naturalization of minors
through the naturalization of their parents. It does not apply to the
acquisition of nationality by a woman through marriage.
ARTICLE II
Nationals of either country, who have or shall become naturalized in the
territory of the other, as contemplated in Article I, shall not, upon returning
to the country of former nationality, be punished for the original act of
emigration, or for failure to respond to calls for military service accruing
after bona fide residence was acquired in the territory of the country whose
nationality was obtained by naturalization.
ARTICLE III

If a national of either country, who comes within the purview of Article I,
shall renew his residence in his country of origin without the intent to return
to that in which he was naturalized, he shall be held to have renounced his
naturalization.
The intent not to return may be held to exist when a person naturalized in
one country shall have resided more than two years in the other; but this
presumption may be overcome by evidence to the contrary.
ARTICLE IV
A person born in the territory of one party of parents who are nationals of
the other party, and having the nationality of both parties under their laws,
shall not, if he has his habitual residence, that is, the place of his general
abode, in the territory of the state of his birth, be held liable for military
service or any other act of allegiance during a temporary stay in the territory
of the other party.
ARTICLE V
The present Treaty shall go into effect immediately upon the exchange of
ratifications, and shall continue in force for ten years. If neither party shall
have given to the other six months previous notice of its intention then to
terminate the Treaty, it shall further remain in force until the end of twelve
months after either of the contracting parties shall have given notice to the
other of such intention.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed this Treaty and
have hereunto affixed their seals. Done in duplicate at Tallinn, this . . . . .
56 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the chiefs of missions in
612), and Rumania (No. 11).

60 The same draft, mutatis mutandis, for treaties with Finland, Latvia,
Lithuania, the Netherlands, and Rumania.

Second International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration, held at
61 For proceedings of the Conference, see Segunda Conferencia
Internacional de Emigracion e Inmigracion, Diario Oficial, 2 vols. (Habana,
1928).
[352] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, March 23, 1928.
[353] The Cuban Chargé (Altunaga) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 24, 1928.
[354] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 25, 1928.
[355] The Secretary of State to the Cuban Chargé (Altunaga)
Washington, September 14, 1928.

[Document 352]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, March 23, 1928.
SIRS: The International Conference on Emigration and Immigration to which
you have been designated as representatives of this Government is the
second Conference of this type to which the United States has sent
delegates, the first having been held in Rome in 1924 upon the invitation of
the Italian Government.62 The present Conference has been called by the
Cuban Government in pursuance of a resolution adopted at the Rome
Conference for the convening of the second International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration to be held in an immigration country.
The purpose of the Rome Conference as explained by the Italian
Government in issuing its invitation was to examine emigration and
immigration problems of a technical nature with a view to facilitating a
coordination of action between nations in dealing with them. The Cuban
Government in asking that this Government send delegates to the
forthcoming Conference at Habana stated that it was hoped to reach final
conclusions on certain of the questions considered at the Rome Conference.
The nature of the questions to be discussed at Habana is indicated in some
detail in the agenda of the Conference, copies of which have been made
available to you.63
The attitude of this Government regarding immigration is a matter of
historical record and was accurately and forcefully expressed by the
Honorable Henry P. Fletcher at the Pan American Conference of 192864 in
the following terms:
“The delegation of the United States desires in connection with
this resolution (i. e. regarding international aspects of emigration
and immigration) to state that the Government of the United
States considers that control of immigration is a matter of purely

domestic concern, representing the exercise of a sovereign right,
and that, as far as the United States of America is concerned, the
authority of its Congress in immigration matters is exclusive.”
You will make clear at the Conference this Government’s position with
respect to immigration as above indicated, and you will take no action
inconsistent with the attitude and prerogatives of the Congress of the United
States in this connection or in any way committing the Government of the
United States. The performance of this duty will be the paramount
consideration of the delegation and will at all times determine the attitude to
be taken by the delegation in the proceedings of the Conference.
The position of the United States on questions of immigration is well
known to the nations participating in the Conference, and it is believed that
a similar attitude will be adopted by many of them, notably by the Latin-
American countries whose immigration problems are similar to our own.
The reaffirmation of this principle that immigration is a matter of purely
domestic concern, not only by the United States but by other countries, will
obviously operate to the advantage of this Government, and will also afford
the United States the opportunity to cooperate with Latin-American
countries in a helpful manner and thus to continue the work of the Pan
American Conference.
While your attitude will be governed by the above consideration, it is,
however, desired that you take a helpful and appropriate part in the
discussions of the Conference and of its Committees on the various
technical questions before the Conference which are or have been of
particular interest to the United States. You may inform your colleagues in
the Conference of the forms in which these questions have presented
themselves to the United States, and the methods of this Government in
dealing with them; and you may describe the aims and policies of this
Government regarding them, and the legislative and administrative
machinery which it has established to carry out those aims and policies.
Likewise you should be careful to note any information furnished by your
colleagues in the Conference which may be of value to this Government,
and any suggestions which may appear to merit its consideration, for
incorporation in your report.

It is believed that participation on this basis will enable the United States to
contribute to the work of the Conference within the limitations imposed by
its standing policy on immigration, especially as evidenced by the
Immigration Act of 192465 and other legislation. You should, however,
make clear to the Conference from the beginning that this represents the full
extent to which the United States can take part in any discussion between
nations on the problems of emigration and immigration.
It is thus apparent that your efforts in the Conference will be confined to
discussion of the technical matters presented, to observing the trend of the
Conference, and to safeguarding and reaffirming the position of the United
States on immigration on such occasions as may be appropriate. It is
equally clear that you should refrain from voting on any of the resolutions
presented to the Conference for approval without the specific authorization
of this Government. While in the vast majority of cases it will be obvious
that a vote by this Government would be inappropriate, nevertheless it is
possible that certain resolutions may be put forward on which it may seem
desirable to put this Government on record: such as, for example, a
proposal for the convening of a Third International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration. In such cases the delegation should ask this
Government for instructions, by cable through the Department of State.
For your further information and guidance there are attached:66
(1). A collection of documents illustrative of the historical and
diplomatic background of the Conference and of American
immigration policy in general;
(2). An annotated copy of the agenda of the Habana Conference
indicating the special considerations attaching to the discussion of
the various questions by the American delegates.
I need not remind you of the importance which this Government attaches to
the manner in which you carry out the mission with which you are now
entrusted, involving as it does the authoritative and effective presentation in
an international gathering of one of the most important of the national
policies of the United States. It is my confident hope that you will be able to
carry this mission to a successful conclusion.

FRANK B. KELLOGG
63 For English text, see Diario Oficial, first vol. I, p. 43.
66 Enclosures not printed.

[Document 353]
The Cuban Chargé (Altunaga) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 24, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honour to send Your Excellency herewith three copies of
the Final Act of the Second International Conference on Immigration and
Emigration held in Havana, March–April, 1928,67 one of the copies duly
certified by the Under Secretary of State of Cuba.
I beg to transmit these documents to Your Excellency with the request that
Your Government, if desirous of so doing, give adherence to the resolution
approved by the Conference regarding the desire to hold the next
Conference on Immigration and Emigration in Madrid, the organization of
which will be in charge of the Board of Directors of the Conference,
I avail myself [etc.]
RAFAU RODRIGUEZ ALTUNAGA
67 For text, see Acta Final de la Segunda Conferencia Internacional de

[Document 354]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 25, 1928.
SIR: The undersigned appointed by the President as Delegates of the United
States of America to the Second International Conference on Emigration
inclusive, have the honor to submit the following report:
At the closing session of the First International Conference on Emigration
and Immigration, held in Rome in May, 1924, a resolution was adopted
calling for a Second International Conference on Emigration and
Immigration, to be held in an immigration country and charging the
Committee of Control of the Rome Conference with the work of
preparation for such a conference, to which it should present a general
report on the effect given by different governments to the resolutions voted
by the Conference of Rome. The Committee of Control, which consisted of
the President and the eight Vice Presidents of the Rome Conference, was to
sit at Rome under the Presidency of Signor De Michelis, President of the
Rome Conference, and Italian Commissioner General of Emigration.
On July 9, 1927, the Committee of Control adopted the following resolution
regarding the holding of the Second International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration:
“The Committee entrusted with the preliminary work of the IInd
international emigration and immigration Conference, in
accordance with the resolution of the Rome Conference,
“Whereas its resolution of 10th of December appointed the city of
Havana to be the see for the IInd Conference,

“Having considered the message of the Cuban Government
suggesting that the Conference convene during the month of
March 1928,
“Having read the list of questions proposed by the several
Governments, to be included in the agenda of the Havana
Conference:
“1) Resolves to fix the agenda for the IInd international
emigration and immigration Conference as it appears in
annex A.
“2) Entrusts its President to request the Cuban
Government to kindly send invitations to the
Governments interested in the IInd international
emigration and immigration Conference and to fix the
opening date of the same.
“3) Also entrusts its President with the mission to
kindly ask the Cuban Government to extend the
courtesy of an invitation to the great international
Organizations so as to enable them to be represented in
the Conference of Havana, in a consultive character.”
On July 18, 1927, the Cuban Embassy in Washington addressed a note to
the Department,68 inviting this Government to participate in the Second
International Conference on Emigration and Immigration, which was to
open in Habana, March 31, 1928, and shortly afterward it supplied the
Department with the agenda of the Conference (see annex).69
Several conferences were held between the appropriate officers of the
Department of State, the Department of Labor and the United States Public
Health Service, at which the questions of policy involved in American
participation in such a conference were thoroughly discussed and weighed.
It was the feeling of the Conference that participation was advisable, and on
January 12, 1928, the Secretary of State addressed a letter to the President
recommending American participation in the following terms:

“The Cuban Government, through its Embassy in Washington,
extended an invitation on July 18, 1927, to this Government to
participate in the Second International Emigration and
Immigration Conference, which will be held at Habana
of State sent a note to the Cuban Embassy68 requesting that the
thanks of the United States Government for the invitation be
conveyed to the Cuban Government and that the Cuban
Government be informed that this Government would be glad to
consider the invitation when it had had an opportunity to examine
the agenda of the conference.
“After copies of the agenda had been received, communications
were addressed to the Secretaries of the Treasury and Labor on
December 17, 1927,68 apprising them of the receipt of the
invitation under discussion and transmitting copies of the agenda
with the suggestion that a conference be held between
representatives of the Department of State, the Department of
Labor, and the United States Public Health Service for the
purpose of discussing the question of participation in the
conference to be held in Habana.
“On December 29 representatives of the three Departments met at
the State Department and after due deliberation reached the
conclusion that it would be advisable for the United States to send
a delegation to the Habana conference because of the following
considerations: First, the United States appears to be in some
degree committed to such participation not only by reason of the
fact that it was formally represented in the previous conference,
on the same subject held in Rome in 1924, but more especially in
view of the fact that the chairman of the American delegation at
that conference cast his vote in favor of the convening of a second
conference, i. e., that to be held at Habana in March. Second, the
conference is to be held in a Latin American country, and will be
largely attended by delegates from the Latin American nations
whose immigration problems are similar to those of this country,
as was evidenced by their attitude at the recent meeting of the

Interparliamentary Commercial Conference held at Rio de Janeiro
in September of last year.
“While the opinion of the conferees that the United States should
accept the invitation was based chiefly on the considerations set
forth in the foregoing paragraph, they did not lose sight of the
advantage to this country in having the traditional position of the
United States, that immigration is strictly a domestic matter,
reaffirmed at this conference. Should delegates be appointed, they
will accordingly be instructed to make clear this Government’s
position on immigration and to take no action inconsistent with
the attitude and prerogatives of the Congress of the United States
in this connection.
“This matter has been submitted to the Director of the Bureau of
the Budget who advises that it is not in conflict with the
President’s financial program.
“I believe, therefore, that attendance at this conference will be in
the public interest, and have the honor to recommend that, as an
act of international courtesy and as a means of reaffirming the
historic policy of this country on immigration and of cooperating
with American countries with similar immigration problems, the
Congress be requested to appropriate funds to cover the expense
of sending a delegation to the Second International Emigration
and Immigration Conference. It is not believed an amount in
excess of $5,000 will be necessary for this purpose.
“It is my further recommendation that the delegation from the
United States consist of a representative of the Department of
Labor, a representative of the United States Public Health Service,
a representative of this Department, and a consular officer who
has had extensive experience in immigration matters.”
On January 13 the President sent the Secretary of State’s letter to Congress
with a message requesting legislation appropriating $5,000 for the expenses
of an American delegation to the Habana Conference. An appropriate
resolution was subsequently introduced in the House of Representatives and

was favorably reported on by the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
However, when it appeared that the volume of business for Congress was so
great as to make it unlikely that definite action could be taken on the
resolution before the opening of the Conference on March 31, 1928, the
Secretary of State, deeming that participation in the Habana Conference
was sufficiently important from the viewpoint of American foreign policy
to justify making other provision for the expenses of the participation in the
event that Congress should fail to make the appropriation which had been
requested on March 20, informed the Cuban Embassy of this Government’s
acceptance of its invitation of July 18, 1927, in the following terms:
“I have the honor to refer to your note of July 18, 1927, inviting
this Government to participate in the Second International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration which will open in
Habana on March 31.
“I take pleasure in informing you that the United States will be
glad to send delegates although you will readily understand that
the immigration policy of this country as established by Acts of
the Congress will obviously impose certain restrictions upon the
American delegates. However, with due regard to such limitations
this Government will be happy to attend the Habana Conference
and to participate so far as practicable in a discussion of the
technical matters presented.
“The names of the American delegates will be communicated to
you in the course of the next few days. In the meantime I trust
that you will notify your Government of this Government’s
acceptance of its courteous invitation.”
On March 22, the Secretary of State addressed a letter to the President71
recommending the appointment of delegates and submitting a draft
instruction for the President’s approval.72 These instructions emphasized
the importance of upholding the American view that control of immigration
is purely a domestic question and that the authority of Congress in
immigration matters is exclusive. The instructions further stated that the
delegates attending the Conference at Habana would be expected to

reaffirm the policy of this Government that immigration is a matter of
purely domestic concern in the manner in which it was stated at the Sixth
Pan American Conference in Habana; to take a helpful and appropriate part
in the discussions of various technical questions before the Conference with
a view to informing the Conference of the forms in which these questions
have presented themselves to the United States, the methods of this
Government in dealing with them, the aims and policies of the Government
regarding them, and the legislative and administrative machinery which it
has established to carry them out; to observe the trend of the Conference
and to take no action committing this Government and to refrain from
voting on any of the resolutions presented for approval without the specific
authorization of this Department.
On March 24 the President’s approval having been signified, the American
delegates to the Second International Conference on Emigration and
Immigration were announced as follows, and appropriate travel instructions
were issued:
The Honorable W. W. Husband, Assistant Secretary of Labor,
Chairman;
Mr. Norval P. Nichols, Commissioner of Immigration at Porto
Rico;
Surgeon John W. Kerr, United States Public Health Service;
Surgeon John D. Long, United States Public Health Service;
Mr. Leo J. Keena, American Consul General at Habana;
Mr. Henry Carter, Department of State.
On March 30 the American delegates assembled in Habana and an office
was established in the Sevilla-Biltmore Hotel with a staff consisting of two
stenographers, one Spanish-English interpreter and one French-English
interpreter. Office furniture and typewriters were rented in Habana and
stationery and office supplies were provided by the American Embassy. Mr.
Carter was appointed Secretary of the Delegation and Mr. Shields, Special

Disbursing Officer in the Embassy, acted as Disbursing Officer, and in
addition, took charge of the code work of the Delegation.
On the afternoon of March 30 an informal meeting of the chief delegates of
the participating nations was held at the University of Habana where the
Conference was to sit, at which a slate of officers of the Conference and of
the Chairmen and Vice Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference
was drawn up for presentation to the opening session of the Conference.
Mr. Husband was named for one of the ten Vice Presidencies, and the
position of Chairman of the Third Section (that dealing with measures
designed to adapt emigration to the labor necessities of immigration
countries and with methods of international cooperation between the
emigration and immigration services) was offered to him. Mr. Husband
accepted the post of Vice President, thus becoming a member of the
Presidential Committee of Control which functioned as a steering
committee for the Conference (see the standing orders of the Conference,73
annex) but felt that the nature of his instructions made it inappropriate for
him to act as Chairman of the Third Commission and accordingly declined,
suggesting that Señor Aguero of the Cuban Delegation be named in his
place.
The Conference proper opened at the University of Habana on the morning
of March 31 when the inaugural plenary session was held. President
Machado of Cuba presided at the opening and a speech of welcome was
made by Dr. Rafael Martinez Ortiz, Cuban Secretary of State, to which a
reply was made by Señor Gutierrez de Aguera, chief delegate of Spain and
Spanish Ambassador to Cuba, following which the meeting adjourned until
afternoon.
The first plenary session was held on the afternoon of March 31 under the
temporary presidency of Dr. Carlos Armenteros of the Cuban Delegation. A
letter from Signor de Michelis of the Rome Committee was read and a
speech was made regarding the purposes and labors of that Committee by
Señor Brebbia of Argentina. The Conference then proceeded to the election
of officers and Dr. Sanchez de Fuentes of Cuba was nominated for
President of the Conference by Signor Vivaldi of Italy, seconded by Mr.
Aoki of Japan, and elected by acclamation, following which he took the

chair. After deciding that both the plenary sessions and the committee
meetings should be opened to the public, the Conference then elected
President Machado as honorary President of the Conference upon the
motion of Mr. Rais of France, seconded by Señor Perez Alfonseca of Santo
Domingo.
The slate of the other officers of the Conference and its recommendations,
as drawn up in the informal meeting of March 30, was then approved, and
Signor Vivaldi of Italy was elected Chairman of the Drafting Committee.
The organization of the Conference as finally constituted was as follows:
President:
Dr. Fernando Sánchez de Fuentes (Cuba).
Vice Presidents:
Mr. Arata Aoki (Japan).
Mr. Jan Gawronski (Poland).
Mr. Francisco Bernis (Spain).
Mr. Guglielmo de Vivaldi (Italy).
Mr. Luis Rais (France).
Mr. W. W. Husband (United States).
Mr. Amadeo E. Grandi (Argentina).
Mr. Pedro Erasmo Callorda (Uruguay).
Mr. Carlos Trejo y Lerdo de Tejada (Mexico).
(A vice presidency was reserved for Portugal,
but remained vacant as Portugal had no
representative present at the Conference).

Chairmen and Vice Chairmen of the Commissions:
FIRST COMMISSION
President:
Doctor Manuel Bianchi (Chile).
Vice Presidents:
Mr. Liang Chi-Cho (China).
Doctor Henry S. Brandt (Netherlands).
SECOND COMMISSION
President:
Mr. Antonio Sum (Czechoslovakia).
Vice Presidents:
Mr. Ramsés Chaffey (Egypt).
Mr. Furcy Pichardo (Dominican Republic).
THIRD COMMISSION
President:
Doctor Arístides de Agüero (Cuba).
Vice Presidents:
Doctor Oscar Barrenechea (Peru).
Doctor Fernando Dennis (Haiti).
FOURTH COMMISSION

President:
Mr. Marc Peter (Switzerland).
Vice Presidents:
Mr. Heinrich Montel (Austria).
Mr. Ricardo A. Morales (Panama).
FIFTH COMMISSION
President:
Prince Sturdza (Rumania).
Vice Presidents:
Mr. Reider Hildal (Norway).
Mr. Víctor Zevallos (Ecuador).
Following discussion of minor points of organization and
procedure, the plenary session adjourned, after arranging for the
hours of meeting of the various Commissions, and after charging
the Presidential Committee with the responsibility of settling
upon a closing date for the Conference (the Committee
subsequently announced April 17th as the closing date).
The following two weeks were devoted exclusively to
commission meetings and it was not until April 16 that the
Conference again met in plenary session. The nature of the work
of the committees is indicated by the subjects of discussion listed
in the agenda and by the resolutions adopted by the Conference at
the final plenary sessions74 (see annex). The American delegates
were assigned to the five commissions as follows:
FIRST COMMISSION

Transport and protection of the emigrants.
Hygiene and sanitary services.
Doctor Kerr and Doctor Long.
SECOND COMMISSION
Assistance to the emigrated—Cooperation, insurance,
systems of mutual insurance.
Mr. Nichols and Doctor Long.
THIRD COMMISSION
Adoption of measures in order to adapt emigration to
the labor necessities of
immigration countries.
International cooperation between the emigration and
immigration services.
Mr. Husband and Mr. Keena.
FOURTH COMMISSION
General principles of immigration treaties.
Miscellaneous matters.
Mr. Keena and Mr. Carter.
FIFTH COMMISSION
Examination of the resolutions of the Rome Conference
and sequence to be given them.
Mr. Carter and Mr. Nichols.
In view of the nature of their instructions, the American delegates took a
passive part in the debates of the Conference, confining themselves to
declarations of American policy and discussion of technical methods
employed by the United States, and abstained from voting, both in the
commission meetings and in the plenary sessions. However, on certain
occasions they felt called upon to express their views and the following
brief summary of those occasions may be noted:

1. In the first meeting of the Fifth Commission on April 3 the Chairman,
Prince Sturdza of Rumania, outlined the work of the Commission as
follows:
(A) To prepare and report upon the effect given by the different
Governments to the resolutions adopted at the Rome Conference; (B) to
prepare a report upon the possibility of giving further effect to the
resolutions of the Rome Conference and (C) to consider how the work of
the Rome Conference might be carried on after the Habana Conference, by
further international conferences or otherwise. The delegate of the
Dominican Republic was then appointed rapporteur of the Commission and
the Chairman asked that the various delegations submit appropriate reports
for use in the preparation of the two reports called for, and announced that
consideration of the third part of the program would be deferred to the final
sessions of the Commission. (This third topic was subsequently handled
almost entirely in the Fourth Commission).
Following the adjournment of the meeting, Mr. Carter addressed to the
rapporteur of the Fifth Commission the following letter, stating that the
United States would not submit any report upon the effect given by the
different Governments to the resolutions voted on by the Rome Conference:
“My Government desires me to state that it does not feel it can
appropriately submit to the Conference a formal report of the sort
contemplated in the resolution adopted at the Rome Conference
with regard to the effect given by the different governments to the
resolutions voted by that Conference.
“As you are aware, the fundamental position of the United States
is that control of immigration is a matter of purely domestic
concern, representing the exercise of a sovereign right, and that,
as far as the United States of America is concerned, the authority
of its Congress in immigration matters is exclusive.
“While it is assumed that the Rome resolution did not
contemplate any action inconsistent with that position,
nevertheless, to avoid all possibility of a misunderstanding on the
subject my Government will refrain from submitting a report to

this section of the Conference regarding the effect given the
resolutions voted on by the Conference of Rome.
“I would, however, observe that the American delegates in the
other sections of the Conference will be glad to furnish
information regarding the present status of legislative and
administrative measures in force in the United States dealing with
the problems of immigration, and to cooperate in the labors of the
Conference within the limits and restrictions obviously imposed
upon their action by the clearly established policy and position of
my Government as regards immigration matters.
“I am confident that you will appreciate the attitude of my
Government in this matter, and I request that this letter be made a
part of the report which you intend to submit to the Fifth Section
of the Conference.”
At the same time he addressed the following letter to the Chairman of the
Fifth Commission, enclosing a copy of his letter to the rapporteur, and
stating that the United States would make no report regarding the possibility
of giving further effect to the resolutions voted at the Rome Conference:
“I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a letter which I
have addressed to the Rapporteur of the 5th Section of the
Conference, in which I state that my Government does not feel
that it can appropriately submit to the Conference a formal report
of the sort contemplated in the resolutions adopted at the Rome
Conference with regard to the effect given by the different
governments to the resolutions voted by that Conference.
“The Considerations advanced in that letter apply equally to the
report which you requested be made you as to the possibility of
giving further effect to the resolutions adopted at the Rome
Conference.
“I trust that you will appreciate the position of my Government in
refraining from making to you the desired report, and I would
request that you cause this letter to be incorporated in the report

which you propose to submit to the 5th Section of the
Conference.”
These letters were brought to the attention of the Fifth Commission at its
next meeting on April 7 by its Chairman, Prince Sturdza, who commented
briefly on them and they were also communicated to the Press for
publication on the same day.
2. Just before the adjournment of the second and final meeting of the First
Commission on April 9, Dr. Long made the following statement regarding
the position of the American Delegation:
“The Delegate of the United States declares that he wishes to
make it of record that the Delegation of the United States has
been highly pleased to attend the debates of the Committee. He
wishes it to be made of record also that the Delegation of the
United States did not vote either for or against any of the motions
nor took any part in the discussions that have taken place, all
because the Government of the United States understands that
immigration questions come within the province of the Congress
of the United States and that if any other line of conduct had been
taken, a limit might have been put upon that exclusive authority
held by the Congress of the United States in the matter.”
This statement was followed by one from the Argentina Delegate, Señor
Brebbia, who said:
“I might have saved the Committee the trouble of hearing me
again ask for the floor if after hearing the Delegate of the United
States I did not fear that silence of the Argentine Delegation
might be construed to mean something that is in opposition to the
fundamental points set forth by my North American colleagues. It
is hardly necessary to say that all of us who are working together
here do not propose to compromise in any way the sovereignty of
the countries we represent, their laws or their regulations. This
Conference is not a gathering of diplomats or plenipotentiaries
empowered to draw up conventions or amend them. It is simply a
meeting of technicists, which amounts to saying, men of business,

who are thoroughly familiar with immigration problems and who
have met in assembly to contribute, each one within his sphere,
the lessons from his experience so as to harmonize as far as
possible the conflicting interests of the emigrating and
immigrating countries, all inspired with the wish of being useful.
It is necessary that this be made clear once for all, so that there be
no mistaken interpretation put upon the more or less formal
agreement that may be intended by the vote of any one
Delegation one way or the other when it was required to pass
upon a topic under consideration.”
3. During the discussions of the Second Session of the Second Commission
on April 9 the following proposal was introduced by the Cuban Delegate:
“The Conference, in view of the undoubted advantages to be
gained by the immigrant by the protection of his patrimony and
from the assistance of institutions for the purpose of such
protection, expresses the desire that measures be taken to create
adequate institutions to this end.”
As this proposal pointed to the establishment of cooperative banks in
immigration countries, Dr. Long, when the views of the United States were
asked by the Chairman, stated that the American Delegation would prefer
not to enter upon a discussion of this subject.
4. At the third meeting of the Second Commission on April 11, Dr. Long, in
discussing measures of medical assistance for immigrants, said:
“In so far as the United States is concerned, I have to say that
before entering the country, if the immigrant contracts a disease
on board, he is given attention at the expense of the steamship
companies in one of the many well equipped establishments that
are maintained in the principal ports such as Boston, New York,
San Francisco and others. When the immigrant is already in the
country he may receive medical attention in any hospital, as any
citizen would, regardless as to whether he is a native or a
foreigner. But when the case is one of a chronic disease, and the
patient has become a public charge, then it is ascertained whether

he is a citizen or a foreigner, but in the latter case, he is given the
same care as if he were a citizen, and if he has not resided in the
country the time provided by our law, then he is sent back to the
country whence he came.”
A little later Dr. Long reminded the Commission that at the Fifth Pan
American Conference, held at Santiago de Chile in 1923,75 a resolution was
passsed, in which there was to be found a declaration of principles
recommending to the several countries that they provide medical assistance
for the indigent poor.
5. At the fifth meeting of the Fourth Commission during a roll call upon a
Cuban declaration of principles of migration, the United States formally
abstained from voting. (The Cuban declaration will be described in another
portion of this report).
6. At the third plenary session on April 17 following a resolution presented
to the Conference by the Fourth Commission regarding the general
principles of codification of material relating to migration, Dr. Long, who
announced the votes of the American Delegation throughout the plenary
sessions, found it necessary to say:
“When the name of the United States was called recently
somebody answered yes by mistake. I wish to say that the United
States does not vote.”
7. At the fourth plenary session of the Conference held on April 17, the
following resolution regarding the convening of a third conference was
presented by the Fifth Commission:
“1.) That a Third International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration meet at Madrid on a date
to be fixed after the interested nations (note: the phrase
‘interested nations’ as used in this document, is
understood by the Delegation to refer to those nations
represented at the Habana Conference) have been
consulted on the subject by the Committee referred to in

the following paragraph and after a majority of them
have expressed their assent.
“2.) That the Directing Committee of the Habana
Conference (i. e., the President and Vice Presidents of
the Conference and the Chairmen and Vice Chairmen of
the Commissions of the Conference) be entrusted,
under the name of the Committee of Organization, with
the work preliminary to the Madrid Conference, to
which the Committee will submit the general report
regarding steps taken by the different governments to
give effect to the resolutions adopted by the Conference
of Habana.
“3.) That said Committee may, subject to the assent of
the interested Governments, invite the collaboration of
those members of the former Committee of Rome
whose assistance is deemed advantageous.
“4.) That said Committee may, subject to the assent of
the interested Governments, transfer its seat and
propose the organization of an auxiliary secretariat if it
deems such a course advisable.
“5.) That the said Committee be authorized to collect
the archives of the two International Conferences on
Emigration and Immigration in order that it may, within
the scope of its authority, facilitate the putting into
effect of the resolutions adopted by those Conferences,
and may undertake the publication of documents and
studies whose distribution may be deemed desirable.”
The resolution was voted upon paragraph by paragraph and upon the
motion of Prince Sturdza, Chairman of the Fifth Commission, the vote on
the first two paragraphs was made by acclamation. The American
Delegation had been prepared to abstain from voting on a roll call, and to
make this abstention a matter of official record as it had done in the case of
all previous votes taken in the plenary sessions of the Conference. However,

the Delegation considered that under the recognized rules of procedure in
international gatherings, such a vote by acclamation could not be regarded
as in any way binding upon this Government. It further felt that its position
had already been made so clear in the meetings of the Conference and its
Commissions that a further statement at this juncture would be distinctly
inopportune and might weaken the effect of the statements it had already
made. The Delegation, therefore, refrained from further defining its
abstention from this vote by acclamation. Nevertheless, to avoid any
possibility of a misunderstanding as to the effect of this vote upon the
Government of the United States, the Delegation, at the conclusion of the
meeting, explained verbally to officials of the Cuban Department of State
that the United States could not consider the procedure of adopting by
acclamation the resolution regarding the holding of a Third International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration as in any way binding on the
United States, and that the American Delegation wished to be understood as
having abstained from voting on the resolution. The Cuban officials
confirmed the Delegation’s understanding of the non-binding effect of the
vote by acclamation under reference and further noted the Delegation’s
statement that it desired that it be considered as having abstained from
voting on this matter.
8. At the closing session of the Conference on April 17, Dr. Long addressed
the Conference in Spanish to express the American Delegation’s pleasure at
having taken part in the labors of the Conference and its thanks to the
Cuban Government for its hospitality:
“I have asked for the floor in the name of the Delegation of the
United States of America to express a sentiment we have at this
moment, and in evidence of our sincerity I venture to utter it in
Spanish, which is a rather difficult thing to do.
“In the first place, I wish to say how much we appreciate our
having had the privilege of attending so important and
informative an event as this Conference has proved to be. To be
present at the debates, to listen to the opinions of the several
Delegates and the findings of the Committees has proved an
education on the subject of world migration.

“In addition to this I wish to express our most sincere thanks to
the Republic of Cuba and the people of Habana for the very
affectionate hospitality that has been extended to us during our
stay here. Whenever we come to Habana we are met with the
most affectionate hospitality.
“Finally, I wish to express our deep admiration for the ability and
skill with which our President, His Excellency, Doctor Fernando
Sánchez y Fuentes, has conducted our deliberations, the tact with
which he has managed debates, and the manner in which he has
recognized the rights and wishes of all the Delegates. I will close
by wishing him all kinds of happiness and prosperity in life.”
While the avowed purpose of the Conference was to discuss technical and
non-political questions regarding emigration and immigration in order to
establish a basis for international cooperation in such matters, the principal
question before the Conference was that of the manner and means whereby
international consideration of the problems of emigration and immigration
could best be conducted. As has been stated, the preparatory work of the
Habana Conference was carried on by the Committee of Control of the
Rome Conference of 1924, following the adoption of the 1924 resolution in
favor of a second conference. With the completion of the organization of
the Habana Conference, the responsibility for forwarding the proposals of
the Rome Committee passed to the Presidential Committee of the Habana
Conference, which acted as a steering committee during the sessions of the
second Conference.
The main question for the Conference to decide was that of the method to
be adopted for carrying on the work of the First and Second Conferences
and the creation of a suitable body for that purpose. This, in turn, developed
the question of:
(a) Codification of information relating to migration problems;
(b) Recognition of a set of general principles of migration;
(c) The holding of a third Conference and

(d) The creation of a body to prepare the agenda of a third
Conference.
The matter of codification was settled with comparative ease by the
adoption of the first resolution of the Fourth Commission:
“1) That the countries of emigration and of immigration
proceed as soon as possible, if they have not already
done it, to make a compilation of their legislation
concerning emigration, transmigration and immigration
and also of their legislation regarding agricultural and
industrial labor, with a view to making progress with
the codification of questions on which an international
agreement has been concluded.
“2) That the committee to be appointed for the
preparation of a third International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration be entrusted with all the
preparatory work for the codification of matters relating
to migration on which an agreement has been
concluded among the countries concerned.
“3) That this Committee invite the League of Nations,
the International Labour Office and the International
Institute of Agriculture to continue the work undertaken
by them referring directly or indirectly to migration and
which they have carried out hitherto so effectively.”
However, the other questions, which were treated as a body by the Fourth
Commission, revealed marked divisions of opinion in the Conference, and
it is thought that a brief sketch of the various stages of the discussions on
these three questions may be of interest as illustrative of the general trend of
the Conference.
At the outset of the Conference the Delegation learned that Dr. Harry H.
Laughlin of New York, a well known American authority on eugenics, was
attending as a representative of the Pan American Office of Eugenics and
Homiculture, and that he hoped to secure the support of the Pan American

nations for a declaration regarding the principles of migration. In brief, his
program consisted in an extensive statement of the biological and eugenic
phenomena involved in migration problems; it recognized control of both
emigration and immigration to be an exclusive and unalienable function of
sovereignty and, therefore, to be regulated by each sovereign nation and
migration entity in respect to itself; and it recommended that the current
series of conferences on the subject be discontinued and that the
International Labor Office at Geneva be asked to continue its work and
studies on migration. Dr. Laughlin informally approached the Delegation
with a view to securing its endorsement of his program but was informed
that the Delegation could not support any declaration of general principles.
Following this overture, the Delegation decided that its efforts should be
directed against the possible adoption by the Conference of this or similar
proposals and accordingly asked and obtained authority from the
Department to object to the introduction of Dr. Laughlin’s proposal on the
ground that it dealt with matters beyond the scope of the Conference, and to
make the following statement should developments in the Conference
indicate that such a course would be desirable:
“In view of the vital questions of sovereignty involved in
discussions of the international aspects of emigration and
immigration, it is obvious that the only useful purpose to be
served by international conference such as this lies in facilitating
the exchange of information. It is the belief of my Government
that this purpose can be adequately and effectively served by
direct correspondence between governments and between
organizations interested in these matters. My Government
therefore suggests that the Committee of the Rome Conference be
dissolved and that the present Conference be permitted to dissolve
without providing for a continuation of its labors other than
through the channels I have indicated. In making this suggestion I
wish to express my Government’s appreciation of the manner in
which the Committee of the Rome Conference has carried out its
duties, the personal satisfaction I have experienced in my
association with the labors of this Conference and my most hearty
appreciation of the courtesy and hospitality accorded us by the
Cuban Government.”

However, developments were such that the Delegation found it unnecessary
to make use of this authorization.
Nevertheless, it became evident that views similar to those of Dr. Laughlin
were held by certain of the delegates to the Conference when, at the third
meeting of the Fourth Commission on April 11, the Cuban Delegation
introduced a resolution rehearsing a set of general principles of migration
closely analogous to those set forth in Dr. Laughlin’s informal proposal and
recommending that the task of carrying on the work of the First and Second
Conferences on Emigration and Immigration be entrusted to the members
of the Committee of Control of the Rome Conference which should sit at
Geneva under the title of the International Office on Emigration and
Immigration (see annex). At the same meeting the Mexican Delegation
introduced as an alternative proposal the same resolution on the general
principles of migration which it had advanced at the Sixth Pan American
Conference and which contained the following clause:
“No one of the American States may place obstacles in the way of
migration and immigration of the other American States nor limit
it to a determined number of citizens of another American State.”
(For full text see annex)
A lively discussion then took place from which it appeared that the Cuban
proposal would require considerable modification before it could hope to
obtain favorable consideration by the Conference and the meeting
accordingly adjourned after referring the Mexican proposal to a
subcommittee for examination.
At the Fifth Session of the Fourth Commission on April 13 the Cuban
proposal was presented once more, this time divided into two distinct
proposals, (1) a somewhat modified general declaration of principles and
(2) a resolution providing for the continuation of the work of the
Conferences on Emigration and Immigration by the Rome Committee under
the title of the International Office on Emigration and Immigration which
would sit at Geneva. The Spanish Delegate then arose and presented a
counterproposal to take the place of the Cuban resolution regarding the
continuation of the work of the Conference, in substance as follows:

“1. That there is no occasion for the establishment of
new international bodies, for it (i. e., the Conference)
trusts that those which are now dealing with these
questions will carry on their work with the same skill
and efficiency they have displayed so far.
“2. That the wish be expressed to the respective
governments to the end that, pending the holding of a
new Conference and in the period intervening between
its sessions, the Directing Committee of the Havana
Conference take over the same functions which were
discharged by the Directing Committee of Rome,
empowering the said Directing Committee to the end
that, in agreement with the respective governments, it
may change its seat, should it so deem necessary, and
propose the organization of an auxiliary Secretariat”.
(For full text see annex)
A heated debate ensued revolving about the question whether this new
proposal could be discussed before the Commission had acted upon the
Cuban resolution. However, the Commission, in spite of Cuban
protestations that the Cuban Government could not assume the
responsibility entailed in the Spanish resolution, finally adopted the Spanish
proposal, paragraph 1 by a recorded vote of twenty-four ayes to three noes
and paragraph 2 by twenty-one ayes to no noes with ten abstentions. The
discussion then turned to the Cuban declaration of principle which the
Rumanian Delegate proposed be referred to the new Committee for
consideration at the Third Conference. The vote upon this proposal resulted
in nine ayes and two noes with eighteen abstentions. As noted above, the
American Delegation formally abstained from voting on these roll calls. As
the meeting concluded, the Cuban Delegation once more protested the
inability of the Cuban Government to assume the responsibilities involved
in the adoption by the Conference of the Spanish resolution and the meeting
adjourned leaving discussion of the Mexican proposal as to a declaration of
principles to the following day.

At the Sixth Session of the Fourth Commission, held the morning of April
14, the subcommittee in charge of the Mexican proposal reported that the
Mexican Delegation had eliminated the clause in its proposal regarding Pan
American migration (see above) but that the subcommittee had been unable
to agree whether the Conference should do more than note the Mexican
proposal on the official record.
No further meetings of the Fourth Commission took place and accordingly
the Cuban and Mexican proposals as to declarations of principles were next
discussed at the third plenary session of the Conference on April 17. After a
heated discussion the Mexican Delegate succeeded in having the
Conference take official note of the resolutions on emigration and
immigration adopted by the Sixth Pan American Conference, and in having
his declaration of principles referred to the Third International Conference
on Emigration and Immigration by a vote of seventeen ayes and no noes
with fifteen abstentions. (It was in course of this vote that Dr. Long made
the declaration noted above). At this juncture the Cuban Delegation
withdrew its own declaration of principles which was to have been referred
to the consideration of the Third Conference and the session adjourned,
having only the question of the resolution as to the holding of a Third
Conference to be passed upon by the Conference.
This was speedily accomplished at the final plenary session of April 17 by
the adoption of a resolution based upon the Spanish proposal. (The text of
that resolution is given in an earlier portion of this report) The attitude of
the American Delegation regarding the vote of acclamation in favor of this
proposition has been described elsewhere in this report.
The business of the Conference being then concluded, the closing session
took place in the afternoon on April 17 with Dr. Rafael Martinez Ortiz,
Cuban Secretary of State, presiding, and appropriate addresses were
delivered by Dr. Sánchez de Fuentes, President of the Conference, Dr. Long
of the American Delegation (see above), Signor Vivaldi of Italy, Señor
Vicente Palmaroli of Spain, Señor Pérez Alfonseca of Santo Domingo,
Señor Grandi of Argentina, Mr. Aoki of Japan, Mr. Gawronski of Poland,
and finally by Dr. Ortiz, who, in the name of the President of Cuba,
declared the Conference at an end.

The attitude of the American Delegation, throughout the debates described
above, was, in view of its instructions, a passive one. Of the two proposals
as to the method of carrying on work of the Conferences, the American
Delegation considered the Spanish resolution placing the task in the hands
of the Presidential Committee of the Habana Conference much more
desirable than the Cuban resolution perpetuating the Rome Committee
under the name of the International Office on Emigration and Immigration
at Geneva, and it went to the extent of asking authorization from the
Department to support the Spanish resolution openly in the commission
meetings and the plenary sessions, should developments appear to justify an
active intervention in the proceedings on the part of the United States.
However, the Department was of the opinion that any departure from the
attitude previously taken by the Delegation would be undesirable and
accordingly withheld the authorization which the Delegation had requested.
However, by the time that the Department’s views had been signified to the
Delegation, any necessity which might have existed for positive action on
the part of the American Delegation had been obviated by the
overwhelming support given the Spanish proposal, notably by the Pan
American nations, and accordingly the Department’s decision to deny this
authorization was in no sense a source of embarrassment to the Delegation.
As will appear from the foregoing, there will not be a Third International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration until a majority of the
interested nations (i. e., those represented at Habana) express their desire
for such a Conference. In the meantime the task of preparing the agenda of
a third Conference is left in the hands of the Presidential Committee of the
Habana Conference, of which the United States is technically a member
through the election of Mr. Husband as one of the ten Vice Presidents of the
Habana Conference. The only question left for this Government to
determine is whether it shall continue to hold its right to a place on this
Committee. In some respects it might, on the surface, be more consistent
with the attitude of the United States toward the consideration by
international gatherings of problems of immigration, which it regards as a
purely domestic question in which the authority of Congress is exclusive,
for this Government formally to withdraw from the Habana Committee.
However, on the general question of American policy as to immigration, the
statements and actions of the American Delegation have left no room for

misapprehensions on the part of other Governments and it is not perceived
that a gesture such as a formal withdrawal from the Habana Committee is
needed to emphasize this point. On the other hand, both for the purpose of
observation and more particularly for the purpose of cooperating with the
Pan American nations, whose interest in immigration matters is closely
analogous to that of this Government, the retention of the technical right to
this place would appear desirable. It may further be observed that
withdrawal of the United States from the Committee would destroy the
present majority by which control of the Committee lies in the hands of the
Pan American nations and would enable the countries of emigration to
obtain that control. The question does not call for urgent decision as it is
most unlikely that this Government will be asked to function in its capacity
as a member of the Habana Committee or to assume any responsibilities in
connection therewith for an appreciable length of time. It is, therefore, the
recommendation of the Delegation that the decision on this question be
deferred until such time as the United States may be asked to take active
part in the work of the Committee when, it is believed, the question can be
adequately decided in the light of the considerations presenting themselves
at that time.
This report would be incomplete without a reference to the cordial reception
and the many courtesies extended by the Cuban Government and its
officials to the delegates to the Conference. These included a reception
given by the President of Cuba in the Presidential Palace, dinners given by
the Secretary of State, by the Mayor of Habana, and by the President of the
Conference, and official excursions to Mariel to visit sugar plantations and
mills, to Triscornia to visit the new Cuban Immigrant Receiving Station
established there, and visits to many Cuban manufacturing plants in and
near Habana. The relations of the American delegates with their Cuban
hosts and with their colleagues were pleasant and cordial to a degree. The
American delegates also received cards from the Habana Country Club, the
Habana Yacht Club and the American Club of Habana, and were the
recipients of many other courtesies, both official and unofficial.
In closing, the Delegation would wish to express its appreciation of the
helpful assistance and cooperation given it by the American Ambassador to
Cuba and his staff. In particular, thanks, both official and personal, are due

Mr. Williamson and Mr. Shields, the Disbursing Officer at Habana, for the
extremely efficient arrangements made for the activities and work of the
Delegation. The clerical force is to be commended for its spirit and its
efficiency and the Delegation feels that its success—for it believes its
mission to have been a success—was in large measure due to the assistance
and support rendered it by its staff, by the American Embassy in Habana
and by the cooperation it received from Washington.
Respectfully submitted,
For the Delegation,
W. W. HUSBAND, Chairman
HENRY CARTER, Secretary
68 Not printed.
69 The annexes to this report are not printed.
68 Not printed.
68 Not printed.
71 Not printed.
73 See art. 8 under “Reglamento de la Segunda Conferencia”, Diario
Oflcial, first vol., p. 34.
74 See Diario Oficial, tomo II, pp. 332 ff.

[Document 355]
The Secretary of State to the Cuban Chargé (Altunaga)
WASHINGTON, September 14, 1928.
SIR: I beg to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your note of August 24
enclosing three copies of the Final Act of the Second International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration held in Habana, March–April,
1928, one of the copies being certified by the Under Secretary of State of
Cuba.
In your note you touch upon the possibility of this Government’s adhering
to the resolution adopted by the Habana Conference regarding the holding
of a third International Conference on Emigration and Immigration in
Madrid, the organization of which would be in the charge of the Directing
Committee as provided in paragraphs one and two of the resolution under
reference.
It will not have escaped the attention of your Government that the delegates
of the United States to the Second International Conference on Emigration
and Immigration abstained from voting on the resolution in question as well
as upon the other resolutions presented to the Conference, and it will be
recalled that following the adoption of the resolution under reference they
explained verbally to officials of the Conference that they did not consider
the vote of acclamation adopted by the Conference with respect to
paragraphs one and two of the resolution as in any way binding upon the
United States and that they wished to be understood as having abstained
from voting upon those paragraphs. In order to avoid any possibility of
misunderstanding upon this point, I take this occasion formally to confirm
the statements made at that time by the American delegates.
With regard to the possibility of the United States adhering to the resolution
regarding the holding of a third Conference in Madrid, I would advert to the
traditional attitude of the United States on the subject of immigration as set

forth by the American delegates to the Habana Conference to the effect that
the Government of the United States considers the control of immigration to
be a matter of purely domestic concern, representing the exercise of a
sovereign right, and that, so far as the United States is concerned, the
authority of its Congress in immigration matters is exclusive. In view of the
very definite manner in which the Congress has exercised this authority,
particularly in the passage of the Immigration Act of 1924, and considering
the fundamental divisions of opinion on the subject of immigration which
developed at the Habana Conference, this Government is constrained to
state that in its view no useful purpose is served by such Conferences other
than the exchange of technical information, an aim which it believes can be
satisfactorily achieved by direct correspondence between Governments and
international organizations. The Government of the United States must
therefore state that under existing circumstances it is not disposed to adhere
to the resolution in question nor to participate in a third International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration, and I should be grateful if you
would be good enough to convey its views, with regard to the holding of a
third International Conference on Emigration and Immigration, as here
expressed, to the appropriate quarter.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

Sixth International Conference of
American States, held at Habana,
1 See also Sixth International Conference of American States, Habana,
Cuba, January 16, 1928, Special Handbook for the Use of Delegates,
prepared by the Pan American Union (Washington, Government Printing
Office, 1927); Program and Regulations of the Sixth International
Conference of American States, To Assemble at Habana, Cuba, January 16,
1928, Adopted by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1927); Sixth International
Conference of American States, Havana, 1928, Final Act; also Report of the
Delegates of the United States of America to the Sixth International
Conference of American States, Held at Habana, Cuba, January 16 to
February 20, 1928, With Appendices (Washington, Government Printing
Office, 1928).
Preliminaries
[356] The Cuban Chargé (Barón) to the Secretary of State
Washington, December 17, 1926.
[357] The Secretary of State to the Cuban Chargé (Barón)
Washington, January 6, 1927.
[358] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Curtis)
710.F/122a: Telegram
[359] The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
710.F/123: Telegram
[360] The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State

[361] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Curtis)
710.F/123: Telegram
[362] The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
710.F/124: Telegram
[363] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, January 5, 1928.

[Document 356]
The Cuban Chargé (Barón) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, December 17, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: The Fifth American International Conference held at Santiago,
capital of the Republic of Chile, in 1923,2 resolved to name Habana, capital
of the Republic of Cuba, for the place where the Sixth American
International Conference shall meet, and the Cuban Government with the
approval of the Pan American Union, has decided to open the said
conference on the sixteenth of January, 1928.
In the name of the Government of Cuba I have the honor to invite the
Government of the United States to be represented at the Sixth American
International Conference and to say that my Government is greatly
interested in having Your Excellency’s Government send its delegates to the
said conference, which, by virtue of its great labors which it is to carry out,
will prove a substantial tie and strong foundation for genuine American
brotherhood.
The program of the Sixth American International Conference will be
directly delivered by the Pan American Union to Your Excellency’s
Government as soon as it is finally approved.
My Government would be grateful if the Government, in the event of
accepting the invitation, would kindly let it know as soon as possible the
names and number of its delegates.
I avail myself [etc.]
JOSÉ BARÓN

Delegates of the United States of America to the Fifth International
Conference of American States, Held at Santiago, Chile, March 25 to May

[Document 357]
The Secretary of State to the Cuban Chargé (Barón)
WASHINGTON, January 6, 1927.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Embassy’s note of
December 17, 1926, by which I am informed that the Cuban Government
has decided to open the Sixth International Conference of American States
on January 16, 1928, and the Government of the United States is invited by
the Government of Cuba to participate therein by delegates.
In reply you are informed that the Government of the United States accepts
the invitation with pleasure, and that you will be advised at a later date as to
the number and the names of its delegates.
Note is taken of your statement that the program of the Conference will be
delivered to this Government by the Pan American Union as soon as it shall
have been finally approved.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
J. BUTLER WRIGHT

710.F/122a: Telegram
[Document 358]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Curtis)
[Paraphrase]
85. The New York Times this morning publishes a despatch with Geneva
date line as follows:3
“At the request of the Cuban Government, the League of Nations
has decided to send a member of the League Secretariat to
Habana to follow the proceedings of the Pan American Union
Conference in January.”
Please bring this press statement immediately to the attention of the Foreign
Minister and ask him if it is correct. If the answer is in the affirmative, you
will please state the views of the Government of the United States as set
add that the Government of the United States feels that no non-American
nation or entity should participate or be present at the Pan American
Conferences, and it hopes that the Government of Cuba will concur in this
view and will not have any such representatives present.
You should make it clearly understood that no criticism or disparagement of
the League of Nations is intended, when it is observed that the Pan
American Conference is organized upon a separate and distinct basis. The
League of Nations is intended to be world-wide in its scope and a number
of American States are members of the League of Nations and are thus able
to express their viewpoints on matters of world-wide import which come
before the attention of the Council and the Assembly of the League of
Nations, respectively. The Pan American Conferences have their existence
because of the distinct interests of the American States which, without any
antagonism to any world relationship, make it desirable for these States to

confer with respect to the problems which relate expressly to the States of
the Western Hemisphere. Participation in the Pan American Conference of
representatives of the League of Nations would bring to the Conference the
policies and viewpoints of States which are members of the League of
Nations and are not American States and thus the nature of the Conference
itself would be fundamentally altered. The scope of the Pan American
Conference is confined to aims and interests of this hemisphere, and the
integrity of the Conference as an exclusively American conference should
be maintained if its usefulness is to be preserved.
Should the Government of Cuba have issued such an invitation, you will
call attention to article 22 of the regulations of the Sixth International
Conference of American States which provides:5
“Attendance at the deliberations of the Conference shall be
confined to the following: The delegates with their respective
secretaries and attaches; the Director or other accredited
representative of the Pan American Union and his secretary; the
secretaries of the sessions; the interpreters and stenographers of
the Conference; such representatives of the press as are properly
accredited and as are approved by the Committee on
Organization; and the authorized attendants: Provided, however,
That the Conference may by a majority vote extend the courtesies
of the Conference to such persons as it may at any time
designate.”
You may state in this connection that perhaps the Government of Cuba had
not yet received copies of these regulations when it issued the invitation,
and that the provision of this article might conveniently afford a way out,
permitting the Government of Cuba to inform the League of Nations that,
on account of this, it would not be possible for a representative of the
League of Nations to attend the Conference unless and until the
Conference, by a majority vote, should extend to him the courtesy of the
Conference.
You may also request an audience of the President and express the same
views to him if you deem it to be necessary.

Kerioce
* Quotation not

“Not printed,
> Quotation NOt paraphrased.

Paraphraseqd.

710.F/123: Telegram
[Document 359]
The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:25 p.m.]
for me this morning, and referring to a telegram from Cuban Ambassador at
Washington informed me that the Cuban Government not only did not
invite a representative of League of Nations to be present at forthcoming
Conference but that when the Secretary General requested an invitation it
was refused.
The Spanish Chargé d’Affaires, Habana, also approached the Cuban
Government and was refused an invitation for his Government to be
represented.
CURTIS

[Document 360]
The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, November 9, 1927.
[Received November 14.]
No. 2352
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s cable
effect that the League of Nations has been invited by the Cuban
Government to send an observer to attend the meetings of the Sixth Pan
American Conference, to be held in Habana next January.
Before the deciphering of the above mentioned cable had been completed I
received a message that the Cuban Secretary of State wished me to come to
see him. In accordance with his request I called to see him later in the
morning. He opened our conversation by giving me information on a
subject of decidedly minor importance and then, of his own accord, brought
up the subject of the Department’s cable, concerning which he had received
a cable from the Cuban Ambassador in Washington. He stated that the
reports which had been appearing in the foreign press and even in the
Habana newspapers to the effect that Cuba had invited the League of
Nations to send an observer were not merely inaccurate but absolutely
contrary to the facts; that the Secretary of the League of Nations had
approached the Cuban Secretary at Geneva, Mr. William de Blanc, and had
stated that the secretaryship of the League of Nations would greatly
appreciate the opportunity to have an observer at the meetings of the
Conference; that Mr. de Blanc had promptly cabled to the Secretary of
State, who immediately replied to the effect that the Cuban Government
was not in a position to extend any such invitation under any circumstances
and that its position as host to the delegations of the other American nations
would make it an act of discourtesy for it even to suggest to those nations
that such an invitation might be extended. He further read to me the text of

a cable, which was at that moment being enciphered for transmission to
Ambassador Ferrara, repeating the statements which he had just made to me
and adding assurances of the great desire of the Cuban Government to
cooperate with that of the United States in every way concerning all matters
connected with the Pan American Conference.
In view of the Secretary’s voluntary action in giving me all the information
which I could have desired, I made no mention to him of the cable from the
Department, since I felt that Ambassador Ferrara had probably already
emphasized sufficiently the Department’s interest in the matter and I did not
desire the Secretary to feel that this Embassy was further attempting to
influence the attitude of the Cuban Government in this matter.
In connection with the foregoing the Cuban Secretary of State informed me
that just after his return from his long vacation, on October 21st, the
Spanish Chargé d’Affaires here sought from Dr. Campa, the Cuban
Undersecretary of State, an invitation for the Spanish Government to be
represented at the Conference by an observer; that Dr. Campa made answer
in substantially the same terms as the answer given to the League of
Nations, as reported above; that the Spanish Chargé d’Affaires returned a
few days later and sought from the Secretary of State the invitation which
had already been refused by his subordinate. Needless to say, the Spanish
Chargé received on the second occasion the same answer as on the first.
It would seem that the reply made to the Spanish Ambassador in
Washington by Mr. White, as reported in the Department’s strictly
to discourage the Spanish Government from making further efforts to obtain
an invitation to be represented by an observer.
As to the report published in the New York Times, I quote below a
translation of an Associated Press despatch published in the Diario de la
Marina of yesterday:
“Geneva, Nov. 7. (AP). At the instance of the Cuban Government
the League of Nations has decided to send to Habana a member
of the secretariat as ‘observer’ of the progress of the sessions of

the Pan American Conference which are to take place next
January.”
As I did not wish to take up this matter formally with the Secretary of State,
Dr. Martinez Ortíz, I sought an interview with the Undersecretary, but
found that he would not be at the State Department during the day. Mr.
Williamson, Second Secretary of this Embassy, was, however, going to the
State Department to seek information concerning other minor matters, and,
at my request, he inquired casually of Sr. Carbonell, the Chief of the Pan
American Bureau and in direct charge of Cuba’s preparations for
participation in the Pan American Conference, as to the truth of this report.
Mr. Williamson was informed that there was not the slightest truth in it and
that Cuba realized fully that it could extend no such invitation, even should
such be its desire, without consulting all of the other nations which are
members of the Pan American Conference.
I have [etc.]
C. B. CURTIS
6 Not printed.

710.F/123: Telegram
[Document 361]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Curtis)
publishes following Associated Press despatch dated Geneva, November
10:
“Although the League of Nations does not intend to send an
official observer to the forthcoming pan-American conference in
Havana, the League secretariat probably will participate in the
work of preliminary organization for the conference.
An official note issued today said that the League secretariat was
sending Cristobal Rodriguez to Havana. Rodriguez is a Panaman
and a member of the secretariat. It also is reported that one or
more League interpreters may go to the conference.
It appears that Cuba, which is a member of the League council,
first consulted Sir Eric Drummond, League secretary, concerning
technical points connected with preparation for the conference,
which is scheduled to open in January, because of the League’s
vast experience in arranging such affairs. Sir Eric appointed Señor
Rodriguez to supply the requested information, and soon after
Cuba asked whether Rodriguez could not be sent to Havana. To
this Sir Eric agreed.
Although the League does not intend to send an official
‘observer,’ it is understood that Rodriguez will make a report,
especially because of the fact that the League is seeking to
augment its links of liaison with its Latin American members.”

Please inquire immediately regarding this and report definitely regarding
measures taken by Cuba with the League in connection with coming
Conference. It is most important that the Department know exactly what
has been done and whether any official of the League has been requested to
come to Habana and if so when and for what purpose.
KELLOGG

710.F/124: Telegram
[Document 362]
The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:50 p.m.]
informs me that the Secretariat of the League of Nations was consulted
concerning the strictly mechanical preparations for the Conference and
Rodriguez was anxious to come to Habana to assist but … Cuban
Government has refused to allow him to come in any but a purely personal
capacity. It has been absolutely impossible to find any competent
interpreters in Cuba and the League has therefore been asked whether some
of its interpreters could be obtained as individuals to serve during the period
of the Conference, subject to there being no objection on the part of any
other members of the Conference. He stated that no official of the League
had been invited to come to Cuba in any capacity whatsoever.
CURTIS

[Document 363]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation7
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1928.
SIRS: The International Conference of American States to which you have
been designated as representatives of our country is the sixth conference of
this type to be held on the Western Hemisphere, covering a period of
approximately forty years. It is an established principle of our international
policy that: “Among the Foreign Relations of the United States as they fall
into categories, the Pan American policy takes first place in our diplomacy.”
In this regard I wish to express your Government’s appreciation of the
importance of the occasion and its sense of the responsibility you have
undertaken in accepting appointment to represent it at a gathering where
there will be present delegates from all the American Republics.
Our country has occupied a unique position with regard to the nations of
Latin America. Our national individuality and independence were acquired
before theirs, and when they achieved independence, they turned to us for
moral guidance and support. But today and for many years past, they have
stood alone, free, independent, self-reliant. The United States does not
desire and in no sense can it be contemplated that any of the American
peoples should be in a state of tutelage. We wish the fullest possible
development of the national life of the republics of America in complete
accord with their own national characteristics and aptitudes. If it is possible
for us to assist them in any way, through our development and our
achievements in science and industry, we shall be glad to extend such
assistance in the most friendly manner, but we shall not proffer it unless it is
desired. The policy of the Government of the United States towards the
Republics of Latin America is one of mutually beneficial cooperation, and
it is of paramount importance that the spirit of this policy be manifested in
your attitude and action at the Conference.

To the task of these conferences, which in the first instance was consultative
and recommendatory only, has been added that of approval. The programs
of the various conferences, which dealt primarily with political, commercial
and social matters included subjects concerning which an element of
controversy was notably absent. Only those topics were inserted about
which the American States held similar opinions and where a complete
accord might be looked for through a friendly and frank exchange of views.
In this connection, and as stated in the instructions to the American
delegates to the Fifth Pan American Conference:8 “It should be borne in
mind that the function of these Pan American Conferences is to deal so far
as possible with non-controversial subjects of general interest, upon which
free and full discussion may be had with the purpose and probability of
arriving at agreement and cooperation. International questions which cause
prolonged, and even bitter and controversial debate, are not infrequently, in
their important aspects, of actual interest only to a small group of nations. It
is believed that in this Conference the most fruitful results will be obtained
if discussion is confined to those aspects of the various topics which are of
interest to all the Republics. In this connection, you will bear in mind that
the present Conference has not been called to sit in judgment on the conduct
of any nation, or to attempt to redress alleged wrongs.”
It nevertheless is possible that attempts may be made to introduce for
discussion subjects not incorporated in the program. For your guidance in
such a contingency, there have been prepared a brief analysis of the political
affairs of the several American Republics and an analysis of economic
affairs, which are attached hereto as appendices Nos. 1 and 2.
As to results accomplished by the past Conferences, I am happy to state that
projects have been endorsed and recommendations made on matters
political, commercial and sanitary which have had a profound and far
reaching influence on the course of events in this Hemisphere. Since the
first International Conference of American States it is noteworthy that there
has not been a declaration of war between any of the American States,
although armed disturbances have occurred. The coming together of men
typical of the best feeling and thought of all the republics brings about a
gradual growth of mutual understanding upon which it is possible to build
solid international friendships founded in justice, respect, good-will, and

tolerance. It is for this that I desire you to give your studious attention not
only to the particular subjects before the conference but also to the task of
becoming imbued with the spirit which animates the American policy of the
United States, so that the tone of your whole attitude and action shall be in
harmony with that policy.
The Fifth International Conference of American States, held at Santiago,
Chile, adopted a resolution naming the City of Habana as the seat of the
Sixth International Conference, and provided that the Governing Board of
the Pan American Union, together with the Government of the Republic of
Cuba, would fix the date thereof. In conformity with this resolution the date
of January 16, 1928, was fixed for the convening of the Sixth Conference,
and the Governing Board of the Pan American Union prepared the program
which was approved on April 12, 1927, and submitted to the governments
of the states members of the Pan American Union which reads as follows:
PROGRAM OF THE SIXTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF AMERICAN STATES TO ASSEMBLE AT HABANA, CUBA, JANUARY 16,
ARTICLE I
PAN AMERICAN UNION
Topic 1. Organization of the Pan American Union on the basis of a
convention prepared by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union in
accordance with the resolution adopted by the Fifth International
Conference of American States on May 1, 1923.
ARTICLE II
MATTERS OF AN INTER-AMERICAN JURIDICAL NATURES
Topic 1. Consideration of the results of the Commission of Jurists
which assembled at Rio de Janeiro.9
Topic 2. In view of the fact that the codification of international
law has been entrusted to the Commission of Jurists which
assembled at Rio de Janeiro, the commission has been
recommended to give preferential attention to the study of

“Methods for the pacific settlement of international disputes”; but
if the commission should not have time to dispatch this part of its
work, this topic will be considered included in the program and
submitted to the consideration of the Sixth Conference.
Topic 3. The Commission of Jurists which assembled at Rio de
Janeiro was entrusted, by resolution of the Fifth International
Conference of American States, with making comparative studies
tending toward uniformity in civil law, commercial law,
procedure law and other branches of private law; and the
Governing Board has recommended that they give preferential
attention to the preparation of projects of uniform legislation on:
(a) Commercial law and other branches of legislation in
which uniformity is possible and desirable;
(b) Maritime law, for the preservation of life and
property on board ship;
(c) Principles to which the juridical status of companies
organized in a foreign State should be adjusted, with a
view to securing uniform standards;
(d) Legislative measures for extending to women the
same civil rights as those enjoyed by adult males;
(e) Bases for determining the nationality of individuals
with a view to eliminating the conflict of laws on
nationality;
(f) Legislation designed to prevent the loss of
nationality by a woman because of marriage;
(g) Recognition of the validity, by the authorities of the
States represented at the Conference or which adhere to
its conventions, of the acts and documents relating to
the civil status of persons, estates, and contracts made
by foreigners before the respective diplomatic and

consular agents, and the preparation of a standard form
for each of the aforesaid instruments;
(h) Commercial arbitration;
(i) Elimination of the differences in the juridical system
relative to bills of exchange and checks, by means of an
international agreement or uniform legislation;
(j) Organization and regulation of the international
service of checks and postal money orders; and
(k) Regulation of the use of water power and other uses
or applications of the waters of international rivers for
industrial and agricultural purposes.
If the commission should not have time to prepare these projects,
this topic will be considered included in the program and
submitted to the consideration of the Sixth Conference.
Topic 4. Frontier Police.
ARTICLE III
PROBLEMS OF COMMUNICATIONS
Topic 1. Consideration of the results of the work of the Inter-
American Commission on Commercial Aviation, provided for by
resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American
States.
Topic 2. Regulation of international automotive traffic.
Topic 3. Means for facilitating the development of fluvial inter-
communication between the nations of America.
Topic 4. (a) International regulation of railway traffic;

(b) Consideration of the report of the Pan American Railway
Committee.
Topic 5. Organization of a technical commission to study and
recommend the most effective means for the establishment of
steamship lines to connect the countries of America and to
recommend measures for the elimination of all unnecessary port
formalities.
Topic 6. Consideration of the results of the Pan American
Highway Conference, which met at Buenos Aires in October
1925, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International
Conference of American States.
Topic 7. Consideration of the results of the Inter-American
Electrical Communications Conference, which met at Mexico
City in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International
Conference of American States.
ARTICLE IV
INTELLECTUAL COOPERATION
Topic 1. Establishment of a Pan American geographical institute
which shall serve as a center of coordination, distribution, and
dissemination of geographical studies in the American States and
as an organ of cooperation between the geographical institutes of
America for facilitating the study of boundary questions between
the American nations.
Topic 2. Recommendation to the countries of America that in
their legislation they levy a minimum duty on the importation of
books and minimum postal rates on books and periodicals.
Topic 3. Recommendation to the countries, members of the
Union, that have not yet done so, to publish geodetic, geological,
agricultural maps, etc., which will give an idea of their natural
resources, possibilities of development, and also of their means of
communication.

Topic 4. Revision of the Convention on Intellectual Property
signed at Buenos Aires (1910).10
Topic 5. Establishment of scholarships and fellowships.
Topic 6. Exchange of professors and students.
Topic 7. To recommend the establishment of special chairs,
supported or subsidized by the Government, for the study of the
Spanish, English and Portuguese languages and of their respective
literatures.
Topic 8. To recommend the establishment in the Universities of
the countries, members of the Pan American Union, of special
chairs for the study of the Commercial Legislation of the
American Republics.
Topic 9. Consideration of the results of the Pan American
Congress of Journalists, which met at Washington in compliance
with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of
American States.
ARTICLE V
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Topic 1. Uniformity of legislation on consular fees.
Topic 2. Conference of chambers of commerce and, as a part of its
program, organization of an inter-American chamber of
commerce.
Topic 3. International aspects of immigration problems.
Topic 4. Revision of the conventions signed at Buenos Aires in
191011 and at Santiago, Chile, in 1923,12 with a view to
formulating changes which shall assure uniform and effective
protection for trade-marks in the States members of the Pan
American Union.

Topic 5. Consideration of the results of the Conference on
Uniformity of Communication Statistics, which met at Lima in
December, 1924, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth
International Conference of American States.
Topic 6. Consideration of the results of the standardization
Conference which met at Lima on December 23, 1924, in
accordance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference
of American States and the conference which met at Washington
in 1927.
ARTICLE VI
SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Topic 1. Consideration of the action taken by the American States
in complying with the recommendations of the Fifth International
Conference of American States on the Pan American Maritime
Sanitary Code.
Topic 2. Consideration of the action taken by the American States
in complying with the resolution on principles and procedure in
public-health administration, approved by the Fifth International
Conference of American States at its session of April 16, 1923.
Topic 3. Consideration of the results of the Conference on
Eugenics and Homoculture which will meet at Habana in 1927, in
compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International
Conference of American States.
Topic 4. Consideration of the results of the Conference of
Directing Heads of Public Health Services which was held at
Washington in September, 1926, in compliance with a resolution
of the Fifth International Conference of American States.
Topic 5. Consideration of the action taken by the countries of
America for the organization and development of national Red
Cross societies, and the results of the Pan American Red Cross

Conference referred to in the resolution adopted by the Fifth
International Conference of American States on April 12, 1923.
ARTICLE VII
REPORTS ON TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS
ARTICLE VIII
FUTURE CONFERENCES
You will note that the program is divided into eight Articles, which in turn
are subdivided into thirty-two Topics. For your convenience the Department
of State has prepared instructions applying to this program, which are
attached hereto. As the conference progresses developments on certain of
the topics of the program may necessitate a modification of the instructions.
In this case the Department will supply such further advice and instruction
as may be necessary for your guidance.
The Governing Board of the Pan American Union has also prepared the
Regulations for the Sixth International Conference of American States
which were unanimously approved by the Governing Board at the meeting
It will be noted in Article 24 of the Regulations governing the Conference,
just cited, that the deliberations of the Conference shall be confined to such
subjects as are contained in the Program, except when by a vote of two-
thirds of the delegations the Conference decides to take under consideration
a new matter submitted by one delegation and seconded by another. A
motion to take under consideration a new subject shall be decided without
debate. You will note, furthermore, that new subjects can be incorporated in
the Program only at plenary sessions of the Conference.
Article 22 of these regulations prescribes the rules governing the attendance
at the deliberations of the conference. Your attention is directed to the
attached political memorandum and the advisability of excluding all
applicants for official attendance at these sessions by non-American
representatives.

Articles 6 to 8 of these regulations set forth the committee method of
handling the business of the conference. The business of the last conference
was greatly facilitated by a steering committee made up of the President of
the Conference and the Chairman of each delegation with special powers
over the calling of plenary sessions, program and general supervisory
control. It is hoped a similar procedure may be followed in this conference.
ARTICLE I
PAN AMERICAN UNION
Topic 1. Organization of the Pan American Union on the basis of a
Convention prepared by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union,
in accordance with the Resolution adopted by the Fifth International
Conference of American States on May 1, 1923.
The Fifth Conference resolved to recommend to the Governments of the
Republics of America the study of a project for the organization of the Pan
American Union, in order that the Governing Board of the Pan American
Union might present a draft of a Resolution or Convention to the Sixth
Conference. In accordance with this resolution the Governing Board of the
Pan American Union has prepared (consult pages 27 to 31 of the Special
Handbook) a Project of Convention organizing the Pan American Union,
which will be submitted to the Sixth Conference.
In general it may be said that the United States Government approves of
this Convention. However, certain of its provisions show a tendency to
accord very broad powers to the Pan American Union and to invest it with a
political character which might be considered beyond the scope of such an
organization, or are otherwise undesirable. In this connection, your attention
is directed to Articles III, VI, XIV, XV, and XVI.
It is desired that you shall suggest the modification of the second clause of
Article III of the project of the Convention for the organization of the Pan
American Union to read as follows:
“A Director General, who shall have charge of the administration
of the Pan American Union, with power to promote its most
ample development, in accordance with the terms of this

convention, with the regulations, and with the resolutions of the
Board, to which body he shall be responsible. The Director
General shall attend, in an advisory capacity, the meetings of the
Governing Board, and of the Committees appointed by the Board
for the purpose of giving such information as may be required.
The Director General also shall attend in his official capacity the
future International Conferences of American States. The
expenses of the Director General and his assistants incurred
through attendance at these Conferences shall be met out of the
funds of the Pan American Union.”
Article VI, Paragraph 1, provides that the originals of diplomatic
instruments signed at the International Conferences of American States, the
minutes of their meetings, and all documents connected with the holding of
the Conference, shall be placed under the custody of the Pan American
Union. At present all original documents signed at International
Conferences of American States are placed in the custody of the
government in whose capital the Conference is held. Some advantages
might be expected from having all conference minutes and documents
collected in one place instead of scattered among various capitals, as is the
case today. At the present time it is very difficult to ascertain what countries
have ratified the various Conventions, and you may therefore support this
Article.
Article XIV provides that the states members of the Union “in so far as
their internal legislation permits, shall take measures for sending to the
Library of the Pan American Union one copy of each work published in the
country”. While it is not thought possible that the United States without
legislative action can carry out the procedure contemplated in this Article it
is thought that the clause reading “in so far as their internal legislation
permits” is a sufficient safeguard that the United States is not assuming any
obligation which it is unable to perform.
Article XV provides that each of the Government[s] members of the Union
shall establish a committee composed of persons of experience in Pan
American affairs, or an office attached to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to
be entrusted with Pan American matters.

These committees or offices shall have the following duties:
(a) To cooperate with their respective Governments to obtain
ratification of treaties and conventions, and to give effect to the
resolutions adopted by the International Conferences of American
States.
(b) To furnish the, Pan American Union promptly with the
information it may need in the preparation of its work.
(c) To present to the Union through the proper channels such
projects as they may consider adapted to the purposes of the
Union.
The establishment of a committee, such as that described above, would
seem unnecessarily to expand the organization of the Pan American Union
and its affiliated organizations. In a large measure such a committee would
appear to duplicate the work of the national committees of the Inter-
American High Commission. It is thought that the committees of the Inter-
American High Commission, already organized, could well undertake the
functions which it is intended the committee described in this Article shall
undertake, and it is believed that if practicable the Inter-American High
Commission might even be merged into the Pan American Union. If other
nations members of the Pan American Union desire to establish such a new
committee, there would of course be no objection on the part of the United
States, but you should be careful not to commit the United States to follow
their example. Neither does this Government feel the necessity for creating
a new office attached to the Department of State and entrusted with affairs
connected with the Pan American Union. This function is already fulfilled
by the Division of Latin American Affairs, which acts as a liaison office
between the Department of State and the Pan American Union. It is thought
that the Division of Latin American Affairs of the Department of State can
fulfill all the functions set forth in clauses a, b and c of Article XV quoted
above.
Article XVI provides for the formation of a pension and retirement fund.
The United States is disposed to encourage this plan, although, of course,

any contributions to be made to it outside of the regular revenues of the Pan
American Union would be subject to Congressional action.
ARTICLE II
Topic 1. Consideration of the results of the Commission of Jurists
which assembled at Rio de Janeiro.
Topic 2. In view of the fact that the codification of international
law has been entrusted to the Commission of Jurists which
assembled at Rio de Janeiro, the commission has been
recommended to give preferential attention to the study of
“Methods for the pacific settlement of international disputes”; but
if the commission should not have time to dispatch this part of its
work, this topic will be considered included in the program and
submitted to the consideration of the Sixth Conference.
(NOTE: In connection with the following instruction, your attention is directed
CODIFICATION OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW
[Here follows information on previous efforts taken by American States
toward the codification of international law.]
On January 2, 1924, the Chairman of the Governing Board of the Pan
American Union laid before the Board the following resolution:
“Whereas, The Fifth International Conference of American States
adopted a vote of thanks for the results achieved by the American
Institute of International Law; and,
“Whereas, One of the purposes for which the American Institute
of International Law has been established is to secure a more
definite formulation of the rules of international law; and,
“Whereas, The codification of the rules of international law is the
most important task entrusted to the International Commission of
Jurists, and,

“Whereas, The labors of the American Institute of International
Law will be of great service to the International Commission of
Jurists in the fulfillment of the task assigned to it.
“Be it Resolved:
“By the Governing Board of the Pan American Union to submit
to the Executive Committee of the American Institute of
International Law the desirability of holding a session of the
Institute in 1924 in order that the results of the deliberations of
the Institute may be submitted to the International Commission of
Jurists at its meeting at Rio de Janeiro in 1925.” (Am. Journal Int.
In instructions given to the American delegates to the Conference at Rio de
Janeiro,15 the Department stated that “Codification is a clear, systematic and
authoritative statement of existing law; it does not involve the framing of
new legislation. The Delegates of the United States to the Congress of
Jurists should not, therefore, participate in the drafting of new international
legislation embodying changes in the existing systems of law of the Nations
It would appear from the foregoing that the Commission of Jurists, and
especially the American delegates, were to limit their activities to the
codifying of International Law. Of the twelve projects on Public
International Law which the Commission has recommended for
consideration,16 three are hardly to be regarded as proper subjects for
incorporation in a code of International Law. The Department has in mind
project No. V, concerning the Exchange of Publications, Project No. VI,
regarding Exchange of Professors and Students, and Project No. X having
to do with Asylum.
There is attached a memorandum in which these twelve projects have been
briefly analyzed and discussed (Appendix No. 6),17 Generally speaking,
those Articles which have not been mentioned are to be regarded as
unobjectionable. None of the projects is free in its entirety from objection.

In many cases the Commission of Jurists has set forth existing International
Law; in others, however, it has set forth what it apparently has considered
International Law should be. It is not believed that any one of the projects
could be accepted in the form in which it has been presented. Most of them
contain subjects which are either outside the realm of International Law or
on which the practice of Nations has not been sufficiently uniform as to
warrant the conclusion that it has crystallized into International Law. These
have been specifically covered in the comments on the various Articles.
While most of the projects afford a good working basis and, with certain
changes, might be developed into an acceptable statement of existing
International Law, it will be seen that considerable work will be required in
order to render the drafts acceptable. It may well be that many of the
objections pointed out in the attached memorandum can be cured in the
deliberations of the Committee which may have the subject under
consideration. It is doubted, however, whether a general conference, such as
the Sixth Pan American Conference, will find it possible, with the large
number of questions to be considered, to revise these drafts, without greatly
prolonging its sessions, in such a way as to make them entirely acceptable.
It is not desired that the American delegates should show any disinclination
to go forward with the codification of International Law, which has
heretofore been supported by this Government, but rather that they should
take the position that the magnitude and importance of the task would seem
to require that the respective Governments be given the benefit of the views
and criticisms, if any, of the Conference and that their revision and
incorporation into treaty form be left to a Commission or Conference to be
called at a later date.
Topics 1 and 2, Supplement (a)
During the course of its sessions there were presented to the International
Commission of Jurists by certain Delegates a series of socalled
“Propositions”, which the Commission decided to submit to the Sixth
International Conference of American States. The “Propositions” are
“International Commission of Jurists—Public International Law”.

For your guidance in any discussion of these “Propositions” that may take
place, there has been prepared a Memorandum (Appendix No. 8)18 which
presents the views of this Government with respect to the several matters to
which they relate.
Topics 1 and 2, Supplement (b)
Topic 2 of Article II, which includes consideration of “Methods for the
Pacific Settlement of International Disputes”, and Article IV, topic 9, page
1, the resolution of the Pan American Congress of Journalists, bring before
the Conference the question of arbitration of international disputes. You will
notice by analysis of the treaties made between various Central and South
American countries that as a whole these countries have gone a long
distance upon the question of arbitration. The question was brought up at
Santiago during the Fifth Pan American Conference. Those countries
generally were not willing to enter into a general arbitration treaty which
was less broad than the ones they now have. In other words, they said this
would be a step backward. The Department believes, however, that a
proposition to arbitrate any claim of right susceptible of judicial decision by
application of the principles of law or equity, that is, a legal right under well
established principles of international law or a legal right under a treaty,
might be acceptable to the principal Central and South American countries.
Manifestly, the United States cannot agree to arbitrate purely political
questions involving its domestic policy or any question which is purely
within the jurisdiction of the United States and which does not infringe the
legal right of foreign countries or the citizens thereof. I think it would be
comparatively easy to draft a treaty which the United States could agree to
and quite likely the Latin American countries would also agree to. It would
be a step forward and, in my opinion, have great influence in Latin
America. The main question is one of the construction of the Arbitral
Tribunal. This has been discussed generally with Mr. Hughes. It would be
better to have a panel chosen from the United States and the other members
of the Latin American countries with some means of selecting a non-
American arbitrator other than drawing by lot. Mr. Hughes made a very
valuable suggestion—that if each country selected one or two arbitrators
and they could not decide on a chairman or arbitrator, that he be a non-

American and chosen by a special panel composed of members of The
Hague Tribunal or some of them. I doubt very much if the Senate would
ratify a treaty for arbitration unless the agreement for submission be
submitted to the Senate. That has been the universal practice and I am
convinced that it would have to be followed in this case.
MATTERS OF AN INTER-AMERICAN JURIDICAL NATURE
(Private International Law)
Topic 3.
One of the subjects on the agenda of the Sixth Pan American Conference is
the codification of Private International Law. The Commission of Jurists
which met in Rio de Janeiro in April, 1927, recommended for consideration
by the forthcoming conference at Habana a projected code prepared by Dr.
Bustamante, the Cuban delegate on the Commission of Jurists.
The Department attaches hereto a memorandum in which the provisions of
the project are briefly analyzed and discussed (Appendix No. 7).19 It will be
seen that there are fundamental reasons why the United States could not
agree to a code in the form of this project.
The first and most important obstacle to the preparation of a satisfactory
code of Private International Law results from the difference between the
system of jurisprudence obtaining in the United States, which had its origin
in the English Common Law, and that obtaining in other American
countries, which had its origin in the Roman Civil Law. It will be seen that
the project here in question is based primarily on the theory of the law of
nationality, whereas the system in the United States is based on the theory
of territorial law, the principle of which is that the law in force in the
territory shall apply to all persons within the territorial jurisdiction
regardless of their nationality. Many of the provisions of the project are
entirely foreign to our legal system. Others are so at variance with the
principles of law established in this country as to render impossible their
acceptance.
An additional reason why this Government could not subscribe to a code of
this character is that a vast majority of the subjects covered are matters

within the exclusive competency of the several States with which it would
be contrary to the policy of the Federal Government to interfere. I have in
mind such matters as birth, matrimony and divorce, paternity and filiation,
adoption, guardianship, emancipation and majority, property and its various
classifications, leases, annuities, partnerships, loans, bailments, contracts,
questions of evidence and rules of procedure.
You can readily appreciate that any effort by the Federal Government to
regulate such matters, except as an incident to the exercise of its powers
under the Constitution, would give rise to the charge of encroachment upon
the rights reserved to the several States. Some of the subjects such, for
example, as nationality and naturalization, matters pertaining to public
securities and commercial paper, transportation, insurance, bills of
exchange, when they concern interstate or foreign commerce, also matters
pertaining to ships and aircraft, offenses committed against the
Government, extradition, bankruptcy, etc., are, of course, well within the
purview of the powers of the Federal Government. Provisions of the project
with respect to these subjects, however, are for the most part unacceptable
to this Government because of the fact, as indicated above, that they are
based primarily on the civil law which differs widely from the system of
law to which we are accustomed.
The convention as a whole would be unacceptable to this Government. It
will probably be found to be unacceptable to other countries represented at
the conference. That there was by no means complete accord among the
delegates on the Commission of Jurists is shown by the report (Appendix
No. 5) of the American delegates,20 from which it is understood that the
project was approved provisionally in order that attempts at the codification
of Private International Law should not prove abortive and the Sixth Pan
American Conference fail to have before it for consideration any
constructive project dealing with the subject.
You should take the position that while general principles governing some
of the subjects covered by Dr. Bustamante’s project might conceivably be
evolved in subsequent conferences, in view of the magnitude and
importance of the subjects and the great divergence between the laws of the

different American States much careful thought will be required for the
formulation of rules which would be generally satisfactory.
Topic 3(h). Commercial Arbitration.
The American Arbitration Association has recommended the proposal by
the American Delegation of a resolution in the following terms:
“That the Member States of the Pan American Union recommend
to their respective legislatures the enactment of a law which will
make valid, enforceable and irrevocable, a provision in any
written contract relating to commerce, to settle by arbitration any
controversy arising thereafter out of such contract; and which will
permit the award, upon its confirmation by the court, to be treated
as a judgment in an action.”
Although definite progress is being made in some of the Latin-American
Republics in the application of the principle of commercial arbitration—
notably in Brazil, Mexico, Chile and Argentina—and the practice has had a
steady but slow development in the United States, it is not believed that a
resolution making obligatory the settlement by arbitration of any
controversy arising out of any contract relating to commerce would find the
delegates from many of the Latin-American States in a receptive mood.
Even in the United States it has required many years of educational
activities to convince American business men of the value of enforceable
commercial arbitration of the type mentioned, and there is still considerable
disapproval on the part of many business men and attorneys as to the
advisability of inserting such clauses making arbitration on disputed points
enforceable and irrevocable. The proceedings and reports of the American
Bar Association evidence two distinct schools of thought in that
authoritative body with respect to this matter.
It is not believed that business psychology, trade customs and legal systems
in Latin-America can be readily and suddenly adapted to the theory of
commercial arbitration contained in the United States Arbitration Act
(Appendix No. 9)21 which, together with the statutes in New York and New
Jersey, as well as some other States marks the most advanced status of

commercial arbitration in this country, and it is felt that any movement to
bring about a more general use of arbitration in the Latin-American States
should be effected through educational and voluntary methods.
Any endeavor by the American Delegation to have such a resolution
adopted might be considered by certain Latin-American States as an
attempt to force legislation upon them, and although such a resolution
would be in keeping with recent practice in the United States, you are
directed, should its presentation to the Conference be deemed advisable, to
bring about its introduction by a delegation of some other State.
Topic 3 (j). Subject: Organization and Regulation of the International
Service of Checks and Postal Money Orders.
[Instructions on this subject are omitted.]
Topic 4. Frontier Police.
It is understood that this subject has been included in the agenda of the
Conference at the instance of the Argentine Government, and that the
discussion may follow the lines of the generalization of inter-American
frontier agreements, such as the Argentine-Chilean and Argentine-Bolivian
treaties of 1919.
It is the view of this Government that this question is primarily regional in
that conditions along the various frontiers are not alike and hence must be
met in accordance with the peculiar needs of each situation. This
Government, therefore, feels that the end sought could best be obtained
through separate conventions between the various bordering States rather
than by a general agreement of all the American nations.
The United States would be affected only in so far as the policing of the
frontier between this country and Mexico, and the boundary between the
Canal Zone and the Republic of Panama are concerned. It is not considered
desirable to enter into any arrangements with Mexico, or into any
discussion with the Mexican delegates looking to the conclusion of an
agreement on the subject of frontier police at this time. The so-called

Smuggling Treaty with Mexico was recently allowed to lapse at the
instance of the United States Government.22
The boundary between the Canal Zone and the Republic of Panama is
adequately policed, and satisfactory arrangements and understanding
providing for cooperation between the police of the Zone and of the
Republic already exist.
ARTICLE III
PROBLEMS OF COMMUNICATIONS
Topic 1. Consideration of the results of the work of the inter-American
Commission on Commercial Aviation, provided for by resolution of the
Fifth International Conference of American States.
In compliance with the resolution of the Fifth Conference, the Inter-
American Commission on Commercial Aviation met at Washington in May,
1927, and approved certain conclusions and resolutions which were
included in the Final Act of the Commission. The Governing Board of the
Pan American Union then formulated a Project of Convention on
Commercial Aviation, based on the results of the aforesaid Final Act, which
is to be submitted for the consideration of the Sixth International
Conference of American States. Copies of the Final Act of the Inter-
American Commercial Aviation Commission, and the Project of
Convention on Commercial Aviation are attached to the files of the
convention shall safeguard certain special arrangements which the
Government of the United States already has concluded, or may in the
future conclude, with other States and you are therefore directed to
endeavor to have Article 31 of the Project of Convention on Commercial
Aviation amended to read as follows:
Article 31
The right of any of the contracting States to enter into any
convention or special agreement with any other State or States
concerning international aerial navigation is recognized, so long

as such convention or special agreement shall not impair the
rights or obligations of any of the States party to this Convention,
acquired or imposed herein; provided however that prohibited
areas within their respective territories, and regulations pertaining
thereto, may be agreed upon by two or more States for military
reasons or in the interest of public safety. Such agreements, and
all regulations pursuant thereto, shall be subject to the same
conditions as those set forth in Article 5 of this Convention with
respect to prohibited areas within the territory of a particular
State.
While the remainder of the Convention on Commercial Aviation in its
present form meets with the approval of the United States Government,
nevertheless it is desired that you advance the following suggestions as
being calculated to clarify and improve the text and prevent
misunderstandings:
1. It is suggested that Article 3 be changed to read as follows:
“Private aircraft shall be deemed to be all classes of aircraft with
the following exceptions:
“a. Military aircraft, which embraces every aircraft
owned, controlled, or operated by a contracting state in
connection with its military or naval service thereof, or
detailed for that purpose by competent military or naval
authority.
“b. Aircraft owned, controlled or operated by a
contracting state in connection with the administration
of
postal,
customs,
police,
forestry,
or
other
governmental services.”
It is not intended that you shall press for this change in Article 3 should you
find that it encounters any serious opposition.
2. It is suggested that the words “signal of distress” be substituted for the
words “danger signal” in Article 6 and that the nations signatory to this

Convention signify their intention of following the system of signals of
distress agreed upon in the International Convention relating to the
regulation of aerial navigation signed at Paris on October 13, 1919
(Appendix No. 14),24
3. It is suggested that the words “and into” be inserted between the words
“above” and “their” in Article 7.
4. You will suggest the addition to Article 12 of the following sentence:
“After a State has filed a copy of such registrations it shall
thereafter file monthly with every other State party to this
Convention and with the Pan American Union, a copy of all new
registrations containing all the information referred to in Articles
8 and 12 of this Convention and any cancellations of registrations
made during the period covered.”
5. It is suggested that the last three lines of Article 15 of the Convention
beginning with the words “Subject, however” be deleted.
6. It is suggested that the words “State authorities” in Article 19, paragraph
4, (line 5) be changed to read “customs and immigration authorities.”
7. It is suggested that the word “wholly” be inserted between the words
“operations” and “within” in Article 23.
8. It is suggested that the following reading be substituted for Article 27:
“The aircraft of all States shall have the right in cases of danger to
all possible aid.”
9. It is suggested that the following paragraphs be added to Article 32:
“Each contracting State shall exchange with every other
contracting State within three months after the date of ratification
of this Convention copies of its air traffic rules and requirements
as to competency for aircraft commanders, pilots, engineers, and
other members of the operating crew, and the requirements for

airworthiness of aircraft intended to engage in international
commerce.
“Each contracting State shall deposit with every other State party
to this Convention and with the Pan American Union three
months prior to the date proposed for their enforcement any
additions to or amendments of the regulations referred to in the
last preceding paragraph.”
10. It is suggested that it would be beneficial if a provision could be
included in the Convention giving the states, dominions and colonies of this
hemisphere, not members of the Pan American Union, the privilege of
adhering to this Convention if they should so desire.
American Union shall cooperate with the Governments of the contracting
States, shall receive the ratifications and retain them in its archives, and
shall give notice of the adherence or denunciation by one State to the other
signatory States, grant to the Pan American Union a political character
which it is not thought that such an organization should enjoy. This is
especially true of Article XXXII. In this connection you are referred to your
instructions in connection with the Project of Convention on the Pan
American Union. The question of the participation of the Pan American
Union provided for in this Convention will be determined by the manner in
which the Convention organizing the Pan American Union is finally
approved by the Sixth International Conference. Should no changes be
made in the Convention organizing the Pan American Union none will be
needed with respect to this feature of the Convention on Commercial
Aviation, but should the sections of the former Convention authorizing the
Pan American Union to act as custodian of the originals of diplomatic
Convention on Commercial Aviation will be necessary.
Inasmuch as the resolutions and conclusions of the Inter-American
Commercial Aviation Commission were not reached without some
controversy between the delegates of the different nations represented, it is
highly probable that the Convention will not be adopted at Habana without

reopening some of the questions which were debated by the Commission in
Washington last May.
With the exception of Article 31, which it is desired shall be amended in the
manner suggested, you are authorized to approve of the convention on
commercial aviation either in its present form or with any or all of the
suggested changes specified above, but in the event that any further
alterations are proposed you should request time to communicate with your
Government for instructions before the question is put to a vote.
It is needless to remind you of the importance to this country of operating
under a satisfactory international convention regarding Commercial
Aviation; and of the necessity for taking especial care that this country is
not compelled under any international convention to sanction procedure and
practices which might jeopardize the safety of the Panama Canal.
Topic 2. Regulation of international automotive traffic.
Automotive traffic in the United States is subject to regulation by the States
and not by the Federal Government. The American delegation should give
full consideration to this fact before taking or participating in any action on
this subject. Any efforts to secure uniformity of regulation of international
automotive traffic or the elimination of undesirable difficulties or
formalities in connection there-with should nevertheless be considered as a
laudable endeavor and receive the cordial support of the American
delegation. However, such support must necessarily be limited to that
consistent with the restrictions imposed upon participation in any final
action taken by the Conference.
The United States Government would view with pleasure, as representing
the views of the Conference with regard to this subject, the adoption of the
pertinent portions of the report of the Highway Transport Committee of the
American Section of the International Chamber of Commerce, as revised
for use at the meeting of the International Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm in June 1927 and enclosed as Appendix No. 15 to these
which contain a discussion of the principles of highway finance, and to

traffic rules and regulations.
Topic
3.
Means
for
facilitating
the
development
of
fluvial
intercommunication between the nations of America.
[Instructions on this subject are omitted.]
Topic 4 (a). International regulation of railway traffic.
[Instructions on this subject are omitted.]
Topic 4 (b). Consideration of the report of the Pan American Railway
Committee.
As the result of a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of
American States the Pan American Railway Committee was constituted by
the governing board of the Pan American Union. This Committee at its
several meetings considered various projects and after an exchange of
views adopted the following resolution:
“That the project of Mr. Briano and the suggestion of Mr. Verne
L. Havens already presented, as well as those which may be
presented hereafter, be submitted to the consideration of the
American Governments.
“That the countries of America be asked to indicate the
modifications which they consider desirable to make in the
proposed route through their respective territories.
“That the interested countries indicate the interior ports or cities
through which they desire the Pan American Railway to pass, so
that the exploitation of this line may be carried out in relation to
the navigable rivers.
“That each country be asked to indicate the approximate route of
the branch lines to connect with the proposed trunk lines.

“That each country indicate whether it is willing to carry out with
its means and resources the work of exploration and the direct
surveys, or surveys by means of aero-photography which may be
necessary, and that they specify the time at which they can send
this to the Central Committee.
“That each country be asked to indicate the form of financing
which appears most desirable with respect to that portion of the
line included within its borders, in order that the road may be
constructed in the shortest possible time.”
As the subjects of this resolution are limited in that the countries of
America are called upon merely to give consideration to said subjects it is
desired that you approve said resolution and recommend that the
participating States use their best efforts to further the work of the Pan
American Railway Committee.
Topic 5. Organization of a Technical Commission to Study and Recommend
the Most Effective Means for the Establishment of Steamship Lines to
Connect the Countries of America and to Recommend Measures for the
Elimination of all Unnecessary Port Formalities.
In the past ten years there has been a very gratifying improvement in ocean
transportation facilities between the countries of the western hemisphere,
due in large measure to the necessities arising out of the increased volume
of trade carried on between those countries. Statistical data on this subject
appears in the foreign section of volume 2 of the 1927 Commerce
Yearbook. This is now in the press but will be made available to the
Delegation.
The question of improved ocean transportation and that of simplification of
port formalities are matters that have been discussed at previous
conferences. However, a technical commission, properly organized, might
submit a more concise and practical presentation of the problems that are
involved than has been the case heretofore. As further improvement is
desired in this field you will manifest the interest felt by the United States
in this subject and endorse any deserving project put before the conference
with the view to increasing and improving steamship traffic.

Topic 6. Consideration of the results of the Pan American Highway
Conference, which met at Buenos Aires in October, 1925, in compliance
with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States.
The instructions relative to Topic 2 of Article III apply also to this Topic.
Topic 7. Consideration of the Results of the Inter-American Electrical
Communications Conference, which met at Mexico City in Compliance
with a Resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States.
[Here follows a résumé of the proceedings of the Electrical
Communications Conference: a similar résumé is printed in Bulletin of the
Pan American Union (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1925), vol.
It is desired that you shall indicate that you deem it appropriate to treat the
work accomplished at the Conference at Mexico City as preparation for the
International Radiotelegraph Conference held at Washington in 1927, and
also that you shall endeavor to bring about the adoption of a resolution by
the Sixth International Conference of American States urging the several
governments to ratify at the earliest possible date the International
Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations signed at Washington on
ARTICLE IV
INTELLECTUAL COOPERATION
Topic 1. Establishment of a Pan American geographical institute which
shall serve as a center of coordination, distribution and dissemination of
geographical studies in the American States and as an organ of cooperation
between the geographical institutes of America for facilitating the study of
boundary questions between the American nations.
In connection with the establishment of such an institute careful
consideration should be given to the complications which would be
encountered in the many existing boundary disputes between the Latin
American nations, which would doubtless render it difficult for the
scientists of Latin America to enter into and carry out any cooperative plan

because of political considerations which would have to be taken into
account. At the present time there are no geographical institutions in
America making a special study of boundary questions between the
American nations except the American Geographical Society, which has
long specialized in the subject and continues to do so in connection with its
program of Hispanic-American research, now in its seventh year, and
having to do with the creation of a great map of Hispanic-America on a
active communication with all other geographic societies throughout the
world there is nothing lacking in the way of cooperation under existing
arrangements.
It is desired that the American delegates should adopt a neutral though
friendly position towards the plan provided for in this item of the agenda,
making no commitments or offers in connection with it, and being
especially careful to say nothing in connection with the boundary disputes
or political considerations which might give offence to other nations. If a
workable plan for the establishment of such an institute results from the
labors of the Conference, it will then be time for the United States
Government to consider to what extent it may desire to participate in the
work of that institute.
Topic 2. Recommendation to the countries of America that in their
legislation they levy a minimum duty on the importation of books and
minimum postal rates on books and periodicals.
This item contemplates changes in the tariff which can only be
accomplished by legislative action. You should not oppose, however, the
adoption of any reasonable resolutions which can properly be submitted to
the United States Congress for such action as that body may desire to take.
Topic 3. Recommendation to the countries, Members of the Union, that
have not yet done so, to publish geodetic, geological, agricultural maps,
etc., which will give an idea of their natural resources, possibilities of
development, and also of their means of communication.

This proposal differs from that in Article IV, Topic 1, in that it depends
upon the initiative of each country and not upon cooperation between
different countries. In view of the fact that the material referred to in this
item is either non-existent or very limited for most of the countries
concerned it would seem advisable that such a recommendation should be
supported by the American delegates and favorably acted upon by the
Conference. Better maps of Latin American nations along the lines
indicated should tend to promote a more intelligent understanding of those
countries among themselves and in the United States.
The Department of Agriculture of the United States is especially interested
in the matter of soil mapping and a proposed soil map of the world which
the Fifth Commission of the International Society of Soil Science has it in
mind to undertake.
Topic 4. Revision of the Convention on Intellectual Property signed at
Buenos Aires (1910).
According to the Department’s information, this Convention has been
ratified by the United States, Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay and
Uruguay. It was signed but not ratified by Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Cuba, Mexico, Salvador and Venezuela. According to the Department’s
information Peru ratified the Convention but did not communicate the act of
ratification to the Argentine Government as contemplated by Article XVI of
the Convention.
Article II should be amended so as to include in the protected works such
forms of property as motion picture films, musical records, and player piano
rolls. Numerous instances have come to the Department’s attention of the
pirating of property of this character of American producers. The
unauthorized use of motion picture films is particularly prevalent. While it
has been possible in some instances to procure protection of the American
owners through the application of local police regulations, these measures
have not in all instances proved successful. It is highly desirable that the
protection procured by this Convention be extended to cover this class of
property.

It is desirable that Article III of the Convention be revised so as to require
that there be included in the statement indicating the reservation of the
property right the name of the copyright proprietor, the country of origin or
the country or countries of first or simultaneous publication and the year of
first publication.
Article IV should be amended so as to include among the means of
reproduction the right to dramatize, to make or cause to have made motion
picture films, the right to public performance by means of the radio or any
other means and the right to reproduce by any method.
Inasmuch as there are now thirteen countries which have accepted this
Convention, it would be inadvisable to substitute a new Convention which
might require several years for ratification. It would be preferable to
conclude a separate convention in which any amendments agreed upon are
made, which when ratified would be made a part of the Convention of
1910, the present Convention remaining in force as the fundamental
agreement. This comment is applicable also to the Trade-Mark
Convention.27
Topic 5. Establishment of Scholarships and Fellowships.
In the United States Federal control of education does not exist, whereas in
the Latin American States such Federal control exists and has made
possible the conclusion among them of various international conventions
concerning educational matters.
You will bear in mind the constitutional limits imposed upon this
Government in regard to this subject, but you will not oppose any
agreement which may be of benefit to the other American Republics, even
though its provisions should make ultimate action upon it by this
Government impossible.
The growth in recent years in the movement for the establishment of
scholarships and fellowships in American institutions of learning for the
benefit of Latin American students has been very gratifying, and you may
support any practical plan looking to the further development of this means

of promoting mutual, intellectual and social understanding. (See Appendix
Topic 6. Exchange of Professors and Students.
The same considerations apply with regard to this subject as to the
preceding one regarding the establishment of scholarships and fellowships.
In addition, the matter of recognition of professional degrees is a matter
controlled by the State governments and not one in which the Federal
Government may interfere.
Topic 7. To recommend the establishment of special chairs, supported or
subsidized by the government, for the study of the Spanish, English and
Portuguese languages and of their respective literatures.
In the United States the establishment of special chairs for instruction in
specific subjects is left to the private initiative of the various universities
and colleges, which are not subsidized or supported by the federal
government, although many of them receive pecuniary aid from state
governments. In general it may be said that the Spanish language and
literature is widely taught in the United States, and in most of the larger
colleges courses in Portuguese are also available. In general it may be
asserted that the United States has gone far along this line.
Naturally an increase in the study of the English language and its literature
in the Latin American countries will be a distinct advantage in bringing
about a more intimate knowledge of this country in Latin America and you
should accordingly look with favor upon the adoption of such a resolution
as is forecast in this item. As this contemplates a procedure requiring in the
United States legislative action and an appropriation by Congress you will
of course say nothing which might encourage the hope that it will be
adopted in this country. In many of the Latin American countries which
maintain a government department of public instruction it is possible that
special chairs might be established and supported by the Government
through an executive decree. This would not, of course be the case in this
country.

Topic 8. To recommend the establishment in the Universities of the
countries, members of the Pan American Union, of special chairs for the
study of the commercial legislation of the American Republics.
In general it may be said that this is not a subject which lies within the
scope of the United States Government, but you may lend such assistance
as you may find possible during the discussion of this question.
Topic 9. Consideration of the results of the Pan American Congress of
Journalists, which met at Washington in compliance with a resolution of the
Fifth International Conference of American States.
A copy of the resolution of the First Pan American Congress of Journalists
appears as Appendix No. 24.29
In general these resolutions appear to be unobjectionable. However,
Resolution 4, which reads as follows:
“Recommends the adoption of arbitration as a means of settling
all disputes between the American Republics and with other
nations, not only in case of political disagreements but in all those
which in any way affect the interests of or harmony between the
nations of the Western Hemisphere. It recommends that all the
members of the Pan American Press not represented in this
Congress adhere to this recommendation.”
appears to be broader in its scope than is appropriate for a Congress of this
nature, and brings up a number of political questions which require very
careful consideration. This subject should more properly be considered
under Article II, Topics 2 and 3, and not in connection with a resolution of
the First Pan American Congress of Journalists.
Resolution 15, which “Recommends that the Pan American Union extend
the scope of its activities,” appears to be altogether too vague in its terms
and subject to uncertain interpretations. This subject should more properly
be considered in connection with Article I, Topic 1, on the organization of
the Pan American Union.

If a motion is made formally to approve the resolutions of the First Pan
American Congress of Journalists you should make an exception in the case
of Resolution 15.
You may in your discretion propose to the Conference the desirability of
holding further such congresses.
ARTICLE V
Topic 1. Uniformity of legislation on consular fees.
This subject has on several occasions been considered by Pan American as
well as other conferences. There is attached to the files for your information
a full memorandum and classified statements of consular fees collected by
the United States in Latin America and by Latin American countries in the
United States.29
Uniformity of legislation on consular fees came up for discussion also at the
Third Pan American Commercial Conference, held in Washington in 1927.
That Conference recommended to the Governing Board of the Pan
American Union that a Pan American Committee be created for the purpose
of studying the simplification and standardization of consular procedure as
to inter-American trade as far as that might be possible without interfering
with the national interests of the respective governments. By a resolution
adopted at a meeting of the Governing Board on June 6, 1927, the members
of the Board were requested to recommend to their respective Governments
the designation of representatives to serve upon a Pan American Committee
and Monday, October 10, 1927, was designated as the date on which the
Committee should convene in Washington. Among the subjects discussed
by the Committee were that the consular fee be regarded as a service charge
rather than as additional duty and that, pursuant to the recognized principle
that the fee paid for certifying a shipping document constitutes a fee for a
service rendered and should not represent a customs duty, consideration be
given to the question of moderating and obtaining uniformity in the charges
for the consular certification of such documents.…

… After further discussion the Commission adopted a resolution as follows:
“It is recommended that those countries represented in this
conference decide that consular fees are to be considered as
compensation for services rendered but not as an additional tax.
“The reduction of consular fees to the lowest possible point
compatible with the necessities of each country is recommended
until such time as a uniform scale of charges is reached.”
In view of the history of the resolution finally adopted by the Commission
and of the agreement of the Delegation of the United States to that
resolution it appears that you should not attempt at the forthcoming
Conference to advocate the adoption of principles which go beyond those
agreed to by the Pan American Commission, unless after very careful
preliminary consultations with the other Delegations it is convincingly
shown that steps in advance of that position may successfully be advocated.
Topic 1, Supplement A. Pan American Commission on the Simplification
and Standardization of Consular Procedure.
While the program of the Sixth International Conference of American
States under the heading Article V, Topic 1, calls for consideration of the
specific topic “Uniformity of Legislation on Consular Fees”, it is
contemplated that the results of the Pan American Commission on the
Simplification and Standardization of Consular Procedure—as a general
subject—likewise may be submitted to the Conference. In this event the
following instruction is furnished for your guidance:
“The United States approves, with the exceptions hereinafter mentioned, of
the Resolutions adopted by the Pan American Commission on the
Simplification and Standardization of Consular Procedure, and it is desired
that you discreetly lend your influence to secure approval by the
Conference of the work of the Commission. However, it is not believed
advisable that the United States Government should appear as the party
most interested in the adoption of the Resolutions.

Resolution X as passed by the Commission declares that consular fees are
to be considered as compensation for services rendered and not as an
additional tax, and includes a recommendation for the reduction of consular
fees to the lowest point compatible with the necessities of each country.
While the United States would like to see this resolution strengthened into a
specific declaration against the practice of the collection of consular invoice
fees on the basis of a percentage of the value of the shipments, in view of
the fact that two-thirds of the American Republics actually collect consular
invoice fees on a percentage basis, the probability is apparent that the
Conference would not in any case approve without considerable discussion
any resolution looking to the abolishment of this practice. The United States
is disposed to accept the resolution as presented by the Commission
provided no satisfactory opportunity arises for its amendment without
endangering the success of the Commission’s work as an entirety. If an
opportune occasion should arise, however, you may place the United States
Government on record as being opposed to the system.
A reservation should be entered against that part of Resolution VI (c) which
calls for the use of the metric system of weights and measures in consular
invoices and makes all other systems subordinate thereto.”
Topic 2. Conference of chambers of commerce, and as a part of its program,
organization of an inter-American chamber of commerce.
The Department feels that any movement which will tend to draw
commercial organizations together for the consideration and solution of
international trade problems, and which will afford another opportunity of
contact between the United States and the Latin American countries, should
be encouraged. The United States is already a member of the International
Chamber of Commerce whose permanent headquarters are in Paris, and
maintains a national committee with an office in the Chamber of Commerce
of the United States at Washington. Important commercial organizations in
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic and Guatemala hold membership in this international chamber, so
the Sixth Pan American Conference might give thought to the existing
International Chamber of Commerce in considering this matter.

Should a proposition be advanced for a Pan American Chamber of
Commerce there would be no objection to adhering to such a resolution so
long as provision was made for close cooperation between the International
Chamber of Commerce and this proposed organization through one of the
existing Chambers of Commerce already a member of the International
Chamber at Paris.
The attitude of the American Chamber of Commerce with respect to this
question appears as Appendix 25.31
Topic 3. International Aspects of Immigration Problems.
The status of immigration as a question of purely domestic concern is one
which appears to be generally admitted and is one which has been formally
enunciated by the Government of the United States on numerous occasions.
Moore’s Digest refers to this question in the following terms (Vol. 4, page
151):
“The power to regulate immigration is an incident of the
sovereign right to expel or exclude objectionable aliens. The
exercise of the power in a particular country is governed by the
constitution and laws. In the United States it belongs to the
national government as part of its power to regulate commerce.”
Hyde defines it as follows (Volume 1, page 94.):
“A State is acknowledged to enjoy the broadest right to regulate
the admission of aliens to its territory. Declared Mr. Justice Gray
in the course of the opinion of the Supreme Court in the case of
Nishimura Ekiu v. United States:32
“‘It is an accepted maxim of international law, that every
sovereign nation has the power, as inherent in sovereignty, and
essential to self-preservation, to forbid the entrance of foreigners
within its dominions, or to admit them only in such cases and
upon such conditions as it may see fit to prescribe.’

“The law of nations has not as yet forbidden a State to exercise
largest discretion in establishing tests of the undesirability of
aliens, and to that end, to enforce discriminations of its own
devising. There is thus apparent a sharp distinction between the
legal propriety and ultimate expediency of exclusion laws. A
State may unwisely, although not unlawfully, exercise the full
measure of its privilege.”
These definitions are supported by numerous judicial decisions and official
utterances on the part of this Government which may be found in Moore,
As long as immigration to this country was practically unlimited, this
doctrine excited little comment, and the Immigration Act of 191733
providing qualitative tests for immigrants was regarded as a natural and
normal expression of this attribute of sovereignty. However, with the
passage of the Immigration Act of 192034 and more particularly with that of
192435 which provided a quantitative control of immigration, it assumed a
very vital importance, especially when it appeared that other nations in this
hemisphere were considering following the example of the United States. It
immediately became to the interest of emigration countries to endeavor to
have immigration questions regarded as a matter of international concern
and as a subject for international discussion.
The first serious effort to draw the United States into such discussions came
in 1923 when Italy which was particularly affected by the United States
policy of restricted immigration issued invitations for a general
international conference on emigration and immigration to be held at Rome
in 1924.36 In accepting that invitation this Government stated in a
“In connection with any discussion of matters relating to
immigration, in which representatives of this Government might
participate, it has already been indicated that there would be
necessarily certain limitations of such participation. The reception
of immigrants within the United States is regarded wholly as a
domestic matter, and the exclusive authority of Congress must be

recognized. Consequently, when participating in a conference of
the proposed nature, certain restrictions, obviously, would be
incumbent upon any American delegates.”
and this was repeated in a later note to the Italian Embassy, dated October 4,
1923,38 following an exchange of letters between Mr. Hughes and President
Coolidge, in which the latter stated, under date of August 24, 1923:
“Replying to your communication of August 22nd, relative to the
invitation of the Italian Government to participate in a conference
relative to immigration problems, I see no reason to vary the
original intention of participating, on the understanding, of
course, that such conference could not infringe on the province of
the Congress.”
and these views also found expression in a note addressed to the French
Embassy, dated October 2, 1923,38 discussing certain questions in
connection with the Rome Conference:
“I beg to advise you that since the International Conference which
is to take place in Rome—in which certain restrictions will be
incumbent upon the American representatives due to the fact that
the reception of immigrants within the United States is regarded
wholly as a domestic matter in which the exclusive authority of
Congress must be recognized—is to be a strictly technical one to
exchange and clarify views on pertinent questions, this
Government is unable to perceive the need for a preliminary
conference.”
Recognition of the sole authority of Congress in immigration matters was
further evinced in the Department’s instruction of December 26, 1923, to
the American delegates to the Rome Conference39 who were warned that
their designation in nowise authorized them to take any action committing
the Government of the United States.
On May 31, 1924, at the final session of the Rome Conference, the
American Chief Delegate, the Honorable E. J. Henning of the Department
of Labor, took occasion to enter upon the record of the proceedings of the

Conference a formal statement of the position of the United States which
indicated very plainly that this Government regarded immigration as a
purely domestic question.40
Following the adjournment of the Rome Conference, a Committee of
Control was formed to undertake the task of “preparing” the next
conference on emigration and immigration which is to be held in Habana in
March, 1928. The Italian Government invited this Government to name a
representative to this Committee but the Department decided against such a
course and authorized the American Ambassador in Rome, Mr. Fletcher,
under date of May 19, 1925, to address the following note to the Italian
Government:
“Matters relating to immigration have been so definitely regulated
by the Congress of the United States, in particular by the
Immigration Act of 1924, that it is impossible for this
Government to signify its participation in an international
conference on emigration and immigration until it has had
opportunity to examine the program which is to be discussed.
“While this Government has noted with satisfaction the
assurances of the Italian Government that the Committee of
Control will confine itself to the same matters which were
included in the program of the first conference, and that the
conference will have the same technical character as the first,
nevertheless it is the feeling of this Government that until a
concrete program for discussion has been submitted for its
scrutiny it will hardly be possible for it to determine whether or
not any useful purpose could be served by its participation.
“Therefore until such a program has been submitted and until a
definite decision has been reached with regard to the participation
of this Government in the proposed 1927 conference, the
Government of the United States feels that to name a
representative to the, Committee of Control, a privilege which is
limited to the governments accepting the invitation to take part in
the 1927 conference, would be a step open to misconstruction and

inconsistent with the practice of this Government in such
matters.”
However, this note was not formally presented, although the Italian
Government was apprised of its contents.
In the meantime Congress had actively asserted its authority over
immigration matters and had passed the Immigration Act of 1924. This Act,
as it will be recalled, involved the issue of Japanese exclusion which was
made the subject of a brisk correspondence between the Japanese
Ambassador and Mr. Hughes.41 However, throughout this correspondence
the United States consistently maintained, and Japan explicitly recognized,
immigration control to be a purely domestic question, Japan basing her
protests upon the ground of race discrimination. In signing the Act of 1924,
President Coolidge issued a statement on May 26, 1924, reading as follows:
“In signing this bill, which in its main features I heartily approve,
I regret the impossibility of severing from it the exclusion
provision, which in the light of existing laws, affects especially
the Japanese.
“I gladly recognize that the enactment of this provision does not
imply any change in our sentiment of admiration and cordial
friendship for the Japanese people, a sentiment which has had and
will continue to have abundant manifestation.
“The bill rather expresses the determination of the Congress to
exercise its prerogative in defining by legislation the control of
immigration, instead of leaving it to international arrangements. It
should be noted that the bill exempts from the exclusion provision
Government officials, those coming to this country as tourists, or
temporarily for business or pleasure, those in transit, seamen,
those already resident here, and returning from temporary
absences, professors, ministers of religion, students, and those
who enter solely to carry on trade in pursuance of existing treaty
provisions.

“But we have had for many years an understanding with Japan,
by which the Japanese government has voluntarily undertaken to
prevent the emigration of laborers to the United States, and in
view of this historic relation and of the feeling which inspired it,
it would have been much better in my judgment, and more
effective in the actual control of immigration, if we had continued
to invite that co-operation which Japan was ready to give and had
thus avoided creating any ground for misapprehension by an
unnecessary statutory enactment.
“That course would not have derogated from the authority of the
Congress to deal with the question in any exigency requiring its
action. There is scarcely any ground for disagreement as to the
result we want, but this method of securing it is unnecessary and
deplorable at this time.
“If the exclusion provision stood alone, I should disapprove it
without hesitation, if sought in this way at this time. But this bill
is a comprehensive measure dealing with the whole subject of
immigration and setting up the necessary administrative
machinery. The present quota act of 1921 will terminate on June
30 next. It is of great importance that a comprehensive measure
should take its place and that the arrangements for its
administration should be provided at once in order to avoid
hardship and confusion.
“I must therefore consider the bill as a whole and the imperative
need of the country for legislation of this general character. For
this reason the bill is approved.”
Recently occasion arose at the Assembly of the Interparliamentary
Commercial Conference at Rio de Janeiro for the United States to reassert
its position regarding immigration. Certain proposals advanced by the
Italian delegates regarding control of Italian emigrants on foreign soil
impressed the South American delegates as threatening to infringe upon the
sovereignty of their States and upon their exclusive control of immigration.
For obvious reasons they looked to the United States to be the spokesman
for the thesis of immigration as a matter of purely domestic concern. On

September 9, 1927, Senator Robinson, who was attending the Conference at
the request of Mr. Kellogg, addressed the Assembly as follows:
“It has seemed to us, in view of the difficulties of this question
and of the well-known differences of opinion that exist among the
nations represented here, that it is but just and appropriate to
present a fair and short outline of the position of our country as
we understand it.
“When the first Federal Census was taken in 1790, it disclosed in
the then territory of the United States of North America a
population of only 4,000,000. Our country opened wide its gates
to immigrants from every land on earth. They came from the
remotest parts of the world and entered into our citizenship and
became supporters of our institutions; so that after the lapse of
one hundred and twenty years, when the Census of 1920 was
taken, the total population of the United States was disclosed to
be more than 106,000,000—twentyseven times the population
disclosed by the preceding Census which I have already referred
to. We found it necessary and desirable to partly close our gates
against immigrants from other lands. This has been accomplished
through legislation enacted by the Congress of the United States.
We sympathize profoundly with the problems and difficulties of
the great countries of the old world which are distressed and
disturbed by conditions respecting over-population. We realize
that in a measure they are in the situation of the father or the
mother who witnesses a son or daughter depart from his home to
take residence among strangers, and just as any fond parent
follows his child with his prayers and his benedictions, his hopes
and his aspirations, so the people of the countries in which
immigrants have their origin quite naturally have a feeling and
desire to follow them with their assurances of assistance and
protection. But it seems to me, Mr. President, that it is not
inappropriate here to make clear to this Conference what many of
the Delegates already know has been the result of the experience
of the United States of North America respecting this question.
We understand that under the principles of international law as

commonly and generally accepted, every nation has the right if it
chooses to exercise its power to exclude immigrants or admitting
them to define the conditions under which they shall or may be
admitted, and we understand that this principle of law is in
conflict with the right of the country of origin to control the
destiny of the immigrant after he has taken his place in a foreign
land among strangers.
“We therefore accept in the United States the doctrine that when
one born under a flag finds it desirable to leave the home of his
birth, the land of his nativity, to seek residence and citizenship
under a new flag and in a strange land, that in doing so he
necessarily submits himself to the authority of that flag and to the
jurisdiction of the land of his adoption. We cannot settle here the
fundamental differences which I have referred to respecting the
subject of immigration. They are deep-seated, but permit me to
add before taking my seat, that as a necessary result from the
doctrine of international law which I have tried to make clear and
which is well recognized by most of you, it follows that the
country in which the immigrant takes his abode has the right and
owes the duty to protect him and to promote his advancement and
best interests in common with the citizens of the country as
distinguished from immigrants, and that the country of origin
cannot claim, under international law as accepted generally by
mankind, the right to control him after he has taken up his
residence in a foreign land.
“This statement has been made not out of a desire to provoke
controversy or to prolong the session of this conference. It has
been made solely for the purpose of making clear to the Delegates
the view point occupied by those who came here from the United
States of North America. We are entirely content to have the
convention take its action after hearing this statement.”
A perusal of the foregoing leaves no doubt of the position of this
Government that control of immigration must be regarded as a matter of

purely domestic concern, representing as it does the exercise of a sovereign
right and that the authority of Congress in immigration matters is exclusive.
Accordingly, you should in any discussion on international aspects of
immigration problems, be careful to note any tendency to call this doctrine
into question and should, if necessary, be prepared to combat such a
tendency by clear and unequivocal statements based on the historic position
of the United States. For use in this respect, there are enclosed (Appendices
the United States, the Italian invitation to participate in the Conference on
Immigration and Emigration in 1927, and a list of certain correspondence
regarding immigration.
It is possible that during the course of the Conference it may seem to you to
be desirable to avoid all discussion of this Topic. This might be effected by
pointing out that immigration and emigration matters are to constitute the
sole subject matter of the March Conference in Habana. In this connection,
and for your confidential information it may be stated that while the United
States has not yet accepted the invitation to attend that Conference it will in
all likelihood participate, in which case the Department’s instructions to the
American Delegates will be based in essence upon the policy set forth
above.
Topic 4. Revision of the conventions signed at Buenos Aires in 1910 and at
Santiago, Chile, in 1923, with a view to formulating changes which shall
assure uniform and effective protection for trade-marks in the States
members of the Pan American Union.
[Detailed instructions on the proposed amendments to convention of 1923
are omitted.]
Topic 5. Consideration of the results of the Conference on Uniformity of
Communication Statistics, which met at Lima in December, 1924, in
compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of
American States.
Topic 6. Consideration of the results of the Standardization Conference
which met at Lima on December 23, 1924, in accordance with a resolution

of the Fifth International Conference of American States and the conference
which met at Washington in 1927.
The resolutions of the First and Second Standardization Conferences are
primarily of interest to the Department of Commerce, which will be charged
with making them effective if they are accepted and acted upon by this
Government. The Department of Commerce has expressed its approval of
these resolutions and has recommended that the American Delegation
support them. (There is attached hereto as Appendix No. 30 a copy of a
letter from the Department of Commerce, dated July 26, 1927 with
reference to this point).43
It is felt that the American Government can agree to the creation of the
various committees contemplated in some of these resolutions since, while
they are of an international character, they will, if they function at all, aim at
encouraging and simplifying commerce between the United States and
Latin America. In connection with the formal draft of the convention for the
establishment of uniform specifications, however, it is provided that the
High Contracting Parties bind themselves to support the national sections of
the Inter-American High Commission with adequate personnel for carrying
out the work with which it has been charged. Inasmuch as the Inter-
American High Commission has never been established by a formal
convention, and as the general subject of the usefulness of this organization
has recently been under discussion, it does not seem desirable to assure its
permanence by the adoption of a formal convention whereunder the High
Contracting Parties bind themselves to support it.
It is desired that you shall point out that references to the Inter-American
High Commission do not properly fall within the scope of this convention
and that while there is no objection to charging the Commission with
certain tasks by resolutions of the Conference, the High Contracting Parties
cannot bind themselves by a convention to support an organization which
has not yet been established by a convention. Consequently Article V of
this convention should be stricken out and, if approved in substance by the
Conference, be embodied in a separate resolution, and Article VI should be
eliminated entirely and not acted upon in any way by the Conference.

If the question of the organization of the Inter-American High Commission
by a definite convention should be raised, it is desired that you shall state
that this will require careful consideration and recommend that it be
referred to the next International Conference of American States. This will
provide an additional opportunity to study the value of the services rendered
by the Inter-American High Commission and the manner in which it carries
out the tasks assigned to it by the resolutions of the First and Second
Standardization Conferences.
ARTICLE VI
SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Topic 1. Consideration of the action taken by the American States in
complying with the recommendations of the Fifth International Conference
of American States on the Pan American Maritime Sanitary Code.
This Code was presented to, and its ratification consented to and advised by
the United States Senate and subsequently approved by the President of the
present time other countries have ratified this Code as follows: Cuba, June
The First Pan American Congress of American Directors of Health which
consideration to this Code and proposed several amendments of minor
importance. These amendments were taken up and discussed at the meeting
of the Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference at Lima, Peru, in October
of this year, a report concerning which is in the Delegation’s files.
It is hoped that the Sixth Pan American Conference will urge those
countries which have not as yet accepted this Code to do so. To this end the
following resolution may be proposed by you:
“The Sixth International Conference of American States resolves:
“That provision having been agreed upon, ad referendum, for the
withdrawal by any country, on one year’s notice, from the

obligations of the Pan American Sanitary Code, and believing
that the Code offers the best solution for the further cooperation
of the Health Departments of the Signatory Powers in the matter
of the promotion of hygiene and sanitation and the prevention of
the spread of contagious disease in international commerce, it is
urged that those countries which have not yet approved this Code,
should do so at their earliest convenience.”
Topic 1, Supplement A.
If the other Delegations show an active and friendly interest in the
discussion of the Pan American Sanitary Code, you are authorized to
introduce the following resolution to the Conference. Its aim as appears in
the preamble of the said resolution is the elimination of unnecessary delays
to shipping in the ports of the Panama Canal.
WHEREAS, the Fifth International Conference of American States,
held at Santiago, Chile, entrusted to the Pan American Sanitary
Bureau the preparation of a Pan American Sanitary Code, and
recommended its study, approval and adoption by the Seventh
Pan American Sanitary Conference; and,
WHEREAS, the Seventh Pan American Sanitary Conference,
composed of the duly accredited representatives of 18 of the
American Governments, after careful study and consideration,
adopted and signed the Pan American Sanitary Code, in the form
of an ad referendum treaty, on November 14, 1924; and,
WHEREAS, the treaty has been ratified to date by the following
governments:—United States, Cuba, Chile, Peru, Nicaragua,
Honduras, Costa Rica and Salvador, and,
WHEREAS, the treaty provides an International Standard Form of Bill
of Health, which was adopted as the standard form of Bill of
Health that should be used by the signatory countries, and,
WHEREAS, the vessels that transit the Panama Canal are, at times,
delayed through the necessity for obtaining either a Bill of Health,

or a sanitary visa from the Consul of each country that is included
in their itineraries, thereby causing delay, expense, and a tendency
toward stagnation of traffic in the Canal and its terminal ports:
Now, therefore:
Be it resolved, by the Sixth International Conference of American
States, to recommend to the Governments of the American States
the adoption of such measures as may be necessary and
appropriate for the several Governments to authorize the
quarantine officers at their respective ports to accept from the
Panama Canal Zone without Consular Visas the International
Standard Form of Bill of Health prepared by The Panama Canal
authorities in accordance with the provisions of the Pan American
Sanitary Code, in lieu of Consular Bills of Health and Consular
Sanitary Visas as now required, whenever after due investigation
any of said Governments shall find that it does not have consular
representation in the ports of the Panama Canal, as hereinafter
defined; that is, it is found impracticable to maintain consular
offices so easily accessible and with consular officers on duty
during such hours that vessels can at all times without delay in
transit, procure the immediate issuance of the aforesaid Bills of
Health and Consular Sanitary Visas; and, that such immediate
issuance is recognized as a requirement of the extraordinary needs
of international commerce through the Panama Canal in
conformity with the interests of all the Governments of the
American States. The foregoing recommendation is adopted in
view of the satisfactory information supplied to the Conference
concerning the excellent sanitary conditions now existing and
constantly maintained on the Panama Canal Zone and in the cities
of Panama and Colon, and because of the international obligation
immediately to report the occurrence of disease, no sanitary
menace can result.
Topic 2. Consideration of the action taken by the American States in
complying with the Resolution on principles and procedure in public health

administration, approved by the Fifth International Conference of American
States at its session of April 16, 1923.
The Treasury Department of this Government has written to the Department
of State stating that there have been no essential changes in the general plan
of health administration in the United States since the date of the Fifth
International Conference of American States when the above Resolution
was passed. The following information contained in the same letter from
the Treasury Department may be submitted by you to the Sixth Conference
if the situation warrants it:
[The letter has been omitted.]
As a means of advancing the development of public hygiene as a
profession, you are requested to submit the following resolution to the
Conference:
“That it reiterate the recommendation of the Fifth Pan American
Conference of American States with regard to the interchange of
health officers, a program for the training of personnel, permanent
tenure of office of persons employed in the more important
position[s] of departments of health, and so forth, the
recommendation having been expressed in the following terms:
“That each country be urged to consider a program which will
include the following features:
“1. The full recognition by appropriate training,
adequate salaries, security of positions and social
esteem of the profession of public hygiene as a special
career essential to the welfare of the nation.
“2. The establishment of courses of training for public
health personnel, or the educating of selected
individuals at the expense of the Government in
institutions in other countries.

“3. The encouragement of visits of its health officers to
other countries and the welcoming in return, of the
representatives of the health organizations of other
nations.”
Topic 3. Consideration of the results of the Conference on Eugenics and
Homoculture which will meet at Habana in 1927, in compliance with a
resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States.
As this Conference is not scheduled to meet until December, 1927, no
instruction can be prepared.
Topic 4. Consideration of the results of the Conference of Directing Heads
of Public Health Services, which was held at Washington in September,
1926, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference
of American States.
The First Conference of National Directors of Public Health of the
American Republics met in the city of Washington in September, 1926. As
a result of resolutions passed by this Conference, the Government of Peru
has created a Permanent Commission for the Study and Eradication of
Malaria; the Government of Ecuador’ is carrying out a rat flea survey in a
number of Ecuadoran cities, and the reporting of communicable diseases
received a new impetus. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau has expressed
the hope that these reports will continue to improve.
The Conference of National Directors of Public Health likewise approved,
for the consideration of the Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference, the
series of propositions, resolutions, and recommendations which are printed
in the document issued by the Pan American Union entitled “Conclusions
of the First Pan American Conference of National Directors of Public
Health”, enclosed herewith as Appendix No. 31.45
The Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference was held at Lima, Peru, in
October 1927 and was participated in by delegates from the United States
of America, whose report (Appendix No. 32) is enclosed herewith45
together with the Final Act of the Eighth Pan American Sanitary
Conference (Appendix No. 33).45 The results of the Conference will be

discussed at the Sixth International Conference of American States at
Habana, and it is desired that with respect to this subject you shall be
guided primarily by the counsel of your Technical Adviser, Dr. John D.
Long.
Your especial attention is, however, invited to the resolution relative to the
creation of Ministries of Health, and to the resolutions permitting the
calling together of the Board of Directors and the creation of the position of
Traveling Representative. With respect to the former, it is believed that the
creation of a Ministry of Health is a matter of national rather than of
international concern; and with respect to the latter, the approval of which
presumably would entail larger appropriations toward the upkeep of the Pan
American Sanitary Bureau, you should bear in mind the necessity for action
by the Congress of the United States on all matters involving the
expenditure of public funds.
Topic 5. Consideration of the action taken by the countries of America for
the organization and development of national Red Cross Societies, and the
results of the Pan American Red Cross Conference referred to in the
resolution adopted by the Fifth International Conference of American States
on April 12, 1923.
In conformity with a resolution proposed by the American Delegates at the
Fifth International Conference of American States, successful Pan
American Red Cross Conferences were held at Buenos Aires in 1923 and at
Washington in 1926. To the results of those conferences, contained in their
Final Acts (Appendix No. 34),46 you may lend your approval.
It is probable that one of the other nations represented at the Conference
will present the following resolution approving of the Red Cross work:
“The Sixth International Conference of American States,
Notes with satisfaction that, in pursuance to a resolution of the
Fifth International Conference of American States at Santiago,
successful Pan-American Red Cross conferences have been held
in Buenos Aires in 1923 and in Washington in 1926, under the
auspices of the League of Red Cross Societies.

Expresses its satisfaction that the American Governments have
uniformly taken action to accord the necessary recognition and
support to their respective national Red Cross organizations,
And resolves:
1. to request the Pan American Union to continue its
assistance in the development of the Red Cross
movement in the Americas.
2. to invite the attention of the governments represented
at the Conference to the importance of the program of
the Red Cross in time of peace in the promotion of
health, the prevention of disease and the mitigation of
suffering from disaster or other cause, and to the
advisability of according due recognition and support to
their respective national Red Cross organizations in
carrying out this program.
3. to approve the continuation of the series of Pan-
American Red Cross conferences, and particularly the
Third Conference, which has been invited to meet at
Rio de Janeiro in 1930 or 1931.”
To this resolution you may also lend your support and approval.
ARTICLE VII
REPORTS ON TREATIES, CONVENTIONS, AND RESOLUTIONS
There is enclosed (as Appendix No. 35)46 for your information a
memorandum of the action that has been taken by this Government with
respect to the one Treaty, the three Conventions, and the sixty-nine
Resolutions effected at the Fifth International Conference of American
States.
IN CONCLUSION:

The continuation and development of friendship, mutual understanding, and
sympathy, among the nations of the Western Hemisphere are the ends which
the United States believes the Sixth International Conference of American
States can further and it is hoped that you will use your best efforts toward
the accomplishment of this purpose.
[File copy not signed]
[Appendix 1]
Special Political Memorandum
The past year has seen the development of a vigorous anti-American
propaganda throughout Latin America based on charges of “imperialism”
and characterized by violent criticism of the relations existing between the
United States and Mexico and the American policy in Nicaragua. For the
most part the Latin American Governments have refrained from
participating in this propaganda, which has been carried on by private
individuals and private organizations created expressly for that purpose, and
in the press. Nevertheless, it is possible that an effort may be made by some
delegates to the Sixth Pan American Conference to bring up controversial
matters which the United States would not consider appropriate for a
gathering of this nature, and it is not improbable that in the course of their
remarks certain delegates may attack the policy of the United States
Government towards Latin America with special reference to its relations
with Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama and Haiti. Every effort should be made to
have the topics discussed at the Conference confined to those on the pre-
arranged agenda, or such additional topics as do not involve any discussion
or criticisms of the foreign policy of this or any other country.
At the Santiago Conference in 1923 certain delegates brought up subjects of
a controversial nature on their own responsibility, without instructions from
their governments. Upon being informed of the actions of their delegates
those governments promptly repudiated them. It is hoped that nothing of
this sort will occur at Habana, but the possibility and the way it was met in
1923 should be borne in mind.

It is possible that an effort may be made to suggest the formation of an
American League of Nations or a League of Latin American Nations, or the
creation of an American Permanent International Court, projects upon
which the United States would not look with sympathy. Detailed
instructions for your guidance in the event that all or any of these topics are
brought up for discussion are included hereafter.
The United States can not enter into any discussion at Habana of matters of
purely domestic concern, such as its immigration and tariff acts, or of its
foreign policy or relations with individual countries, since these are
considered to be subjects which can properly be discussed only between the
nations concerned and not in an open forum of nations not directly affected.
The United States desires to assist the Latin American countries in every
possible way acceptable to and desired by them, but it does not desire to
urge its assistance upon them [nor is it contemplated that the independence
of any of them shall be in the slightest degree infringed].48 The policy of
the United States is one of mutually beneficial cooperation and it is of
paramount importance that the spirit of this policy be manifested in your
attitude and action at the Conference. [To this end the United States will
place at the disposal of the Conference all the information in its possession
drawn from the wide experience and great achievement of this country, to
assist the Latin American nations in solving their various problems.]48 In
general, your attitude should be to favor the free expression of views by the
delegates of the various countries and to support only those proposals which
are of common interest and which merit the unanimous approval of the
American republics.
During the time that has elapsed since the close of the Fifth Pan American
Conference there have been many developments of vital importance for Pan
Americanism, and while the relations between the Latin American
Republics and the United States and among these republics themselves have
not undergone any extreme changes, nevertheless this period has been
marked by the development of certain tendencies which are worthy of
notice.

[Detailed information concerning Mexico, Central American Treaties,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Tacna-Arica, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Colombia-
Peru, Ecuador, and Argentina has been omitted.]
[Appendix 1a]
Supplementary Matters Not on the Agenda But Which May Be Proposed for Consideration at the Conference Under Article 24 of the Regulations
PAN AMERICAN LEAGUE OF NATIONS
At the Fifth Conference at Santiago in 1923 the agenda contained an item:
“Consideration of measures tending toward closer association of the
Republics of the American Continent with a view to promoting common
interests.”
This topic was proposed by Uruguay and was intended to provide the basis
for discussion of a project to create an association of American States in
this hemisphere similar to the existing League of Nations. The Uruguayan
delegation at Santiago during the early sessions of the Conference let it be
known that it was not their intention to press the consideration of this topic.
A resolution was subsequently passed by the Conference which read as
follows:
“Resolved:
“1. To entrust to the governing board of the Pan
American Union the special task of studying the bases
which may be proposed by one or more of the
Governments of the Republics of this continent to make
closer the association between said Republics with the
object of promoting the common interests of all.
“2. To entrust to the same governing board the special
task of studying the bases which may be proposed by
one or more of the Governments of the Republics of
America relative to the manner of making effective the
solidarity of the collective interests of the American
Continent.”

The Pan American Union inquired of the States, members of the Union,
whether there were any proposals relative to these subjects which they
desired to submit to the governing board of the Pan American Union for
study as provided by the resolution. No proposals were received by the
Union, and therefore no action was taken in accordance with this resolution.
It is improbable that the Uruguayan plan for the creation of an association
of American nations will be brought up at the Sixth Pan American
Conference in the form in which it was to have been proposed at Santiago.
Nevertheless, it is not improbable that an effort will be made to promote
discussion of this subject and some more or less detailed project may be
submitted to the Conference. The United States would not view with favor
the inclusion of this subject in the agenda and should such a proposal be
made, you are instructed to vote against it. However, if it should be
included by a two-thirds vote you will be guided in any discussion which
results by the following views of the Department, included in the
instructions to the American delegates to the Fifth Conference:
“A proposal to establish an American League of Nations with a
formal organization and specific guaranties would probably
encounter in this country difficulties similar to those that were
met when the proposal to participate in the League of Nations was
submitted. Even if it were possible to obtain an agreement which
would embody such a plan, it is not probable that it would be
ratified by this Government.
“On the other hand, the Government of the United States is most
hospitable to the consideration of measures tending to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Latin America and ensuring
a basis for beneficent cooperation. This end can be attained most
readily and without engendering a futile controversy over a
proposal for an organization similar to that of the League of
Nations, if attention be directed to the fundamental purposes of
international institutions of the sort contemplated. These may be
said to be:
“First. Judicial settlement of justiciable disputes;

“Second. Appropriate means of conciliation.
“Third. Conference.
“With respect to the first, it is not believed to be desirable to
establish an American Permanent International Court. There
would seem to be no reason why a permanent organization of this
sort should be established here to rival the Permanent Court of
International Justice at The Hague, and the difficulties in
establishing, in view of the relations of the Latin American States,
a satisfactory method of selecting the judges of an American
Permanent Court would be very great. What would seem to be
needed, in order to promote judicial settlement of international
controversies in this hemisphere is an improved plan for arbitral
settlements. In this way controversies of which disposition could
be more advantageously made by an American tribunal could be
referred to a tribunal established for the purpose in accordance
with the accepted principles of arbitral procedure. It should be
remembered in this connection that five of the Latin American
Republics, to wit, the Republics of Costa Rica, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador, have at Washington
concluded a Convention for the establishment of a Central
American Tribunal.50 The plan of this Convention, a copy of
which is attached to the files of the delegation, should be
carefully studied and it may be that a similar plan would meet the
requirements of judicial settlement of controversies between all
the Latin American States. According to this plan a permanent list
of jurists, with prescribed qualifications, is to be established from
which the Tribunal may be constituted as provided in the,
Convention when a controversy has not been settled through
diplomatic agencies or some other method of arbitral or judicial
determination has not been approved. If measures are taken to add
to existing facilities an appropriate plan for the arbitration of
justiciable controversies, the first object in view will be suitably
met.

“The mechanism of conciliation can best be provided, it is
believed, through a Commission of Inquiry. The historic relation
of the Latin American Republics should be borne in mind and too
rigid a scheme for conciliatory measures or mediation should not
be attempted. Again reference may be made to the convention
signed by the representatives of the Central American Republics
at the Washington Conference for the establishment of
Commissions of Inquiry. The United States is a signatory to this
Convention.51 Provision is made for the appointment of the
nationals of the Contracting Powers to form a permanent list of
Commissioners of Inquiry. This Convention is in general a
unification of the Conventions which the Government of the
United States concluded with the Central American Governments
in 1913 and 1914,52 and the purpose is to facilitate settlement of
the dispute by an impartial inquiry into the facts. It is also
provided that as soon as the Commission of Inquiry is organized
it shall at the request of any of the parties to the dispute have the
right to fix the status in which the parties must remain in order
that the conditions may not be aggravated and matters may
remain in the same state pending the rendering of the report by
the Commission.
“With respect to the third object, that of Conference, it would
seem that the continuance of the present plan of holding Pan
American Conferences would adequately afford the desired
opportunities for interchanges of views and the discussion of
matters of common interest. There is no special advantage in
creating machinery which is either unnecessary or too elaborate.
It is a mistake to attempt to commit nations in advance with
respect to their action in unknown contingencies, aside from
disputes of a justiciable nature, as such attempts either are
abortive or lead to disappointment, but it is highly important that
every facility for conference should be provided.
“The more important need is the arrangement for cooperation in
technical services, for the coordination of expert investigation, for
facilities for negotiations leading to uniformity of action where

that is desirable, and for the promotion of the vital interests of
health and education. This Government strongly favors any
arrangements which may be effective to these ends.”
PROHIBITION OF THE SALE OR EXPORT OF ARMS AND MUNITIONS OF WAR AND PREVENTION OF THE TRANSIT OF ARMS AND
MUNITIONS WHICH ARE NOT DESTINED FOR GOVERNMENTS
Such proposals would require legislation by the Congress to make them
effective (and it is doubtful whether such legislation could be obtained).
This Government would undoubtedly desire to discourage the exportation
of arms for the purpose of fomenting revolution but it is doubtful if
legislation could be enacted in this country going beyond the existing
provisions of law which enable the Executive in an appropriate case to
declare an embargo. Whatever may be said with respect to the merits of
such proposals it is important that this Government should not be in a
position of entering into agreements which it has reason to believe it would
have difficulty in making effective through the necessary legislative action.
AN AGREEMENT TO RESPECT THE TERRITORIAL AND POLITICAL INTEGRITY OF THE LATIN AMERICAN NATIONS
Such an obligation would be quite acceptable to this Government, which
has frequently given public and emphatic assurances that it does not covet
the territory of any other nation. (Any obligation, however, not to intervene
under any circumstances in the internal affairs of another country or not to
go to war until after the pronouncement of an arbitral award, while
commendable so far as the general purpose in view is concerned, would be
likely to encounter opposition in this country as inconsistent with the
constitutional authority of Congress and thus would give rise to
unnecessary controversy. The object can be obtained, it is believed, by the
adoption of suggestions already made for an Arbitral Tribunal and
Commissions of Inquiry.)
This Government could not, of course, undertake to limit or bind its action
in future unknown contingencies regarding the measure of protection which
it might deem it incumbent upon it to exert on behalf of American citizens
and property endangered by revolution or other civil turmoil in a foreign
country.

You will of course understand that should this Government be obliged thus
to afford protection to its nationals abroad its action would, as in the past,
be limited to this object alone. When this object has been obtained and the
danger is removed, the forces of the United States would of course be
withdrawn. This has been the traditional policy of the United States.
DEFINITION OF THE MONROE DOCTRINE
It is not the desire of this Government that the Monroe Doctrine should be
discussed at the Conference. The views of the Department as set forth for
the instruction of the delegates to the Fifth Conference and repeated here
for your guidance, arenas follows:
In the view of this Government, that Doctrine has no place in the
discussions of the Conference as it is essentially a national policy of the
United States. It is not a part of international law nor is it a “regional
understanding”,—to refer to the inept phrase used in the Covenant of the
League of Nations. While conditions have changed, and the attitude of the
non-American Powers does not at this time give rise to apprehension with
respect to aggression on their part as against at least the stronger Latin
American Republics, still the Monroe Doctrine, however infrequent or
limited may be the necessity of its application, should be maintained in its
integrity and no action should be countenanced by this Government which
would in the slightest degree impair its efficacy.
Note may be taken of the content of this Doctrine. Properly understood, it is
opposed (a) to any non-American action encroaching upon the political
independence of American States under any guise, and (b) any acquisition
by any non-American Power of any territorial control over any American
soil by any process whatever. It may be observed that the United States is
uninfluenced even by the willingness or desire of any American State to
yield any transfer of its territory or to submit to any form of political control
or influence of a non-American State. In maintaining its position, the
United States has been governed primarily by its own interests, involving
its conception of what was essential to its security and its distinctive
position in this hemisphere. Its unselfish and friendly regard for its
American neighbors has had a potent influence and should never fail of

recognition in an estimate of our traditional policy, but the controlling
consideration has been one of national interest.
In maintaining and applying the Monroe Doctrine the United States has
commonly avoided concerted action with other States, especially European
States. Nor has the Government of the United States been disposed to enter
into an arrangement with States of this hemisphere for the purpose of
safeguarding them against conduct which would be regarded by this
Government as in violation of the Monroe Doctrine. The essential character
of the Doctrine itself has led to the taking of this attitude which it is
believed should be maintained. The nature of the Doctrine should not be
altered, its strength weakened or its effect diminished by any concert.
On the other hand, it should always be remembered that the Monroe
Doctrine thus fully maintained as a national policy of the United States,
carries with it no suggestion which threatens in any proper sense the just
independence, or the political integrity of the American States; much less
does it involve any thought of action inimical to their security or interest.
On the contrary, it has received a constantly widening recognition on the
part of the Latin American peoples, as a bulwark of their independence,
safety and progress. So far as the Doctrine may be deemed to impinge upon
their freedom in submitting to the control or influence of non-American
States, it constitutes a safeguard of their liberty and security. The United
States has not, and does not intend to use, this national policy for the
purpose of conserving any other national interest than its own essential
security. The United States seeks no territory; it does not seek to establish
any state of tutelage with respect to any American Republic; it has no desire
to aggrandize itself at the expense of its Latin American neighbors or to
promote selfish interests in diminution of their own. It earnestly desires a
common prosperity.
There is thus nothing in the Monroe Doctrine which is opposed to Pan
American cooperation. It establishes the necessary and most hopeful bases
of that cooperation. The United States seeks to promote its commerce with
Latin American States and to aid in their development to the end that all
may have their appropriate share in these mutually helpful efforts in the
advancement of civilization. During the visit of Secretary of State Hughes

to Brazil,53 and on the occasion of the dedication of the site for the
American Centennial Monument at Rio de Janeiro, on September 8, 1922,
the view[s] of this Government were thus expressed:
“We shall also be glad to have this monument associated in the
thought of our friends with a true appraisement of our North
American ideals and aspirations. You, my fellow countrymen of
the United States, know full well how sincerely we desire the
independence, the unimpaired sovereignty and political integrity,
and the constantly increasing prosperity of the peoples of Latin
America. We have our domestic problems incident to the
expanding life of a free people, but there is no imperialistic
sentiment among us to cast even a shadow across the pathway of
our progress. We covet no territory; we seek no conquest; the
liberty we cherish for ourselves we desire for others; and we
assert no rights for ourselves that we do not accord to others. We
sincerely desire to see throughout this hemisphere an abiding
peace, the reign of justice and the diffusion of the blessings of a
beneficent cooperation. It is this desire which forms the basis of
the Pan American sentiment.”
Recent efforts, which there is no occasion to criticize so long as they are
kept within their proper sphere, to bring Latin American States into closer
contact with non-American Powers make it important that there should be
no sacrifice through such endeavors of essential American interests. There
should be no yielding to the suggestion of the control or influence of non-
American Powers in the settlement of political questions of a distinctively
American nature, or of the establishment by non-American Powers of
territorial or political rights over American territory. There is, as John
Bassett Moore has declared, an “American System based upon the
distinctive interests which American countries have in common.” He adds:
“To the extent to which Europe should become implicated in
American politics, or to which American countries should
become implicated in European politics, this distinction would
necessarily be broken down, and the foundations of the American
system would be impaired; and to the extent to which the

foundations of the American system were impaired, Pan
Americanism would lose its vitality and the Monroe Doctrine its
accustomed and tangible meaning.” (J. B. Moore, Principles of
American Diplomacy, 1918, X–XI.)
This Government does not approve the creation with non-American States
of relationships which are to be deemed hostile to the Monroe Doctrine and,
it must also be recognized that there are the greatest difficulties in
proposing a policy, which would be capable of safe expression in a Pan
American agreement, touching matters which fall within the scope of the
Monroe Doctrine. No arrangement should be entered into, or resolution
agreed to, which could possibly be interpreted as curtailing in any way the
application by the United States of the Monroe Doctrine. There should be
no opening for the limitation of its action in that application through
acquiescence in any arrangement whereby an American State could accept
non-American control of its territory or political action. No opportunity
should be given to a non-American State through any Pan American
agreement to seek to impair the position which the United States has won
through its assertion of its national policy.
This Government has no objection to the adoption of resolutions, if this
course is desired by the Latin American Republics, asserting their
opposition to all attempts at aggression or invasion of their rights by non-
American Powers. It is not deemed to be probable that proposals for a
definite alliance would meet with the favor of the Conference. Such
proposals should not be encouraged by the delegates from the United
States. If it were proposed that if the rights of an American nation were
threatened by the unjust and aggressive action of a non-American Power,
the American Republics should communicate with one another fully and
frankly in order to reach an understanding concerning the measures to be
taken, jointly or separately, to meet the exigencies of the particular
situation, there would be no objection on the part of this Government
provided always that freedom of action on the part of the United States
under the Monroe Doctrine were completely reserved.
REPRESENTATION OF SPAIN (OR OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES) BY UNOFFICIAL OBSERVERS AT THE SIXTH CONFERENCE

You are instructed to oppose any suggestion which may be made for the
representation of Spain, Portugal, France, Italy or any other country not a
member of the Pan American Union, to be represented at the Conference by
an Unofficial Observer.
The Pan American Conferences are strictly conferences of American States,
held to discuss matters of especial and peculiar importance to the nations of
the Western Hemisphere and it would obviously not be possible or proper to
have other states represented at these conferences even by unofficial
observers who would take no part in the discussions and would not even
vote. Should there be no necessity for discussing matters affecting only the
American nations there would be no reason for these conferences; and
should there be a necessity for discussing matters of world wide concern or
affecting non-American countries the need would be for some other form of
conference of wider scope. For the discussion of questions affecting nations
in both hemispheres there are many international conferences at which both
European and American States are represented and at which world wide
problems are discussed. But as there are also problems pertaining especially
to this hemisphere, these Pan American conferences are held.
The United States entertains the friendliest feelings towards all the
European countries and its action in opposing their representation at the
Conference, even by unofficial observers, should not be considered as
showing any lack of friendliness for them. It is clear that if they were
represented the conferences would cease to be purely Pan American
conferences. Furthermore, if one non-American power should be
represented there would be no reason why others who have possessions in
this hemisphere, or who bear the relation of a “mother country” to one or
more of the American nations, should be excluded. It would be difficult to
say that one non-American country should be represented and not any other,
and in any case the presence of one non-American country would change
the character of the conference, which would no longer be a conference of
purely American States to discuss purely American problems.
TRANSFER OF THE PAN AMERICAN UNION FROM WASHINGTON TO SOME OTHER CAPITAL
There have been frequent rumors that a proposal will be made at the Sixth
Pan American Conference to transfer the seat of the Pan American Union

from Washington to the capital of some Latin American nation. Panama,
Santo Domingo and Uruguay have been mentioned specifically. It is said
that this action would be based on the theory that in Washington the Pan
American Union is too much influenced by the State Department and
dominated by the United States. Also that the Pan American Union
containing as it does a great majority of Spanish-speaking countries should
have its seat in a Spanish-speaking capital.
The Department does not believe that any serious effort will be made to
adopt such a plan at the Sixth Conference. If a suggestion is made to
include this question among the agenda it would seem desirable that the
United States delegates, while being careful not to express their approval,
should not, unless absolutely necessary, take a leading part in opposing it. It
is felt that some of the Latin American delegates will see the disadvantages
of opening this question and the advantages of maintaining the Union in
Washington; …
… A number of arguments against such a change will readily occur to you,
among others:
1). The eminent suitability of the present Pan American building
in Washington, which was constructed on land donated by the
United States, at a cost of about $850,000, the entire amount
being contributed by the well known philanthropist Andrew
Carnegie. This building could not be duplicated in another
locality for anything like its original cost.
2). The advantages which the United States offers as a center of
information on all subjects connected with the advancement of
human knowledge and welfare. This country contains the
headquarters of many organizations working for world
improvement in sanitary, engineering, economic and social
matters.
3). The fact that Washington is the only capital on the American
continents at which all Latin-American nations constantly
maintain a representative.

CANADA
The International Conferences of American States, commonly called the
Pan American Conferences, are, as their name implies, conferences of
American political entities to consider and discuss matters of special
importance to the States of the western hemisphere. Should there be no
need to discuss matters affecting the States of this hemisphere there would
be no reason to hold such conferences, and, on the other hand, should there
be a necessity of discussing topics and problems of world wide concern, or
having a relation at least to other political entities not included in the
western hemisphere, the necessity would be not for a conference of
American States but for some other form of conference of different scope.
The Pan American Conferences are essentially conferences of governments
and not of mere geographical groups or territorial units. Being conferences
attended by the official representatives of Governments, they necessarily
reflect the exigencies and policies of the Governments participating. If
colonies, possessions or dominions, whose foreign relations are controlled
by European States, were represented in these conferences, the influence
and policies of European Powers would be injected into the discussion and
disposition of questions affecting the political entities of this hemisphere.
Whatever value such conferences would have it would not be that attaching
to a conference distinctively American. Should Canada be proposed as a
Member of the Pan American Union, you will be guided by the oral
instructions given by the Secretary of State to the Delegation at its meeting
at the Department of State on December 28, 1927.
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
Reference may here be made also to the participation, which has been
informally suggested, of representatives of the League of Nations in the Pan
American Conference. It should be understood that no disparagement or
criticism of the League of Nations is intended, when it is observed that the
Pan American Conference is organized upon a distinct and separate basis.
The scope of the League of Nations is intended to be world-wide and a
number of American States are members of the League and are thus able to
express their point of view on matters of world-wide import which come
before the attention of the Council and the Assembly of the League

respectively. The Pan American Conference exists because of the distinct
interests of American States which, without antagonism to any world
relationship, makes it desirable for them to confer with respect to the
problems which especially relate to States of this hemisphere.
There is, of course, not the slightest objection for cooperation with the
technical services of the League of Nations through the exchange of reports
and information, and reciprocal advantage may thus appropriately be taken
of statistics and reports of investigation. Participation of representatives of
the League of Nations in the Pan American Conference, however, would
bring to the Conference the viewpoints and policies of the States who are
members of the League of Nations and are not American States and thus
fundamentally alter the nature of the Conference itself.
The scope of the Pan American Conference is defined by Pan American
interests and aims and if its usefulness is to be preserved, the integrity of the
Conference as an exclusively American Conference should be maintained.
[Appendix 2]
Special Economic Memorandum
Trade between the United States and Latin America has shown a steady
increase during the period which has intervened since the Fifth Conference.
Exports from the United States to the Latin American countries in 1923
increase of about 27 per cent. Imports into the United States from the Latin
$1,104,000,000, showing an increase of about 5 per cent. Thus the total
trade of the United States with the Latin American countries amounted in
about 14 per cent. In 1923 this trade with the Latin American countries
constituted 21.9 per cent of the total world trade of the United States, and in
1926 21 per cent, the Latin American share of the United States total trade
decreasing in spite of the great gain in Latin American trade because of the
increase in trade between the United States and other parts of the world.
During this entire period the visible balance of trade was in favor of the
Latin American countries to a very large extent. Trade with the United

States amounts to about 36 per cent of the total trade of the combined Latin
American countries.
Cuba ranks first among the countries of Latin America, not only in imports
from but in exports to the United States. Our imports of merchandise from
Cuba in 1926 were valued at $250,600,000, and our exports at
$160,488,000. The amount of United States capital invested in Cuba is
between $1,250,000,000 and $1,500,000,000. Moreover, a large amount is
spent in the island annually by tourists from the United States. From these
figures it is apparent that Cuba presents a broad field for the extension of
American manufactured exports.
The past five years have witnessed an unprecedented flow of American
capital to Latin America, our total investment in that field being now
are invested in Cuba. While the Latin American governments and people in
general recognize the advantages derived from the use of this capital, which
permits them to develop their natural resources; improve their means of
communication; and create municipal improvements and sanitary works;
nevertheless a growing uneasiness has lately been manifested throughout
Latin America lest this dependence on the American financial market may
lead to some form of economic domination, or even, eventually to armed
intervention. It is possible that this feeling may be expressed at the Sixth
Pan American Conference. Should this be the case you will, while
refraining from committing this Government as to what action it might or
might not have to take to protect American holders of foreign securities in
unforeseen contingencies, make it plain that Americans investing their
money abroad seek only that justice and fair treatment to which creditors
are entitled by universally accepted principles of law and that the United
States Government expects that such fair treatment will be accorded them
and asks no more.
7 The members of the delegation were: Charles Evans Hughes, chairman;
Noble Brandon Judah; Henry P. Fletcher; Oscar W. Underwood; Dwight W.
Morrow; Morgan J. O’Brien; James Brown Scott; Bay Lyman Wilbur; and
Leo S. Rowe.
8 Instructions not printed.

13 For text of regulations, see Program and Regulations of the Sixth
International Conference of American States, p. 5.
16 The 12 projects are set forth in Report of the Delegates of the United
States of America to the Sixth International Conference of American States,
p. 9.
17 Not printed.
18 Not printed.
19 Not printed.
21 Not printed.
23 Not printed.
25 Not printed.
28 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
31 Not printed.

38 Not printed.
38 Not printed.
39 Not printed.
40 Conference Internationale de l’Emigration et de l’Immigration—Rome,
454.
42 Not printed.
43 Not printed.
45 Not printed.
45 Not printed.
45 Not printed.
46 Not printed.
46 Not printed.
48 Brackets appear in original document.
48 Brackets appear in original document.
50 Conference on Central American Affairs, Washington, December 4,
p. 296.
52 Treaties for the advancement of the general peace were signed with Costa
Salvador, Aug. 7, 1913, but never went into force.
by the Secretary of State were published in Addresses in Brazil Delivered by
the Hon. Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State, September, 1922
(Washington, The Pan American Union, 1922).

Conventions54
United States ratified six, the texts of which are printed herewith. The other
conventions were those with respect to (1) private international law, (2)
revision of the convention of Buenos Aires regarding literary and artistic
of these five conventions, see Sixth International Conference of American
States, Havana, 1928, Final Act, and Report of the Delegates of the United
States of America to the Sixth International Conference of American States.
[364] Convention Regarding Commercial Aviation, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Treaty Series No. 840
[365] Contention Regarding the Status of Aliens, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Treaty Series No. 815
[366] Convention Regarding Consular Agents, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Treaty Series No. 843

[367] Convention Regarding Maritime Neutrality, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Treaty Series No. 845
[368] Convention Regarding the Duties and Rights of States in the
Event of Civil Strife, Signed at Habana, February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Treaty Series No. 814
[369] Convention Regarding the Pan American Union, Signed at
Habana, February 20, 1928
Habana, February 20, 1928
Unperfected Treaty No. J–10

Treaty Series No. 840
[Document 364]
Convention Regarding Commercial Aviation, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 192855
Habana, February 20, 1928
The Governments of the American Republics, desirous of establishing the
rules they should observe among themselves for aerial traffic, have decided
to lay them down in a convention, and to that effect have appointed as their
plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, after having exchanged their respective full powers, which have been
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following:
ARTICLE I
The high contracting parties recognize that every state has complete and
exclusive sovereignty over the air space above its territory and territorial
waters.
ARTICLE II
The present convention applies exclusively to private aircraft.
ARTICLE III
The following shall be deemed to be state aircraft:
a) Military and naval aircraft;
b) Aircraft exclusively employed in state service, such as posts,
customs, and police.

Every other aircraft shall be deemed to be a private aircraft.
All state aircraft other than military, naval, customs and police aircraft shall
be treated as private aircraft and as such shall be subject to all the
provisions of the present convention.
ARTICLE IV
Each contracting state undertakes in time of peace to accord freedom of
innocent passage above its territory to the private aircraft of the other
contracting states, provided that the conditions laid down in the present
convention are observed. The regulations established by a contracting state
with regard to admission over its territory of aircraft of other contracting
states shall be applied without distinction of nationality.
ARTICLE V
Each contracting state has the right to prohibit, for reasons which it deems
convenient in the public interest, the flight over fixed zones of its territory
by the aircraft of the other contracting states and privately owned national
aircraft employed in the service of international commercial aviation, with
the reservation that no distinction shall be made in this respect between its
own private aircraft engaged in international commerce and those of the
other contracting states likewise engaged. Each contracting state may
furthermore prescribe the route to be followed over its territory by the
aircraft of the other states, except in cases of force majeure which shall be
governed in accordance with the stipulations of Article 18 of this
convention. Each state shall publish in advance and notify the other
contracting states of the fixation of the authorized routes and the situation
and extension of the prohibited zones.
ARTICLE VI
Every aircraft over a prohibited area shall be obliged, as soon as this fact is
realized or upon being so notified by the signals agreed upon, to land as
soon as possible outside of said area in the airdrome nearest the prohibited
area over which it was improperly flying and which is considered as an
international airport by the subjacent state.

ARTICLE VII
Aircraft shall have the nationality of the state in which they are registered
and can not be validly registered in more than one state.
The registration entry and the certificate of registration shall contain a
description of the aircraft and state, the number or other mark of
identification given by the constructor of the machine, the registry marks
and nationality, the name of the airdrome or airport usually used by the
aircraft, and the full name, nationality and domicile of the owner, as well as
the date of registration.
ARTICLE VIII
The registration of aircraft referred to in the preceding article shall be made
in accordance with the laws and special provisions of each contracting state.
ARTICLE IX
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation must carry a distinctive
mark of its nationality, the nature of such distinctive mark to be agreed
upon by the several contracting states. The distinctive marks adopted will
be communicated to the Pan American Union and to the other contracting
states.
ARTICLE X
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation shall carry with it in the
custody of the aircraft commander:
a) A certificate of registration, duly certified to according to the
laws of the state in which it is registered;
b) A certificate of airworthiness, as provided for in Article 12;
c) The certificates of competency of the commander, pilots,
engineers, and crew, as provided for in Article 13;

d) If carrying passengers, a list of their names, addresses and
nationality;
e) If carrying merchandise, the bills of lading and manifests, and
all other documents required by customs laws and regulations of
each country;
f) Log books;
g) If equipped with radiotelegraph apparatus, the corresponding
license.
ARTICLE XI
Each contracting state shall every month file with every other state party to
this convention and with the Pan American Union, a copy of all
registrations and cancellations of registrations of aircraft engaged in
international navigation as between the several contracting states.
ARTICLE XII
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation (between the several
contracting states) shall be provided with a certificate of airworthiness
issued by the state whose nationality it possesses.
This document shall certify to the states in which the aircraft is to operate,
that, according to the opinion of the authority that issues it, such aircraft
complies with the airworthiness requirements of each of the states named in
said certificate.
The aircraft commander shall at all times hold the certificate in his custody
and shall deliver it for inspection and verification to the authorized
representatives of the state which said aircraft visits.
Each contracting state shall communicate to the other states parties to this
convention and to the Pan American Union its regulations governing the
rating of its aircraft as to airworthiness and shall similarly communicate any
changes made therein.

While the states affirm the principle that the aircraft of each contracting
state shall have the liberty of engaging in air commerce with the other
contracting states without being subjected to the licensing system of any
state with which such commerce is carried on, each and every contracting
state mentioned in the certificate of airworthiness reserves the right to
refuse to recognize as valid the certificate of airworthiness of any foreign
aircraft where inspection by a duly authorized commission of such state
shows that the aircraft is not, at the time of inspection, reasonably airworthy
in accordance with the normal requirements of the laws and regulations of
such state concerning the public safety.
In such cases said state may refuse to permit further transit by the aircraft
through its air space until such time as it, with due regard to the public
safety, is satisfied as to the airworthiness of the aircraft, and shall
immediately notify the state whose nationality the aircraft possesses and the
Pan American Union of the action taken.
ARTICLE XIII
The aircraft commander, pilots, engineers, and other members of the
operating crew of every aircraft engaged in international navigation
between the several contracting states shall, in accordance with the laws of
each state, be provided with a certificate of competency by the contracting
state whose nationality the aircraft possesses.
Such certificate or certificates shall set forth that each pilot, in addition to
having fulfilled the requirements of the state issuing the same, has passed a
satisfactory examination with regard to the traffic rules existing in the other
contracting states over which he desires to fly. The requirements of form of
said documents shall be uniform throughout all the contracting states and
shall be drafted in the language of all of them, and for this purpose the Pan
American Union is charged with making the necessary arrangements
amongst the contracting states.
Such certificate or certificates shall be held in the possession of the aircraft
commander as long as the pilots, engineers and other members of the
operating crew concerned continue to be employed on the aircraft. Upon the

return of such certificate an authenticated copy thereof shall be retained in
the files of the aircraft.
Such certificate or certificates shall be open at all times to the inspection of
the duly authorized representatives of any state visited.
Each contracting state shall communicate to the other states parties to this
convention and to the Pan American Union its regulations governing the
issuance of such certificates and shall from time to time communicate any
changes made therein.
ARTICLE XIV
Each and every contracting state shall recognize as valid, certificates of
competency of the aircraft commander, pilots, engineers and other members
of the operating crew of an aircraft, issued in accordance with the laws and
regulations of other contracting states.
ARTICLE XV
The carriage by aircraft of explosives, arms and munitions of war is
prohibited in international aerial navigation. Therefore, no foreign or native
aircraft authorized for international traffic shall be permitted to transport
articles of this nature, either between points situated within the territory of
any of the contracting states or through the same even though simply in
transit.
ARTICLE XVI
Each state may prohibit or regulate the carriage or use, by aircraft
possessing the nationality of other contracting states, of photographic
apparatus. Such regulations as may be adopted by each state concerning this
matter shall be communicated to each other contracting state and to the Pan
American Union.
ARTICLE XVII

As a measure of public safety or because of lawful prohibitions, the
transportation of articles in international navigation other than those
mentioned in Articles 15 and 16 may be restricted by any contracting state.
Such restrictions shall be immediately communicated to the other
contracting states and to the Pan American Union.
All restrictions mentioned in this article shall apply equally to foreign and
national aircraft employed in international traffic.
ARTICLE XVIII
Every aircraft engaged in international traffic which enters the air space of a
contracting state with the intention of landing in said state shall do so in the
corresponding customs airdrome, except in the cases mentioned in Article
19 and in case of force majeure, which must be proved.
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation, prior to its departure
from the territorial jurisdiction of a contracting state in which it has landed,
shall obtain such clearance as is required by the laws of such state at a port
designated as point of departure by such state.
Each and every contracting state shall notify every other state party to this
convention and the Pan American Union of such airports as shall be
designated by such state as ports of entry and departure.
When the laws or regulations of any contracting state so require, no aircraft
shall legally enter into or depart from its territory through places other than
those previously authorized by such state as international airports, and the
landing therein shall be obligatory unless a special permit, which has been
previously communicated to the authorities of said airport, is obtained from
the competent authorities of said state, in which permit shall be clearly
expressed the distinctive marks which the aircraft is obliged to make visible
whenever requested to do so in the manner previously agreed upon in said
permit.
In the event that for any reason, after entering the territorial jurisdiction of a
contracting state, aircraft of another contracting state should land at a point
other than an airport designated as a port of entry in that state the aircraft

commander shall immediately notify the nearest competent authority and
hold himself, crew, passengers and cargo at the point of landing until proper
entry has been granted by such competent authority, unless communication
therewith is impracticable within twenty-four hours.
Aircraft of one of the contracting states which flies over the territory of
another contracting state shall be obliged to land as soon as ordered to do so
by means of the regulation signals, when for any reason this may be
necessary.
In the cases provided for in this article, the aircraft, aircraft commander,
crew, passengers and cargo shall be subject to such immigration,
emigration, customs, police, quarantine or sanitary inspection as the duly
authorized representatives of the subjacent state may make in accordance
with its laws.
ARTICLE XIX
As an exception to the general rules, postal aircraft and aircraft belonging to
aerial transport companies regularly constituted and authorized may be
exempted, at the option of the subjacent state, from the obligation of
landing at an airdrome designated as a port of entry and authorized to land
at certain inland airdromes, designated by the customs and police
administration of such state, at which customs formalities shall be complied
with. The departure of such aircraft from the state visited may be regulated
in a similar manner.
However, such aircraft shall follow the normal air route, and make their
identity known by signals agreed upon as they fly across the frontier.
ARTICLE XX
From the time of landing of a foreign aircraft at any point whatever until its
departure the authorities of the state visited shall have, in all cases, the right
to visit and examine the aircraft and to verify all documents with which it
must be provided, in order to determine that all the laws, rules and
regulations of such states and all the provisions of this convention are
complied with.

ARTICLE XXI
The aircraft of a contracting state engaged in international air commerce
shall be permitted to discharge passengers and a part of its cargo at one of
the airports designated as a port of entry of any other contracting state, and
to proceed to any other airport or airports in such state for the purpose of
discharging the remaining passengers and portions of such cargo and in like
manner to take on passengers and load cargo destined for a foreign state or
states, provided that they comply with the legal requirements of the country
over which they fly, which legal requirements shall be the same for native
and foreign aircraft engaged in international traffic and shall be
communicated in due course to the contracting states and to the Pan
American Union.
ARTICLE XXII
Each contracting state shall have the right to establish reservations and
restrictions in favor of its own national aircraft in regard to the commercial
transportation of passengers and merchandise between two or more points
in its territory, and to other remunerated aeronautical operations wholly
within its territory. Such reservations and restrictions shall be immediately
published and communicated to the other contracting states and to the Pan
American Union.
ARTICLE XXIII
The establishment and operation of airdromes will be regulated by the
legislation of each country, equality of treatment being observed.
ARTICLE XXIV
The aircraft of one contracting state engaged in international commerce
with another contracting state shall not be compelled to pay other or higher
charges in airports or airdromes open to the public than would be paid by
national aircraft of the state visited, likewise engaged in international
commerce.
ARTICLE XXV

So long as a contracting state shall not have established appropriate
regulations, the commander of an aircraft shall have rights and duties
analogous to those of the captain of a merchant steamer, according to the
respective laws of each state.
ARTICLE XXVI
The salvage of aircraft lost at sea shall be regulated, in the absence of any
agreement to the contrary, by the principles of maritime law.
ARTICLE XXVII
The aircraft of all states shall have the right, in cases of danger, to all
possible aid.
ARTICLE XXVIII
Reparations for damages caused to persons or property located in the
subjacent territory shall be governed by the laws of each state.
ARTICLE XXIX
In case of war the stipulations of the present convention shall not affect the
freedom of action of the contracting states either as belligerents or as
neutrals.
ARTICLE XXX
The right of any of the contracting states to enter into any convention or
special agreement with any other state or states concerning international
aerial navigation is recognized, so long as such convention or special
agreement shall not impair the rights or obligations of any of the states
parties to this convention, acquired or imposed herein; provided, however,
that two or more states, for reasons of reciprocal convenience and interest
may agree upon appropriate regulations pertaining to the operation of
aircraft and the fixing of specified routes. These regulations shall in no case
prevent the establishment and operation of practicable inter-American aerial
lines and terminals. These regulations shall guarantee equality of treatment

of the aircraft of each and every one of the contracting states and shall be
subject to the same conditions as are set forth in Article 5 of this convention
with respect to prohibited areas within the territory of a particular state.
Nothing contained in this convention shall affect the rights and obligations
established by existing treaties.
ARTICLE XXXI
The contracting states obligate themselves in so far as possible to cooperate
in inter-American measures relative to:
a) The centralization and distribution of meteorological
information, whether statistical, current or special;
b) The publication of uniform aeronautical charts, as well as the
establishment of a uniform system of signals;
c) The use of radiotelegraph in aerial navigation, the
establishment of the necessary radiotelegraph stations and the
observance of the inter-American and international radiotelegraph
regulations or conventions at present existing or which may come
into existence.
ARTICLE XXXII
The contracting states shall procure as far as possible uniformity of laws
and regulations governing aerial navigation. The Pan American Union shall
cooperate with the governments of the contracting states to attain the
desired uniformity of laws and regulations for aerial navigation in the states
parties to this convention.
Each contracting state shall exchange with every other contracting state
within three months after the date of ratification of this convention copies
of its air-traffic rules and requirements as to competency for aircraft
commanders, pilots, engineers, and other members of the operating crew,
and the requirements for airworthiness of aircraft intended to engage in
international commerce.

Each contracting state shall deposit with every other state party to this
convention and with the Pan American Union three months prior to the date
proposed for their enforcement any additions to or amendments of the
regulations referred to in the last preceding paragraph.
ARTICLE XXXIII
Each contracting state shall deposit its ratification with the Cuban
Government, which shall thereupon inform the other contracting states.
Such ratification shall remain deposited in the archives of the Cuban
Government.
ARTICLE XXXIV
The present convention will come into force for each signatory state
ratifying it in respect to other states which have already ratified, forty days
from the date of deposit of its ratification.
ARTICLE XXXV
Any state may adhere to this convention by giving notice thereof to the
Cuban Government, and such adherence shall be effective forty days
thereafter. The Cuban Government shall inform the other signatory states of
such adherence.
ARTICLE XXXVI
In case of disagreement between two contracting states regarding the
interpretation or execution of the present convention the question shall, on
the request of one of the governments in disagreement, be submitted to
arbitration as hereinafter provided. Each of the governments involved in the
disagreement shall choose another government not interested in the
question at issue and the government so chosen shall arbitrate the dispute.
In the event the two arbitrators cannot reach an agreement they shall
appoint another disinterested government as additional arbitrator. If the two
arbitrators cannot agree upon the choice of this third government, each
arbitrator shall propose a government not interested in the dispute and lots

shall be drawn between the two governments proposed. The drawing shall
devolve upon the Governing Board of the Pan American Union.
The decision of the arbitrators shall be by majority vote.
ARTICLE XXXVII
Any contracting state may denounce this convention at any time by
transmitting notification thereof to the Cuban Government, which shall
communicate it to the other states parties to this convention. Such
denunciation shall not take effect until six months after notification thereof
to the Cuban Government, and shall take effect only with respect to the
state making the denunciation.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the above-named plenipotentiaries have signed this convention
and the seal of the Sixth International Conference of American States has
been hereto affixed.
Perú: JESÚS M. SÁLAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.
Uruguay; VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCÍA, FERNANDO GONZÁLEZ ROA, SALVADOR URBINA, AQUILES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HÉCTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guatemala: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRA PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIÉRREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.

Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VÁZQUEZ.
Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMÉNEZ.
Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI.
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAZ LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.
Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PEYNADO, TULIO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DE CASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNANDEZ CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGUERO BETHENCOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
RESERVATION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The delegation of the Dominican Republic records, as an explanation of its
vote, that upon signing the present convention it does not understand that
the Dominican Republic dissociates itself from conventions it has already
ratified and which are in force.
55 In English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French; English text, only, printed.
Ratification advised by the Senate, Feb. 20, 1931 (legislative day of Feb.
States deposited with the Government of Cuba, July 17, 1931; proclaimed
by the President, July 27, 1931.

Treaty Series No. 815
[Document 365]
Contention Regarding the Status of Aliens, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 192856
Habana, February 20, 1928
The Governments of the Republics represented at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, held in the city of Habana, Republic of
Cuba, in the year 1928:
Have decided to conclude a convention for the purpose of determining the
status of aliens within their respective territories and to that end have
appointed the following plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, after depositing their full powers, which were found to be in good and
due form, have agreed upon the following provisions:
ARTICLE 1
States have the right to establish by means of laws the conditions under
which foreigners may enter and reside in their territory.
ARTICLE 2
Foreigners are subject as are nationals to local jurisdiction and laws, due
consideration being given to the limitations expressed in conventions and
treaties.
ARTICLE 357
Foreigners may not be obliged to perform military service; but those
foreigners who are domiciled, unless they prefer to leave the country, may

be compelled, under the same conditions as nationals, to perform police,
fire-protection, or militia duty for the protection of the place of their
domicile against natural catastrophes or dangers not resulting from war.
ARTICLE 457
Foreigners are obliged to make ordinary or extraordinary contributions, as
well as forced loans, always provided that such measures apply to the
population generally.
ARTICLE 5
States should extend to foreigners, domiciled or in transit through their
territory, all individual guaranties extended to their own nationals, and the
enjoyment of essential civil rights without detriment, as regards foreigners,
to legal provisions governing the scope of and usages for the exercise of
said rights and guaranties.
ARTICLE 6
For reasons of public order or safety, states may expel foreigners domiciled,
resident, or merely in transit through their territory.
States are required to receive their nationals expelled from foreign soil who
seek to enter their territory.
ARTICLE 7
Foreigners must not mix in political activities, which are the exclusive
province of citizens of the country in which they happen to be; in cases of
such interference, they shall be liable to the penalties established by local
law.
ARTICLE 8
The present convention does not affect obligations previously undertaken
by the contracting parties through international agreements.
ARTICLE 9

After being signed, the present convention shall be submitted to the
ratification of the signatory states. The Government of Cuba is charged with
transmitting authentic certified copies to the governments for the
aforementioned purpose of ratification. The instrument of ratification shall
be deposited in the archives of the Pan American Union in Washington, the
Union to notify the signatory governments of said deposit. Such notification
shall be considered as an exchange of ratifications. This convention shall
remain open to the adherence of nonsignatory states.
In witness whereof, the aforenamed plenipotentiaries sign the present
convention in Spanish, English, French, and Portuguese, in the city of
Habana, the 20th day of February, 1928.
Perú: JESÚS M. SALAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.
Uruguay: VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCÍA, FERNANDO GONZÁLEZ ROA, SALVADOR URRINA, AQUILES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HÉCTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guatemala: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRO PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIÉRREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.
Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VÁZQUEZ.
Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMÉNEZ.

Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI..
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAZ LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.
Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PEYNADO, TULIO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DE CASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
RESERVATION OF THE DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
The delegation of the United States of America signs the present convention
making express reservation to Article 3 of the same, which refers to military
service of foreigners in case of war.
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNANDEZ CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHENCOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
56 In English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French; English text, only, printed.
Ratification advised by the Senate, with exception of articles 3 and 4, Apr.
deposited with the Pan American Union, May 21, 1930; proclaimed by the
President, June 6, 1930.
America.
America.

Treaty Series No. 843
[Document 366]
Convention Regarding Consular Agents, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 192858
Habana, February 20, 1928
The governments of the Republics represented at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, held in the city of Habana, Republic of
Cuba, in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-eight, desirous of defining
the duties, rights, prerogatives and immunities of consular agents, in
accordance with the usages and agreements on the matter;
Have decided to conclude a convention to that end and have appointed the
following plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, after having deposited their full powers, found to be in good and due
form, have agreed to the following provisions:
SECTION I—Appointments and functions
ARTICLE 1
States may appoint in the territory of others, with the express or tacit
consent of the latter, consuls who shall there represent and defend their
commercial and industrial interests and render to their nationals such
assistance and protection as they may need.
ARTICLE 2
The form and requirements for appointment, the classes and the rank of the
consuls, shall be regulated by the domestic laws of the respective state.

ARTICLE 3
Unless consented to by the state where he is to serve, one of its nationals
may not act as consul. The granting of an exequatur implies such consent.
ARTICLE 4
The consul having been appointed, the state shall forward through
diplomatic channels to the other state the respective commission which
shall contain the name, category and authority of the appointee.
As to a vice consul or commercial agent appointed by the respective consul,
where there is authorization by law, the commission shall be issued and
communicated to the latter.
ARTICLE 5
States may refuse to accept consuls appointed in their territory or subject
the exercise of consular functions to certain special obligations.
ARTICLE 6
The consul can be recognized as such only after having presented his
commission and obtained the exequatur of the state in whose territory he is
to serve. Provisional recognition can be granted upon the request of the
legation of the consul pending the delivery in due form of the exequatur.
Officials appointed under the terms of Article 4 are likewise subject to this
formality and in such case it rests with the respective consul to request the
exequatur.
ARTICLE 7
The exequatur having been obtained, it shall be presented to the authorities
of the consular district, who shall protect the consul in the exercise of his
functions and guarantee to him the immunities to which he is entitled.
ARTICLE 8

The territorial government may at any time withdraw the consul’s
exequatur, but, except in urgent cases, it shall not have recourse to this
measure without previously attempting to obtain from the consul’s
government his recall.
ARTICLE 9
In case of the death, disability or absence of consular agents any of the
assistant employees whose official position has been previously made
known to the ministry of foreign affairs or the department of state, may
temporarily assume the consular functions; while thus engaged he shall
enjoy all the rights and prerogatives corresponding to the permanent
official.
ARTICLE 10
Consuls shall exercise the functions that the law of their state confers upon
them, without prejudice to the legislation of the country where they are
serving.
ARTICLE 11
In the exercise of their functions, consuls shall deal directly with the
authorities of their district. Should their representations not be heeded, they
may then pursue them before the government of the state through the
intermediary of their diplomatic representative, but should not communicate
directly with the government except in the absence or non-existence of a
diplomatic representative.
ARTICLE 12
In case of the absence of a diplomatic representative of the consul’s state,
the consul may undertake such diplomatic actions as the government of the
state in which he functions may permit in such cases.
ARTICLE 13

A person duly accredited for the purpose may combine diplomatic
representation and the consular function provided the state before which he
is accredited consents to it.
SECTION II—Prerogatives of consuls
ARTICLE 14
In the absence of a special agreement between two nations, the consular
agents who are nationals of the state appointing them, shall neither be
arrested nor prosecuted except in the cases when they are accused of
committing an act classed as a crime by local legislation.
ARTICLE 15
In criminal cases, the prosecution or the defense may request attendance of
consular agents at the trial, as witnesses. This request must be made with all
possible consideration to consular dignity and to the duties of the consular
office and shall be complied with by the consular official.
Consular agents shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts in civil
cases, although with the limitation that when the consul is a national of his
state and is not engaged in any private business with purposes of gain, his
testimony shall be taken either verbally or in writing, at his residence or
office, with all the consideration to which he is entitled.
The consul may, nevertheless, of his own free will appear as a witness when
such appearance does not seriously hinder the discharge of his official
duties.
ARTICLE 16
Consuls are not subject to local jurisdiction for acts done in their official
character and within the scope of their authority. In case a private individual
deems himself injured by the consul’s action, he must submit his complaint
to the government, which, if it considers the claim to be relevant, shall
make it valid through diplomatic channels.

ARTICLE 17
In respect to unofficial acts, consuls are subject, in civil as well as in
criminal matters, to the jurisdiction of the state where they exercise their
functions.
ARTICLE 18
The official residence of the consuls and places used for the consulate’s
offices and archives are inviolable and in no case may the local authorities
enter them without the permission of the consular agents; neither shall they
examine nor seize, under any pretext whatsoever, documents or other
objects found in a consular office. No consular officer shall be required to
present his official files before the courts or to make declaration with
respect to their contents.
When consular agents are engaged in business within the territory of the
state where they are exercising their duties, the files and documents of the
consulate shall be kept in a place entirely separate from the one where
private or business papers are kept.
ARTICLE 19
Consuls are obliged to deliver, upon the simple request of the local
authorities, persons accused or condemned for crimes who may have sought
refuge in the consulate.
ARTICLE 20
Consular agents, as well as the employees of the consulate who are
nationals of the state appointing them, not engaged in business with
purposes of gain, in the state where they perform their functions, shall be
exempt from all national, state, provincial, or municipal taxes levied upon
their person or property, except such taxes as may apply to the possession
or ownership of real estate located in the state where discharging their
duties or to the proceeds of the same. Consular agents and employees who
are nationals of the state they represent, are exempt from taxes on the

salaries, honorariums, or wages which they receive in return for their
consular services.
ARTICLE 21
The employee who substitutes for the consular agent in his absence, or for
another cause, shall enjoy during his temporary term of office the same
immunities and prerogatives as the latter.
ARTICLE 22
Consuls engaged in business or exercising other functions apart from those
pertaining to their consular duties are subject to local jurisdiction in all their
activities not pertaining to the consular service.
SECTION III—Suspension and termination of consular functions
ARTICLE 23
Consular agents suspend their functions because of illness or leave of
absence, and terminate their office:
a) By death;
b) By retirement, resignation, or dismissal; and
c) By the cancellation of the exequatur.
ARTICLE 24
The present convention does not affect obligations previously undertaken
by the contracting parties through international agreements.
ARTICLE 25
After being signed, the present convention shall be submitted to the
ratification of the signatory states. The Government of Cuba is charged with
transmitting authentic certified copies to the governments for the
aforementioned purpose of ratification. The instrument of ratification shall

be deposited in the archives of the Pan American Union in Washington, the
Union to notify the signatory governments of said deposit. Such notification
shall be considered as an exchange of ratifications. This convention shall
remain open to the adherence of non-signatory states.
In witness whereof, the aforenamed plenipotentiaries sign the present
convention in Spanish, English, French, and Portuguese, in the city of
Habana, the 20th day of February, 1928.
Perú: JESÚS M. SALAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.
Uruguay: VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCIA, FERNANDO GONZALEZ ROA, SALVADOR URBINA, AQUTLES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HECTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guaterrtcda: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRA PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
RESERVATION OF THE DELEGATION OF VENEZUELA
On behalf of the Government that I represent, I make a reservation with
respect to the coincidence of diplomatic and consular functions in the same
person, because it is totally opposed to our tradition, maintained since it
was established until the present time, in a way that admits of no change.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIÉRREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.
Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VAZQUEZ.

Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMÉNEZ.
Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI.
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAZ LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.
Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PETNADO, TULIO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DECASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNÁNDEZ CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHENOOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
58 In English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French; English text, only, printed.
Ratification advised by the Senate, Jan. 22, 1932; ratified by the President,
Feb. 1, 1932; ratification of the United States deposited with the Pan

Treaty Series No. 845
[Document 367]
Convention Regarding Maritime Neutrality, Signed at Habana,
February 20, 192859
Habana, February 20, 1928
The Governments of the Republics represented at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, held in the city of Habana, Republic of
Cuba, in the year 1928;
Desiring that, in case war breaks out between two or more states the other
states may, in the service of peace, offer their good offices or mediation to
bring the conflict to an end, without such an action being considered as an
unfriendly act;
Convinced that, in case this aim cannot be attained, neutral states have
equal interest in having their rights respected by the belligerents;
Considering that neutrality is the juridical situation of states which do not
take part in the hostilities, and that it creates rights and imposes obligations
of impartiality, which should be regulated;
Recognizing that international solidarity requires that the liberty of
commerce should be always respected, avoiding as far as possible
unnecessary burdens for the neutrals;
It being convenient, that as long as this object is not reached, to reduce
those burdens as much as possible; and
In the hope that it will be possible to regulate the matter so that all interests
concerned may have every desired guaranty;
Have resolved to formulate a convention to that effect and have appointed
the following plenipotentiaries:

[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, after having presented their credentials, which were found in good
and correct form, have agreed upon the following provisions:
SECTION I.—Freedom of commerce in time of war
ARTICLE 1
The following rules shall govern commerce in time of war:
1. Warships of the belligerents have the right to stop and visit on the high
seas and in territorial waters that are not neutral any merchant ship with the
object of ascertaining its character and nationality and of verifying whether
it conveys cargo prohibited by international law or has committed any
violation of blockade. If the merchant ship does not heed the signal to stop,
it may be pursued by the warship and stopped by force; outside of such a
case the ship cannot be attacked unless, after being hailed, it fails to observe
the instructions given it.
The ship shall not be rendered incapable of navigation before the crew and
passengers have been placed in safety.
2. Belligerent submarines are subject to the foregoing rules. If the
submarine cannot capture the ship while observing these rules, it shall not
have the right to continue to attack or to destroy the ship.
ARTICLE 2
Both the detention of the vessel and its crew for violation of neutrality shall
be made in accordance with the procedure which best suits the state
effecting it and at the expense of the transgressing ship. Said state, except in
the case of grave fault on its part, is not responsible for damages which the
vessel may suffer.
SECTION II.—Duties and rights of belligerents
ARTICLE 3

Belligerent states are obligated to refrain from performing acts of war in
neutral waters or other acts which may constitute on the part of the state
that tolerates them, a violation of neutrality.
ARTICLE 4
Under the terms of the preceding article, a belligerent state is forbidden:
a) To make use of neutral waters as a base of naval operations
against the enemy, or to renew or augment military supplies or the
armament of its ships, or to complete the equipment of the latter;
b) To install in neutral waters radio-telegraph stations or any other
apparatus which may serve as a means of communication with its
military forces, or to make use of installations of this kind it may
have established before the war and which may not have been
opened to the public.
ARTICLE 5
Belligerent warships are forbidden to remain in the ports or waters of a
neutral state more than twenty-four hours. This provision will be
communicated to the ship as soon as it arrives in port or in the territorial
waters, and if already there at the time of the declaration of war, as soon as
the neutral state becomes aware of this declaration.
Vessels used exclusively for scientific, religious, or philanthropic purposes
are exempted from the foregoing provisions.
A ship may extend its stay in port more than twenty-four hours in case of
damage or bad conditions at sea, but must depart as soon as the cause of the
delay has ceased.
When, according to the domestic law of the neutral state, the ship may not
receive fuel until twenty-four hours after its arrival in port, the period of its
stay may be extended an equal length of time.
ARTICLE 6

The ship which does not conform to the foregoing rules may be interned by
order of the neutral government.
A ship shall be considered as interned from the moment it receives notice to
that effect from the local neutral authority, even though a petition for
reconsideration of the order has been interposed by the transgressing vessel,
which shall remain under custody from the moment it receives the order.
ARTICLE 7
In the absence of a special provision of the local legislation, the maximum
number of ships of war of a belligerent which may be in a neutral port at the
same time shall be three.
ARTICLE 8
A ship of war may not depart from a neutral port within less than twenty-
four hours after the departure of an enemy warship. The one entering first
shall depart first, unless it is in such condition as to warrant extending its
stay. In any case the ship which arrived later has the right to notify the other
through the competent local authority that within twenty-four hours it will
leave the port, the one first entering, however, having the right to depart
within that time. If it leaves, the notifying ship must observe the interval
which is above stipulated.
ARTICLE 9
Damaged belligerent ships shall not be permitted to make repairs in neutral
ports beyond those that are essential to the continuance of the voyage and
which in no degree constitute an increase in its military strength.
Damages which are found to have been produced by the enemy’s fire shall
in no case be repaired.
The neutral state shall ascertain the nature of the repairs to be made and will
see that they are made as rapidly as possible.
ARTICLE 10

Belligerent warships may supply themselves with fuel and stores in neutral
ports, under the conditions especially established by the local authority and
in case there are no special provisions to that effect, they may supply
themselves in the manner prescribed for provisioning in time of peace.
ARTICLE 11
Warships which obtain fuel in a neutral port cannot renew their supply in
the same state until a period of three months has elapsed.
ARTICLE 12
Where the sojourn, supplying, and provisioning of belligerent ships, in the
ports and jurisdictional waters of neutrals are concerned, the provisions
relative to ships of war shall apply equally:
1. To ordinary auxiliary ships;
2. To merchant ships transformed into warships, in accordance
with Convention VII of The Hague of 1907.
The neutral vessel shall be seized and in general subjected to the
same treatment as enemy merchantmen:
a) When taking a direct part in the hostilities;
b) When at the orders or under the direction of an agent
placed on board by an enemy government;
c) When entirely freight-loaded by an enemy
government;
d) When actually and exclusively destined for
transporting enemy troops or for the transmission of
information on behalf of the enemy.
In the cases dealt with in this article, merchandise belonging to
the owner of the vessel or ship shall also be liable to seizure.

3. To armed merchantmen.60
ARTICLE 13
Auxiliary ships of belligerents, converted anew into merchantmen, shall be
admitted as such in neutral ports subject to the following conditions:
1. That the transformed vessel has not violated the neutrality of
the country where it arrives;
2. That the transformation has been made in the ports of
jurisdictional waters of the country to which the vessel belongs,
or in the ports of its allies;
3. That the transformation be genuine, namely, that the vessel
show neither in its crew nor in its equipment that it can serve the
armed fleet of its country as an auxiliary, as it did before;
4. That the government of the country to which the ship belongs
communicate to the states the names of auxiliary craft which have
lost such character in order to recover that of merchantmen; and
5. That the same government obligate itself that said ships shall
not again be used as auxiliaries to the war fleet.
ARTICLE 14
The airships of belligerents shall not fly above the territory or the territorial
waters of neutrals if it is not in conformity with the regulations of the latter.
SECTION III.—Rights and duties of neutrals
ARTICLE 15
Of the acts of assistance coming from the neutral states, and the acts of
commerce on the part of individuals, only the first are contrary to neutrality.
ARTICLE 16

The neutral state is forbidden:
a) To deliver to the belligerent, directly or indirectly, or for any
reason whatever, ships of war, munitions or any other war
material;
b) To grant it loans, or to open credits for it during the duration of
war.
Credits that a neutral state may give to facilitate the sale or exportation of
its food products and raw materials are not included in this prohibition.
ARTICLE 17
Prizes cannot be taken to a neutral port except in case of unseaworthiness,
stress of weather, or want of fuel or provisions. When the cause has
disappeared, the prizes must leave immediately; if none of the indicated
conditions exist, the state shall suggest to them that they depart, and if not
obeyed shall have recourse to the means at its disposal to disarm them with
their officers and crew, or to intern the prize crew placed on board by the
captor.
ARTICLE 18
Outside of the cases provided for in Article 17, the neutral state must
release the prizes which may have been brought into its territorial waters.
ARTICLE 19
When a ship transporting merchandise is to be interned in a neutral state,
cargo intended for said country shall be unloaded and that destined for
others shall be transhipped.
ARTICLE 20
The merchantman supplied with fuel or other stores in a neutral state which
repeatedly delivers the whole or part of its supplies to a belligerent vessel,
shall not again receive stores and fuel in the same state.

ARTICLE 21
Should it be found that a merchantman flying a belligerent flag, by its
preparations or other circumstances, can supply to warships of a state the
stores which they need, the local authority may refuse it supplies or demand
of the agent of the company a guaranty that the said ship will not aid or
assist any belligerent vessel.
ARTICLE 22
Neutral states are not obligated to prevent the export or transit at the
expense of any one of the belligerents of arms, munitions and in general of
anything which may be useful to their military forces.
Transit shall be permitted when, in the event of a war between two
American nations, one of the belligerents is a mediterranean country, having
no other means of supplying itself, provided the vital interests of the
country through which transit is requested do not suffer by the granting
thereof.
ARTICLE 23
Neutral states shall not oppose the voluntary departure of nationals of
belligerent states even though they leave simultaneously in great numbers;
but they may oppose the voluntary departure of their own nationals going to
enlist in the armed forces.
ARTICLE 24
The use by the belligerents of the means of communication of neutral states
or which cross or touch their territory is subject to the measures dictated by
the local authority.
ARTICLE 25
If as the result of naval operations beyond the territorial waters of neutral
states there should be dead or wounded on board belligerent vessels, said
states may send hospital ships under the vigilance of the neutral government

to the scene of the disaster. These ships shall enjoy complete immunity
during the discharge of their mission.
ARTICLE 26
Neutral states are bound to exert all the vigilance within their power in
order to prevent in their ports or territorial waters any violation of the
foregoing provisions.
SECTION IV.—Fulfilment and observance of the laws of neutrality
ARTICLE 27
A belligerent shall indemnify the damage caused by its violation of the
foregoing provisions. It shall likewise be responsible for the acts of persons
who may belong to its armed forces.
ARTICLE 28
The present convention does not affect obligations previously undertaken
by the contracting parties through international agreements.
ARTICLE 29
After being signed, the present convention shall be submitted to the
ratification of the signatory states. The Government of Cuba is charged with
transmitting authentic certified copies to the governments for the
aforementioned purpose of ratification. The instrument of ratification, shall
be deposited in the archives of the Pan American Union in Washington, the
Union to notify the signatory governments of said deposit. Such
notifications shall be considered as an exchange of ratifications. This
convention shall remain open to the adherence of non-signatory states.
In witness whereof, the aforenamed plenipotentiaries sign the present
convention in Spanish, English, French, and Portuguese, in the city of
Habana, the 20th day of February 1928.
Perú: JESÚS M. SALAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.

Uruguay: VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCÍA, FERNANDO GONZÁLEZ ROA, SALVADOR URBINA, AQUILES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HÉCTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guatemala: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRA PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIÉRREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.
Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VÁZQUEZ.
Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMENEZ.
RESERVATION OF THE DELEGATION OF CHILE
The delegation of Chile signs the present convention with a reservation
concerning Article 22, paragraph 2.
Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI.
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAZ LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.

Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PEYNADO, TUUO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DE CASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
RESERVATION OF THE DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
The delegation of the United States of America signs the present convention
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
RESERVATION OF THE DELEGATION OF CUBA
The delegation of the Republic of Cuba signs with a reservation in
reference to Article 12, section 3.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNÁNDEZ CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHENCOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
59 In English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French; English text, only, printed.
Ratification advised by the Senate, with exception of section 3 of article 12,
United States deposited with the Fan American Union, Mar. 22, 1932;
proclaimed by the President, May 26, 1932.
60 Section 3 was excepted from ratification by the United States of
America.
61 The Argentine delegation proposed in committee amendments which it
had suggested in subcommittee. One of these, to the effect that armed
merchantmen should be assimilated to auxiliary vessels in the service of
belligerents, was carried and forms the last sentence of article 12 of the
convention. To this, the United States interposed a reservation, as did
likewise Cuba and Uruguay. The convention was adopted in the plenary
session of February 18, Chile and the United States expressly maintaining
at the time of signing, their respective reservations (Report of the Delegates
of the United States of America to the Sixth International Conference of
American States, p. 19).

Treaty Series No. 814
[Document 368]
Convention Regarding the Duties and Rights of States in the
Event of Civil Strife, Signed at Habana, February 20, 192862
Habana, February 20, 1928
The Governments of the Republics represented at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, held in the city of Habana, Republic of
Cuba, in the year 1928, desirous of reaching an agreement as to the duties
and rights of states in the event of civil strife, have appointed the following
plenipotentiaries:
[Here follows list of names of plenipotentiaries.]
Who, after exchanging their respective full powers, which were found to be
in good and due form, have agreed upon the following:
ARTICLE 1
The contracting states bind themselves to observe the following rules with
regard to civil strife in another one of them:
1. To use all means at their disposal to prevent the inhabitants of
their territory, nationals or aliens, from participating in, gathering
elements, crossing the boundary or sailing from their territory for
the purpose of starting or promoting civil strife.
2. To disarm and intern every rebel force crossing their
boundaries, the expenses of internment to be borne by the state
where public order may have been disturbed. The arms found in
the hands of the rebels may be seized and withdrawn by the
government of the country granting asylum, to be returned, once
the struggle has ended, to the state in civil strife.

3. To forbid the traffic in arms and war material, except when
intended for the government, while the belligerency of the rebels
has not been recognized, in which latter case the rules of
neutrality shall be applied.
4. To prevent that within their jurisdiction there be equipped,
armed or adapted for warlike purposes any vessel intended to
operate in favor of the rebellion.
ARTICLE 2
The declaration of piracy against vessels which have risen in arms,
emanating from a government, is not binding upon the other states.
The state that may be injured by depredations originating from insurgent
vessels is entitled to adopt the following punitive measures against them:
Should the authors of the damages be warships, it may capture and return
them to the government of the state to which they belong, for their trial;
should the damage originate with merchantmen, the injured state may
capture and subject them to the appropriate penal laws.
The insurgent vessel, whether a warship or a merchantman, which flies the
flag of a foreign country to shield its actions, may also be captured and tried
by the state of said flag.
ARTICLE 363
The insurgent vessel, whether a warship or a merchantman, equipped by the
rebels, which arrives at a foreign country or seeks refuge therein, shall be
delivered by the government of the latter to the constituted government of
the state in civil strife, and the members of the crew shall be considered as
political refugees.
ARTICLE 4
The present convention does not affect obligations previously undertaken
by the contracting parties through international agreements.

ARTICLE 5
After being signed, the present convention shall be submitted to the
ratification of the signatory states. The Government of Cuba is charged with
transmitting authentic certified copies to the governments for the
aforementioned purpose of ratification. The instrument of ratification shall
be deposited in the archives of the Pan American Union in Washington, the
Union to notify the signatory governments of said deposit. Such notification
shall be considered as an exchange of ratifications. This convention shall
remain open to the adherence of non-signatory states.
In witness whereof the aforenamed plenipotentiaries sign the present
convention in Spanish, English, French, and Portuguese, in the city of
Habana, the 20th day of February, 1928.
Perú: JESÚS M. SALAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.
Uruguay: VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCÍA, FERNANDO GONZÁLEZ ROA, SALVADOR URBINA, AQUILES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HÉCTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guatemala: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRA PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIERREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.
Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VÁZQUEZ.

Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMÉNEZ.
Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI.
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAZ LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.
Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PEYNADO, TULIO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DE CASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNANDEZ CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHENCOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
62 In English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French; English text, only, printed.
Ratification advised by the Senate, subject to an understanding in regard to
ratification of the United States deposited with the Pan American Union,
63 Ratified on the part of the United States of America subject to the
understanding that the provisions of article 3 thereof shall not apply where a
state of belligerency has been recognized.

Unperfected Treaty No. J–10
[Document 369]
Convention Regarding the Pan American Union, Signed at
Habana, February 20, 192864
Habana, February 20, 1928
Their Excellencies the Presidents of the Republics of Peru, Uruguay,
Panama, Ecuador, Mexico, Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Colombia, Honduras, Costa Rica, Chile, Brazil, Argentina,
Paraguay, Haiti, Dominican Republic, the United States of America and
Cuba, through their respective plenipotentiary delegates, have agreed upon
the following convention, which shall be signed in the manner provided for
in the final article:
The American Republics, whose moral union rests on the juridical equality
of the republics of the continent and on the mutual respect of the rights
inherent in their complete independence, desirous of promoting
efficaciously the increasing conciliation of their economic interests and
coordination of their social and intellectual activities, and recognizing that
relations between peoples are regulated by law as well as by their legitimate
individual and collective interests;
Agree to continue their joint action of cooperation and solidarity by means
of periodic meetings of the International Conferences of American States,
as well as by means of organs established by virtue of international
agreements, and through the Pan American Union which has its seat in
Washington and whose organization and functions shall be regulated by the
present convention, in the following terms:
ARTICLE 1—ORGANS OF THE UNION OF THE AMERICAN STATES
The Union of the American States strives for the fulfilment of its object
through the following organs:

a) The International Conference of American States;
b) The Pan American Union under the direction of a Governing
Board with its seat in the city of Washington;
c) Every organ that may be established by virtue of conventions
between the American states.
Each state enjoys, as of right, representation at the conferences and on the
Governing Board.
ARTICLE 2—THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES OF AMERICAN STATES
The conferences shall meet at periodic intervals. The Governing Board of
the Pan American Union shall determine the date on which they shall meet,
provided that in no case shall a longer period than five years elapse between
conferences, except in case of force majeure.
ARTICLE 3—GOVERNING BOARD
The government of the Pan American Union shall be vested in a Governing
Board composed of the representatives that the American governments may
appoint. The appointment may devolve upon the diplomatic representatives
of the respective countries in Washington.
Besides his own country, a member of the Governing Board may serve as
special representative of one or more countries, in which case such
representative shall have as many votes as countries represented.
The Board shall elect its Chairman and Vice Chairman annually.
ARTICLE 4—EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The Governing Board shall appoint the following officers:
A Director General, who shall have charge of the administration of the Pan
American Union, with power to promote its most ample development in
accordance with the terms of this convention, the regulations and the
resolutions of the Board, to which body he shall be responsible.

The Director General shall attend, in an advisory capacity, the meetings of
the Governing Board, of the committees appointed by the Board, and of the
International Conferences of American States for the purpose of giving
such information as may be required. The necessary expenses shall be paid
out of the funds of the Pan American Union.
An Assistant Director, who shall act as secretary of the Governing Board.
The Director General shall prepare the internal regulations by which the
various divisions of the Pan American Union shall be governed, in
accordance with the provisions of the present convention, and shall submit
them to the Governing Board for approval.
The Director General shall present to the Governing Board annually, at the
regular session of the Board in November, a detailed budget for the ensuing
fiscal year.
The Director General shall submit to the consideration of each conference
of the American Republics a detailed report on the work carried out by the
Pan American Union during the period preceding the meeting of the
conference.
The Director General shall appoint, with the approval of the Governing
Board, the personnel necessary to the work of the Pan American Union,
endeavoring as far as possible to distribute the positions among nationals of
the countries members of the Union.
ARTICLE 5—MAINTENANCE OF THE PAN AMERICAN UNION
The Governing Board of the Pan American Union shall determine the quota
which is to be paid by each of the governments members of the Union for
the maintenance of the Pan American Union. But increases in the budget of
the Pan American Union exceeding by more than twenty-five per cent the
budget of the preceding year shall be approved by the unanimous vote of
the Governing Board, the representatives being given time to consult their
respective governments. The quota shall be determined on the basis of the
latest official statistics of population in possession of the Pan American
Union on the first day of July of each year. The budget shall be

communicated to the governments members of the Union before the first
day of the ensuing calendar year, with an indication of the quota which each
country shall pay, such payments to be made before the first of July of that
year.
The Governing Board shall elect from among its members a committee
charged with examining, on the dates determined by the Board, the
accounts of the expenditures of the Union, in conformity with the
provisions established by the regulations and the opinion of three experts to
be appointed for the purpose.
ARTICLE 6—FUNCTIONS OF THE PAN AMERICAN UNION
Both the Governing Board and the Pan American Union shall discharge the
duties assigned by this convention subject to the condition that they shall
not exercise functions of a political character.
The functions of the Pan American Union are:
1. To compile and distribute information and reports concerning
the commercial, industrial, agricultural, social, and educational
development as well as the general progress of the American
Republics.
2. To compile and classify information referring to the
conventions and treaties concluded among the American
Republics and between these and other states, as well as to the
legislation of the former.
3. To assist in the development of commercial, industrial,
agricultural, social, and cultural relations, the study of the
problems of labor and the furtherance of a more intimate mutual
acquaintance between the American Republics.
4. To act as a Permanent Commission of the International
Conferences of American States; to keep their records and
archives; to assist in obtaining ratification of the treaties and
conventions; to carry out and facilitate the execution of the

resolutions adopted by the International Conferences of American
States, within the limits of its powers; and to prepare in
agreement with the governments the program of the International
Conferences of American States, and submit to the conferences a
project of regulations.
5. To perform such other functions entrusted to it by the
Conference or by the Governing Board, by virtue of the powers
conferred upon it by this convention. Whenever a state believes
that its vital interests are involved in a question, or that an
obligation may thereby be imposed upon it, such state may
require that the resolution of the Board be adopted by unanimous
vote.
6. The Governing Board may promote the meeting of
international conferences of experts to study problems of a
technical character of common interest to the countries members
of the Union, and to this end may request the governments to
appoint experts to represent them at these conferences, which
shall meet at the place and time determined by the Board.
To carry out the purposes for which the institution is organized the
Governing Board shall provide for the establishment of such administrative
divisions or sections within the Pan American Union as it may deem
necessary.
ARTICLE 7—DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE OF RATIFICATIONS
The instruments of ratification of the treaties, conventions, protocols, and
other diplomatic documents signed at the International Conferences of
American States shall be deposited at the Pan American Union by the
respective representative on the Governing Board, acting in the name of his
government, without need of special credentials for the deposit of the
ratification. A record of the deposit of the ratification shall be made in a
document signed by the representative on the Board of the ratifying
country, by the Director General of the Pan American Union, and by the
Secretary of the Governing Board.

The Pan American Union shall communicate to all the states members of
the Union, through their representatives on the Board, the deposit of the
ratification.
ARTICLE 8—COMMUNICATION OF OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS TO THE PAN AMERICAN UNION
The governments of the countries members of the Union shall transmit to
the Pan American Union two copies of the official documents and
publications which relate to the purposes of the Union, as far as the internal
legislation of the respective countries may permit.
ARTICLE 9—COOPERATION BETWEEN OFFICIAL PAN AMERICAN ORGANIZATIONS
For the purpose of coordinating the results of the work of other official Pan
American organizations, and of establishing relations of close cooperation
between them, the program of work and the development of their activities
shall, as far as possible, be the subject of agreement between their directive
bodies and the Governing Board of the Pan American Union.
The governments members of the Union which may not have an efficient
organ for the study and investigation of Pan American affairs, shall
establish a committee composed of persons of experience in such matters,
or an office attached to the ministry of foreign affairs entrusted with Pan
American affairs.
These committees or offices shall have the following duties:
a) To cooperate with their respective governments to obtain
ratification of treaties and conventions, and to the carrying out of
the agreements adopted by the International Conferences of
American States;
b) To furnish the Pan American Union promptly with the
information it may need in the preparation of its work;
c) To present to the Union through the proper channels such
projects as they may consider useful to the purposes of the Union.

ARTICLE 10
The Governing Board of the Pan American Union shall prepare the
regulations and fix the status of the members of the staff, determining their
salaries and conditions of retirement.
ARTICLE 11
All correspondence and matter transmitted through the mails to the Pan
American Union, which bears the frank used by the Union, and all
correspondence or matter transmitted by the Pan American Union, shall be
carried free of charge by the mails of the American Republics.
ARTICLE 12
The contracting states may withdraw from the Pan American Union at any
time, but shall pay their respective quotas for the period of the current fiscal
year.
ARTICLE 13
This convention can not be modified except in the same manner in which it
was adopted.
ARTICLE 14
The present convention shall be ratified by the signatory states, and is open
to the signature and ratification of the states represented at the Conference
that may not have been able to sign.
The President of the Conference, through the Government of the Republic
of Cuba, shall send to the governments represented at the Conference an
authenticated copy of the present project of convention in order that, if the
governments approve, it may receive their adhesion. For this purpose, the
governments that adhere to the convention shall authorize their respective
diplomatic or special representatives in the city of Habana to sign the
convention. All the states having signed, the convention shall be submitted
by each government for ratification.

The present convention shall become effective when all the states
represented at the Conference receive notice that all the ratifications have
been deposited with the Pan American Union, and that the adhesions and
ratifications of the twenty-one American Republics have been received.
In witness whereof, the delegates sign and affix their seals to the present
convention.
Perú: JESÚS M. SALAZAR, VÍCTOR M. MAÚRTUA, LUIS ERNESTO DENEGRI, E. CASTRO OYANGUREN.
Uruguay: VARELA, PEDRO ERASMO CALLORDA.
Panamá: R. J. ALFARO, EDUARDO CHIARI.
Ecuador: GONZALO ZALDUMBIDE, VÍCTOR ZEVALLOS, C. E. ALFARO.
Mexico: JULIO GARCÍA, FERNANDO GONZÁLES ROA, SALVATOR URBINA, AQUILES ELORDUY.
Salvador: J. GUSTAVO GUERRERO, HECTOR DAVID CASTRO, ED. ALVAREZ.
Guatemala: CARLOS SALAZAR, B. ALVARADO, LUIS BELTRANENA, J. AZURDIA.
Nicaragua: CARLOS CUADRA PAZOS, MÁXIMO H. ZEPEDA, JOAQUÍN GÓMEZ.
Bolivia: JOSÉ ANTEZANA, A. COSTA DU R.
Venezuela: SANTIAGO KEY AYALA, FRANCISCO G. YANES, RAFAEL ANGEL ARRAIZ.
Colombia: ENRIQUE OLAYA HERRERA, R. GUTIERREZ LEE, J. M. YEPES.
Honduras: F. DÁVILA, MARIANO VAZQUEZ.
Costa Rica: RICARDO CASTRO BEECHE, J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO, A. TINOCO JIMENEZ.
Chile: ALEJANDRO LIRA, ALEJANDRO ALVAREZ, C. SILVA VILDÓSOLA, MANUEL BIANCHI.
Brazil: RAÚL FERNANDES, LINDOLFO COLLOR.
DECLARATION OF THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA

The Argentine delegation declares, pursuant to express instructions of its
Government, that it approves and will sign the project of convention; but
that it now wishes to formulate the reservation that it regrets that the
economic principles which it upheld in the committee have not been
included in this convention.
Argentina: LAURENTINO OLASCOAGA, FELIPE A. ESPIL, CARLOS ALBERTO ALCORTA.
Paraguay: LISANDRO DÍAS LEÓN, JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ.
Haiti: FERNANDO DENNIS.
Dominican Republic: FRACO. J. PEYNADO, TULIO M. CESTERO, JACINTO R. DE CASTRO, ELÍAS BRACHE, R.
PÉREZ ALFONSECA.
United States of America: CHARLES EVANS HUGHES, NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH, HENRY P. FLETCHER,
OSCAR W. UNDERWOOD, MORGAN J. O’BRIEN, JAMES BROWN SCOTT, RAY LYMAN WILBUR, LEO S. ROWE.
Cuba: ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE, ORESTES FERRARA, E. HERNÁNDEZ, CARTAYA, ARÍSTIDES DE AGÜERO BETHENCOURT,
M. MÁRQUEZ STERLING, NÉSTOR CARBONELL.
President, Mar. 6, 1931; ratification of the United States deposited with the
Pan American Union, Mar. 18, 1931. Convention not yet in force, since it
requires ratification by all the Governments of the Pan American Union
before entry into force.

International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration,
held at Washington, December 10,
arrangements65
65 For the proceedings of the Conference, see Proceedings of the
International Conference of American States on Conciliation and
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1929).
[370] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, April 14, 1928.
[371] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
Washington, April 14, 1928.
[372] The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State

[373] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[374] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
[375] The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
[376] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[377] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[378] The Chargé in Haiti (Gross) to the Secretary of State

[379] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreech) to the Secretary of State
[380] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[381] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[382] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[383] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[384] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State

[385] The Minister in Salvador (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
[386] The Chargé in Mexico (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State
[387] The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[388] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[389] The Secretary of State to the Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions in
Latin America
[390] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[391] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis), Temporarily in Washington,
to the Secretary of State
Washington, July 3, 1928.
[392] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[393] The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[394] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
Washington, July 12, 1928.
[395] The Chargé in Colombia (Matthews) to the Secretary of State
[396] The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State

[397] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State

[Document 370]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)66
WASHINGTON, April 14, 1928.
No. 1364
SIR: On February 18, 1928, the republics represented at the Sixth
International Conference of American States at Habana, Cuba,67 passed a
resolution, a copy of which is enclosed,68 declaring in favor of obligatory
arbitration for the pacific settlement of international differences of a
juridical nature. They also resolved to meet in Washington within the period
of one year in a conference of conciliation and arbitration to draw up a
convention for the realization of this principle with the minimum
exceptions which they consider indispensable to safeguard the
independence and sovereignty of states, as well as domestic questions, and
also including matters relating to the interest or referring to the action of a
state not a party to the convention.
The United States Government will be pleased to invite the other
Governments of the Pan American Union to send delegates to such a
conference. It is suggested that the conference be called to meet in
Washington on December 10, 1928. This date will give ample time for the
various countries to formulate their plans and prepare for the conference.
The resolution further provides that each of the countries shall be
represented at the conference by plenipotentiary jurisconsults with
instructions regarding the maximum and the minimum which the nations
they represent would accept with regard to obligatory arbitral jurisdiction. I
suggest that not more than two delegates be named by each country. You
are instructed to inform the Government of Brazil of these suggestions and
to inquire if they are acceptable to that Government.
On the subject of conciliation you are undoubtedly aware that a Treaty to
Avoid or Prevent Conflicts Between the American States (commonly

known as the Gondra Treaty) was signed at Santiago, Chile, on May 3,
1923, by sixteen republics parties to the Pan American Union;69 viz., the
United States, Cuba, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil, Ecuador, Chile,
Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina. It was subsequently signed by Mexico.
To date it has been ratified by the following states and the ratifications duly
deposited at Santiago, Chile,—the United States, Mexico, Cuba, Chile,
Haiti, Venezuela, Brazil and Paraguay. The information available to the
Department indicates that the following nations have ratified the treaty but
have not yet officially deposited their ratifications—Guatemala, Panama
and Uruguay.
On March 29, 1928, at the invitation of the Acting Secretary of State, the
diplomatic representatives of Uruguay, Panama and Colombia, as the three
diplomatic agents longest accredited before this Government, met in the
Department of State and organized the Permanent Commission to be
established at Washington in accordance with Article III of this Treaty.70
The Minister of Uruguay was chosen as Chairman of this Commission.
The Gondra Treaty, similar to the Bryan Treaty which the United States has
concluded with about eighteen countries,71 would seem to cover questions
of conciliation; and, as you are probably aware, the last Pan American
Conference adopted a resolution, a copy of which is enclosed, requesting all
states parties to the Pan American Union to ratify this Treaty as quickly as
possible.
I desire you confidentially and discreetly to obtain such information as may
be possible with regard to the attitude of the Brazilian Government on the
question of arbitration and conciliation. Brazil has ratified the Gondra
Treaty and it would therefore seem as though that subject has been properly
taken care of; but the Department desires to know the attitude of the
Government of Brazil with regard to the arbitration of juridical questions.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

66 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the chiefs of missions
68 For text of resolution, see circular telegram, June 19, to the chiefs of
Doc. 388, and Doc. 389].
71 For Bryan treaties for the advancement of general peace, see Foreign
1007 .

[Document 371]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)72
WASHINGTON, April 14, 1928.
No. 71
SIR: [Here follow five paragraphs, the same, mutatis mutandis, as the first
in Brazil, printed supra.]
I desire you confidentially and discreetly to obtain such information as may
be possible with regard to the attitude of the Argentine Government on the
question of arbitration and conciliation. I also desire that you informally
and discreetly suggest to the Government of Argentina that, as the Gondra
Treaty has been signed and ratified by a majority of the countries members
of the Pan American Union, it would be a decided step forward on the
subject of conciliation if the Gondra Treaty could become effective as to all
the countries members of the Pan American Union before the conference
meets in Washington next December. This would leave the subject of
arbitration for primary consideration at the conference. You may informally
state to the Government of Argentina that the United States Government
sincerely hopes that the Government of Argentina will see its way to ratify
the Gondra Treaty and deposit ratification thereof at Santiago, Chile, before
the conference.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
72 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the chiefs of missions
Dominican Republic (No. 239), Guatemala (No. 1070), Honduras (No.

Salvador (No. 124). A similar instruction was sent to the mission in

[Document 372]
The Chargé in Cuba (Curtis) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, April 30, 1928.
[Received May 3.]
No. 219
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
from the Cuban Government whether the suggestions therein advanced by
the Department in relation to the conference, which is to take place in
Washington in conformity with the Resolution of February 18, 1928 on the
subject of obligatory arbitration for the pacific settlement of international
differences of a juridical nature, are acceptable to that Government. The
matter was informally broached to the Secretary of State on April 25 who,
after consultation on the subject, orally replied on the 28th that the date of
December 10, 1928, suggested by the Department for the convening of the
conference, is agreeable to the Cuban Government. The recommendation is
likewise acceptable that not more than two delegates shall be named by
each country.
As to the attitude of the Cuban Government towards the subject of
arbitration and conciliation, when the recommendations of the Department
were brought to his attention, Secretary Martinez Ortiz remarked that in
principle he is favorable to arbitration provided local laws are adequately
safe-guarded. Anything that can be done towards making war more unlikely
is worthwhile in his opinion. He added, in effect, that Cuba would, as the
Embassy knows, accord with the United States in such matters—not alone
because it is its desire to adjust its foreign policy to that of the United
States, but also because the United States sees so clearly with regard to
subjects involving the preservation of peace, as, for example, is evidenced
in the recent arbitration negotiations with France.

Perhaps more significant than the above remarks, since the neutral character
of the audience imposes no necessity for polite phraseology, are the words
which the Secretary of State will use in a discourse at the annual meeting of
the Cuban Society of International Law to be held on May 7. In translation
he will say on that occasion:
[“] We have purposely left for the end of this synthetic outline of
the work of the Sixth Conference some of the resolutions adopted
on matters of great difficulty which today have the attention of
the entire world, and in regard to which up to the present time the
nations have not been able to find a satisfactory solution. One is
obligatory arbitration. The following was resolved:
(Here follows the text of the resolution on obligatory arbitration.)
There is nothing more transcendental than what has been
mentioned, this having, nevertheless, been taken up in a high
spirit of conciliation and of hope for reaching the desired goal.
Let us hope that during the coming year and as a consequence of
the resolution transcribed, a definite step forward may be taken
toward universal peace, or at least peace among the most cultured
nations of the world, and that it shall be our America which, for
its own glory, shall achieve the final success in that which
constitutes the coming hope of humanity.”
With regard to the Cuban attitude on the Gondra Treaty, as the Department
observes, Cuba’s ratification of the Treaty would seem to speak for itself.
Moreover, while the Secretary of State ventured no remarks relative to
Cuba’s position on the Treaty, it is believed that his favorable observations
concerning any agreement which leads to the preservation of amity between
the nations may be interpreted as equally applicable to the Gondra Treaty.
I have [etc.]
C. B. CURTIS

[Document 373]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, May 5, 1928.
[Received May 16.]
No. 594
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 250 of
April 14, 192874 relative to a conference of Pan American states planned to
be held at Washington in December next for the purpose of drawing up a
convention of conciliation and arbitration. In reply to representations
relative to this matter made to the Government of Honduras, I have received
a reply, under date of May 5, in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs
states that the Government of Honduras is in perfect accord with the
suggestions made by the Government of the United States in regard to the
projected Conference and that it will participate therein and will take all
necessary steps for its official representation.
I may add that it will unfortunately not be possible for Honduras to ratify
the treaty known as the Gondra Treaty before the Conference meets in
December, for the necessary power for ratification rests with the National
Congress which will not convene again before January 1, 1929.
I have [etc.]
GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN

[Document 374]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, May 8, 1928.
[Received May 19.]
No. 1700
SIR: I have the honor to report that, pursuant to the Department’s instruction
Foreign Affairs in conversation yesterday the interest felt by my
Government in having the Gondra treaty become effective as to all
countries members of the Pan American Union before the proposed
conference of conciliation and arbitration met at Washington at the end of
this year. The Foreign Minister replied that this would be done, so far as
Panama was concerned, and added that he had already mailed his
Government’s ratification of the treaty to Santiago for deposit with the
Government of Chile.
With regard to the attitude of the Panaman Government toward arbitration
and conciliation, I believe that there is no doubt whatever of Panama’s
readiness to adhere to the proposed convention on these subjects. Panama is
a small nation. One of her international boundaries is in dispute and the
other has not been delimited. Her boundary question with Costa Rica is of a
serious and involved character.76 In my opinion, Panama would not only
consent to submit this question to arbitration, but would also welcome an
opportunity of becoming a party to such a convention for the purpose of
submitting thereunder, if possible, another question which has been agitated
by the present administration, namely, the sovereignty of the Panama Canal.
I have [etc.]
J. G. SOUTH

[Document 375]
The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, May 10, 1928.
[Received June 8.]
No. 620
SIR: In compliance with the Department’s instruction No. 129 of April 14,
1928,77 I hava the honor to report that I today presented to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs a note concerning the proposed Conference of Arbitration
and Conciliation to be held at Washington on December 10, 1928.
In a conversation with the Chief of Protocol (Director de Secciones e
Introductor de Embajadores) before my interview with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Sr. Yeregui volunteered the information that the
Department’s proposals would surely receive a hearty acceptance as
Uruguay was unreservedly in favor of arbitration. He further declared that
Uruguay had up to now refused to conclude arbitration treaties which
contained reservations, even on matters of sovereignty.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sr. Dominguez, upon receiving the note
stated that Uruguay was in favor of the principle of arbitration and that an
early answer might be expected.
I have [etc.]
GERHARD GADE

[Document 376]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, May 11, 1928.
[Received May 23.]
No. 885
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s instruction
Arbitration to be held in Washington, and to enclose herewith a copy of the
Legation’s note to the Foreign Office79 informing it of the suggestions
therein contained and inquiring if they are acceptable to the Dominican
Government.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sanchez, has informally expressed the
opinion that the suggestions as to the date of the conference and the size of
the delegations will be acceptable to his Government. In conversation with
him concerning the proposed conference, I endeavored discreetly to obtain
information as to the attitude of the Dominican Government on the question
of arbitration and conciliation. Without hesitation Mr. Sanchez informed me
that in his opinion the Dominican Government should be unreservedly
committed to arbitration and conciliation, first, because of the constitutional
provision that the powers instituted by the Constitution cannot declare war
without previously proposing arbitration and that to secure this principle
clauses relative to the solution of all differences by means of arbitration
must be inserted in all international treaties entered into by the Republic
(Article 100 of the Constitution of 1927), and second, because the physical
position of the Dominican Republic makes arbitration and conciliation
essential. He added that he believed that the Dominican delegation to the
forthcoming conference should have instructions enabling them to concede
the maximum with regard to obligatory arbitral jurisdiction.

During the above-mentioned conversation I referred to the Gondra Treaty.
Mr. Sanchez stated that he was unaware of any particular opposition to the
treaty and said that it is probably among those which have been submitted
to Congress but not acted on, or which through carelessness have never
been submitted to the Congress. In discussing the provisions of this treaty
Mr. Sanchez volunteered the observation, that its ratification might
opportunely precede the conference at Washington, which gave me an
opportunity to indicate the sincere hope of my Government that ratification
might be effected before the conference.
Minister Sanchez assured me that he would submit the various suggestions
raised to the President and promptly advise me of the Government’s attitude
thereon.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
79 Not printed.

[Document 377]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, May 14, 1928.
[Received May 31.]
No. 955
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 432 of April 14,
1928,80 regarding preliminary arrangements for the proposed meeting of
American States at Washington in a conference of conciliation and
arbitration, I have the honor to report that the Department’s suggestions are
now being considered by the Peruvian Government.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs called me to the Foreign Office a few days
ago and told me that President Leguia is pleased with the Department’s
suggestions for the date when the conference is to assemble and the
maximum number of delegates to be named by each country. He also told
me that President Leguia is disposed to adhere to the Gondra Treaty and
present it for ratification shortly after the Peruvian Congress assembles in
the latter part of July. Dr. Rada y Gamio intimated that the Peruvian
Government might request the Department’s assistance in connection with
depositing the ratifications with the Government of Chile, with which it has
no official relations, and he also mentioned the fact that his government
does not possess a properly authenticated copy of the treaty for submission
to the Peruvian Congress. I understand he will discuss these points with
President Leguia and inform the Embassy of the latter’s wishes in regard
thereto when making formal reply to the Embassy’s note. I will add that Dr.
Maurtua told me recently that Dr. Rada y Gamio had conferred with him
concerning the ratification of the Gondra Treaty and that I could be assured
that it would be ratified, probably in August.
I have not yet been able to obtain more than an impression concerning the
attitude of the Peruvian Government on the question of arbitration and

conciliation. Something may be deduced from the speech of Dr. Rada y
Gamio forwarded with my despatch No. 945,81 in which he contrasted
Peru’s past attitude on this question with that of Chile. I will quote the
following extracts in translation:
“Peru has always been a supporter of international arbitration
without limitations of any form. In the history of arbitration, we
have without doubt a very distinguished place.
“In the First Conference in Washington arbitration was
considered. The Committee on general welfare proposed the
conclusion of a uniform arbitration treaty. In the general plan it
was agreed that the Republics of North, Central, and South
America should adopt arbitration as a principle of international
law for the solution of controversies which might arise between
two or more of said Republics, and that arbitration was obligatory
in all differences referring to diplomatic and consular privileges,
frontiers, territories, indemnities, rights of navigation, and the
validity, interpretation, and execution of treaties. Questions which
could imperil the independence of States were excluded and
optional (facultativo) arbitration was prescribed for them. The
arbitration agreed upon was retroactive (retrospective). Peru
raised the banner of arbitration on high and without limitations.
Chile opposed arbitration of this nature so far as it was possible
for her to do so.
“In the Second International American Conference in Mexico, the
noble and progressive Argentine nation, through her delegation,
proposed obligatory arbitration for certain rules which comprised
all the possible origins of a casus belli. She said she could repeat
what she said to Chile in 1872 and to Colombia in 1880: With
treaties or without them, the Argentine Government is determined
to end all international questions by arbitration.’
“The Chilean delegation at that conference was opposed to
obligatory arbitration. On the other hand, the Peruvian delegation
stated that ‘the stability of institutions and peace between the
Republics of America were the two cardinal necessities, and that

nothing could be done to promote the material progress of these
countries if measures were not adopted beforehand to assure
internal order in the young American nations, clarifying with
frankness and energy the causes of misunderstanding, imaginary
affronts, restlessness, and latent or active struggles which exist or
may occur among them’; and the delegation concluded by
defending with vigor the principle of obligatory arbitration in its
most ample form.
“In the Habana Conference … the debate on obligatory arbitration
gave rise to a clash between the Chilean and Peruvian theses, the
first being presented by Alejandro Lira, President of the Chilean
delegation, and the second by Dr. Victor M. Maurtua, a member
of the Peruvian delegation. Lira supported a general thesis,
pleading
for
restricted
compulsory
(coactivo
restrictivo)
arbitration. Maurtua, in conformity with the policy of Peru,
supported the principle of compulsory and extensive (coactivo y
amplio) arbitration.
“Obligatory arbitration, as it triumphed in the International
American Conference in Habana, may be cited as a means for
settling international differences of a juridical nature. The
resolution approved is as follows: (The resolution is then
quoted).”
When I saw Dr. Rada y Gamio and presented the Department’s suggestions
concerning the proposed conference, he took occasion to express in the
warmest terms his great admiration for Secretary Kellogg’s efforts to
negotiate a multilateral treaty restricting war,82 and said that this initiative
in the cause of world peace filled him with joy. He asserted that Mr.
Kellogg is interpreting the most profound aspiration of the world at the
present time and, whatever the immediate outcome, is giving force and
expression to a current of public opinion which eventually will be
irresistible. And then he added, in reply to an inquiry from me, that this
would exert a beneficial effect in creating a favorable atmosphere for the
proposed conference.
I have [etc.]

MATTHEW E. HANNA
81 Not printed.

[Document 378]
The Chargé in Haiti (Gross) to the Secretary of State
PORT AU PRINCE, May 16, 1928.
[Received June 5.]
No. 1013
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s Despatch No. 818, dated
by the Republics represented at the Sixth International Conference of
American States on the question of obligatory arbitration for the pacific
settlement of international differences, and instructing the Legation to
inform the Government of Haiti of the suggestion of the United States
Government to invite the other Governments of the Pan-American Union to
send delegates to a conference of conciliation and arbitration, suggested to
be held in Washington on December 10, 1928, to draft a convention for the
realization of this principle.
In reply I have the honor to inform the Department that President Borno has
informed me verbally that he would be pleased to appoint delegates should
such a conference take place for the purposes suggested; that the delegates
could be instructed beforehand; but stated that he could not be certain this
far ahead that Haitian Jurisconsults would be available as delegates.
In compliance with the request contained in the last paragraph of the
Department’s instruction, I have the honor to inform the Department that
President Borno has expressed himself to me verbally as in favor not only
of the principle of arbitration of juridical questions, but also in favor of the
arbitration of questions involving national honor.
I have [etc.]
C. GROSS

[Document 379]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreech) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, May 17, 1928.
[Received June 21.]
No. 550
SIR: I have the honor to reply to the Department’s instruction No. 417 of
April 14, 1928,84 concerning the approaching conference for the
consideration of obligatory arbitration in accordance with the resolution
passed at the Sixth International Conference of American States at Habana.
The Government of Paraguay is thoroughly in accord with the suggestions
of the Secretary of State, that the conference be called to meet in
Washington on December 10, 1928, and that not more than two delegates be
named by each country.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs talked very freely concerning the
conference and gave me the opportunity discreetly to ascertain his views
regarding the attitude of his Government to the arbitration of juridical
questions. Paraguay believes that all questions of whatever nature, that
might arise as potential causes of war should be considered obligatory of
arbitration. He mentioned Paraguay’s question with Bolivia, concerning
limits,85 and said, “It is, as you know, purely a juridical question, yet it
would come under the terms of such a treaty.” Conversation continued in
which the Tacna-Arica question86 was mentioned, and here again he
maintained the difference was such a juridical question that a treaty of
conciliation and arbitration should be applicable, although he thought that
Chile would oppose such a suggestion, while possessing belief in, and
expressing agreeableness to, arbitration.
Much study has been given the subject of arbitration by the Minister, and he
is very much interested in the coming conference. He is of the opinion that

the Gondra Treaty will take care of conciliation questions, but that such a
treaty is secondary in importance to one of arbitration.
I have [etc.]
GEO. L. KREECK

[Document 380]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
MANAGUA, May 24, 1928.
[Received June 22.]
No. 679
regarding the proposed Conference of Conciliation and Arbitration which is
to meet in Washington in December of this year, I have the honor to report
that President Diaz states that the suggestions of the Department are entirely
acceptable to his Government and that two delegates to the Conference
referred to will be appointed in due course.
The Gondra Treaty was submitted to the Congress by Dr. Cuadra Pasos, at
that time Minister for Foreign Affairs, immediately after his return from the
Havana Conference. The Congress did not however act upon the treaty
before its adjournment, and there will probably be no opportunity for its
ratification until after December 15, when the next regular session
convenes.
I have discussed informally with the President the attitude of the
Nicaraguan Government on the question of arbitration and conciliation, but
I have been unable to learn that either he or the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
have any very definite ideas on this subject. It is my impression that the
present administration would follow the lead of the United States
Government in any policy which the latter might adopt. It must be
remembered, however, that a new administration will come into office on
January 1, while the Conference will presumably still be in session, and that
it is impossible to prophesy at this time what the attitude of the new
president will be.
I have [etc.]

CHARLES C. EBERHARDT

[Document 381]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, May 24, 1928.
[Received June 5.]
No. 616
SIR: With further reference to the Department’s instruction No. 250 of April
conference of Pan American states planned to be held at Washington in
December next for the purpose of drawing up a convention of conciliation
and arbitration, I have the honor to report that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs has informed me his Government is in favor of the arbitration of
international differences. He stated further that this has been for many years
the traditional policy of his country.
I have [etc.]
GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN

[Document 382]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
GUATEMALA, May 24, 1928.
[Received June 7.]
No. 1946
1928,88 I have the honor to make the following report, regarding the attitude
of the Government of Guatemala concerning the proposed Pan American
Conference of Conciliation and Arbitration, to be held at Washington.
On May 9, I had a conversation with Minister for Foreign Affairs Salazar,
in the course of which I handed him a brief Memorandum, a copy of which
is enclosed,89 requesting that I be informed whether the suggestions, that
the Conference be called to meet on December 10, 1928, and that not more
than two delegates be named by each country, are acceptable to Guatemala.
I beg leave to transmit, with translation, a copy of a Memorandum, in which
Mr. Salazar expresses the acceptance of the Government.90
In the conversation referred to, I made informal inquiry regarding
Guatemala’s procedure in the matter of the Gondra Treaty. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs said, that he would look into the status of that Convention.
He has since said to me, orally, that the ratification will be sent to the
Government of Chile, probably by the end of the current month.
Mr. Salazar, in the course of our discussion of the subject, indicated, that he
considers that ratification of the Gondra Treaty, by most of the countries
members of the Pan American Union, would seem to go far toward
supplying a method of conciliation, if not indeed quite as far as it might be
practicable to go. As regards the proposed Convention of Arbitration, he did
not express any specific ideas.

In the course of a week or two, I shall inquire informally, what has been
done regarding the depositing of Guatemala’s ratification of the Gondra
Treaty.
I have [etc.]
ARTHUR H. GEISSLER
89 Not printed.
90 Not printed.

[Document 383]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 29, 1928.
[Received June 20.]
No. 1399
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that yesterday I arranged for a special
meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and discussed quite fully many
pending matters including Chile’s views with regard to conciliation and
arbitration and the probable action of its delegates at the conference to be
held at Washington in December next. The Minister said that in determining
the reservations that it would have to make as to arbitration, Chile was
influenced by the Tacna-Arica question; that if that matter were out of the
way he would be disposed to agree to accept “the most ample arbitration”;
that it was somewhat difficult to find a formula that would exclude Tacna-
Arica without mentioning it, and that to mention it might be embarrassing. I
asked if he thought it possible to except it by a provision that the future
treaty should not bind one to accept a new arbitration of any question
already submitted to arbitration. He thought that was possible. He told me
that in Chile’s recent treaty with Italy,91 copy of which he promised to send
me … there were very ample provisions for the settlement of disputed
questions by arbitration or conciliation; that, in fact, there was a provision
that if either country believed that justice in a certain matter was not being
administered in the local tribunals, the question could be carried before an
international tribunal. The Minister said that he felt that he had perhaps
gone too far in accepting this provision; that it was too much of a limitation
of sovereignty; that he doubted if Chile would consent to such provisions in
treaties with other countries. As soon as a copy of this treaty can be
obtained by me I will send it to you.
Incidentally, the Minister referred to the improved temperament of the
Peruvian Government towards Chile, mentioning the fact that, in a recent

address, Leguia, for the first time, had refrained from making remarks
offensive to Chile. The Minister assured me that no formal conversations
between Peru and Chile were yet under way and that there had been so far
no negotiations towards a commercial treaty. Nevertheless, he admitted that
he and the Minister of the Treasury had had a long talk with Señor Maurtua
during his recent visit and that naturally there was some reference to the
economic interests of the two countries.
I have [etc.]
WM. MILLER COLLIER

[Document 384]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, June 4, 1928.
[Received June 13.]
No. 915
SIR: Having further reference to the Department’s instruction No. 239, April
14, 1928,92 in regard to the conference which is to be held at Washington
this year on conciliation and arbitration, and supplementing the Legation’s
conference with me the Minister of Foreign Affairs stated that from the
records of the Foreign Office it appears that the Gondra Treaty was never
submitted to the Dominican Congress for approval. The Minister said
confidentially that if the present boundary negotiations with Haiti reach a
successful conclusion93 the treaty will be submitted to the Congress at its
next session which convenes on August 16.
Mr. Sanchez again stated that he was fully in sympathy with the purposes of
the proposed Washington conference and that he will press for the
ratification of the Gondra Treaty so soon as the boundary question is
adjusted.
The Department will recall in this connection the refusal of the Dominican
Government last year to enter into a treaty of friendship and amity with
Haiti, as proposed by President Borno, outlawing war between the two
countries. The reasons underlying the attitude of the Dominican
Government in the matter were reported in the Legation’s confidential
The Legation has not yet received a final reply to its Note of May 10, 1928
to the Foreign Office, in regard to the coming conference at Washington.

Mr. Sanchez has assured me verbally, however, that the suggestions of the
Department in regard to the conference are entirely agreeable to the
Dominican Government and that the Foreign Office is merely awaiting the
written authority of President Vasquez before apprising me formally to that
effect.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG

[Document 385]
The Minister in Salvador (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
SAN SALVADOR, June 8, 1928.
[Received June 22.]
No. 1190
acceptance by the Salvadorean Government of the Department’s
suggestions in relation to the holding of the Conference of Arbitration and
Conciliation, and referring again to the Department’s instruction No. 124 of
April 14, 1928,96 on that subject, I have the honor to report that President
Romero Bosque has informally expressed to me his intention of submitting
the Gondra Treaty to the National Assembly for its ratification. He told me
also that he approved of the resolution of the Havana Conference declaring
in favor of obligatory arbitration for the pacific settlement of international
differences of a juridical nature, and that he sympathized with the
Department’s efforts for furthering the principle of international
conciliation.
I have [etc.]
JEFFERSON CAFFERY
95 Not printed.

[Document 386]
The Chargé in Mexico (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7:45 p.m.]
a.m.,97 I was informed today by the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs that
the Government of Mexico had no objection to holding the Conciliation and
Arbitration Conference at Washington on December 10, 1928. The Acting
Minister also indicated that the Government of Mexico found acceptable
the suggestion as to naming two jurisconsults to represent it.
With regard to the last paragraph of the Department’s instruction No. 252,
April 14,98 in which inquiry was made as to the attitude of the Government
of Mexico regarding obligatory arbitration of juridical questions, Señor
Estrada stated that this subject was being given a very thorough study, but
he indicated that the Government of Mexico had little confidence in the
efficacy of obligatory arbitration in disputes between Mexico and a more
powerful country. The Government of Mexico felt that such treaties
substantially restricted their freedom of action in such disputes. While it
was understood that the suggested obligatory arbitration applied only to
juridical questions, nevertheless such questions could easily assume a
political color, and in such event the United States, for example, always had
the advantage. These expressions of the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
were entirely informal, but I think they accurately represent the present
attitude of the Government of Mexico toward the question of obligatory
arbitration of juridical questions. Upon further study of the purposes of the
Conference they may be modified.
SCHOENFELD

97 Not printed; it requested the missions in Latin America to report whether
the suggestion as to the date of the Conference was acceptable to the
respective Governments.

[Document 387]
The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:37 p.m.]
26. Ministry of Foreign Relations assures me that President has decreed that
Bolivia’s adherence to Gondra Treaty be notified to Santiago immediately
and that ratification will be given by Congress convening August 6.
Ministry also assures me that the President will decree Bolivia’s adherence
to International Radio Convention99 within a few days and that pending
ratification by Congress in August Standard Oil will have provisional
permit to proceed with the wireless installation.1 I have received from the
Minister of Foreign Affairs formal note stating that Bolivian Government is
pleased with suggestions outlined in the Department’s instruction of April
14, 19282 regarding Conciliation Conference adopted Sixth Pan American
Conference and reiterates its adherence to the principles of arbitration and
conciliation and that the date of December 10, 1928 is very satisfactory.
KAUFMAN

[Document 388]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, June 14, 1928.
[Received June 26.]
No. 920
and confirming the Legation’s telegram No. 37 of even date, twelve noon,4
I have the honor to report that the Dominican Government has signified its
complete agreement with the suggestions of the Department, in the
instruction under reference, concerning the Conference of Conciliation and
Arbitration to be held in Washington. There is attached hereto a translation
of the note from the Foreign Office informing the Legation of the
Government’s attitude.4
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
4 Not printed.
4 Not printed.

[Document 389]
The Secretary of State to the Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions in
Latin America
Please deliver the following communication textually to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs:
“I have the honor to invite Your Excellency’s attention to a
resolution passed at the Sixth International Conference of
American States at Habana, Cuba, on February 18, which reads as
follows:
‘Resolution: The Sixth International Conference of
American States resolves:
Whereas: The American Republics desire to express
that they condemn war as an instrument of national
policy in their mutual relations; and
Whereas: The American Republics have the most
fervent desire to contribute in every possible manner to
the development of international means for the pacific
settlement of conflicts between States:
1. That the American Republics adopt
obligatory arbitration as the means which
they will employ for the pacific solution of
their international differences of a juridical
character.
2. That the American Republics will meet in
Washington within the period of one year in a

conference of conciliation and arbitration to
give conventional form to the realization of
this principle, with the minimum exceptions
which they may consider indispensable to
safeguard the independence and sovereignty
of the States, as well as matters of a domestic
concern, and to the exclusion also of matters
involving the interest or referring to the action
of a State not a party to the convention.
3. That the Governments of the American
Republics
will
send
for
this
end
plenipotentiary jurisconsults with instructions
regarding the maximum and the minimum
which they would accept in the extension of
obligatory arbitral jurisdiction.
4. That the convention or conventions of
conciliation and arbitration which may be
concluded should leave open a protocol for
progressive arbitration which would permit
the development of this beneficent institution
up to its maximum.
5. That the convention or conventions which
may be agreed upon, after signature, should
be submitted immediately to the respective
Governments for their ratification in the
shortest possible time.’
As, under the terms of this resolution the Conference must be
held within one year, it gives me great pleasure, in accordance
therewith, to extend a cordial invitation to Your Excellency’s
Government to participate in a conference on conciliation and
arbitration to be held in Washington commencing on December

While not desiring in any way to limit the discretion of the
various countries as to their representation, I venture to suggest
that each Government appoint two plenipotentiary jurisconsults,
with such advisers and experts as they may desire, to represent it
at this conference. In this connection I am pleased to inform Your
Excellency that the United States will be represented at the said
conference by the Secretary of State and the Honorable Charles
Evans Hughes. (Signed) Frank B. Kellogg.”
KELLOGG

[Document 390]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
BUENOS AIRES, June 27, 1928.
[Received July 18.]
No. 325
SIR: In acknowledging the receipt of the Department’s instruction No. 71 of
April 14 last, relative to the conference of conciliation and arbitration it is
proposed to hold at Washington next December, I have the honor to report
that I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs the day following the
receipt of the instruction and handed him a note (copy enclosed),5
acquainting him with the Department’s suggestions and inquiring if they
were acceptable to the Argentine Government.
At the same time, I spoke of the so-called Gondra Treaty and the
importance the United States Government attached to its ratification and the
deposit thereof at Santiago, by the signatory Powers which had not yet done
so, before the conference should meet in Washington. Dr. Gallardo said he
fully understood that point of view and would make a renewed effort to
obtain ratification by Congress before which body it had remained for five
years without action being taken. Although one party had now a majority in
the Chamber of Deputies, the Minister said, and the Argentine Government,
throughout its history, had approved arbitration as a method of settling
international disputes, he was not sanguine of obtaining ratification.
On June 5 the Embassy received a note from the Minister (copy and
translation enclosed)5a stating that the Argentine Government would
designate two Argentine jurisconsults to participate in the conference.
The note did not mention whether the date proposed by the Department was
acceptable. On receipt, therefore, the following day, of the Department’s

clear up this point and was subsequently informed that the date was
acceptable and that Dr. Carlos Alberto Alcorta and Dr. Luis A. Podestá
Costa would represent Argentina at the Conference (see my telegram No.
Today I am in receipt of an answer from the Minister for Foreign Affairs to
the note addressed him in compliance with the Department’s unnumbered
telegraphic instruction of June 19, 3 p.m. Doctor Gallardo’s note (copy and
translation enclosed)7 accepts the Secretary’s invitation and confirms the
notification of the appointment of Dr. Alcorta and Dr. Podestá Costa.
I have [etc.]
ROBERT WOODS BLISS
5 Not printed.
5a Not printed.
6 Not printed; it requested the missions in Latin America to report whether
the suggestion as to the date of the Conference was acceptable to the
respective Governments.
7 Not printed.
7 Not printed.

[Document 391]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis), Temporarily in Washington,
to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, July 3, 1928.
SIR: Referring to the Department’s instruction No. 447, dated April 14,
1928,8 with reference to the forthcoming conference of conciliation and
arbitration provided for in a resolution adopted at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, I have the honor to report as follows:
While in San José, en route from the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary
Conference9 to Washington, I conferred briefly with the Costa Rican
Minister for Foreign Affairs relative to the conciliation and arbitration
conference. He stated that Costa Rica would be pleased to cooperate at the
conference and that he is under the impression that Costa Rica will give
favorable consideration to conciliation and arbitration proposals, provided
these proposals stipulate that questions previously submitted to arbitration
cannot be made the subject of arbitration under any general treaty of
arbitration that may be drawn up at the conference.
This reservation was made because of the fact that the Costa Rican-
Panaman boundary controversy which was submitted to arbitration by the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States and decided in
favor of Costa Rica has not been accepted by Panama.10 The Costa Rican
Government will not sign an arbitration convention which will offer
Panama an opportunity to again open the question.
I mentioned the “Gondra Treaty” to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
stated that I was under the impression that it contained a clause which will
satisfy the Costa Rican Government on the point raised by him.
On account of the fact that I departed immediately for the United States, I
did not have an opportunity to follow up my conversation but will do so

immediately upon my return to San José.
I have [etc.]
ROY T. DAVIS

[Document 392]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 7, 1928.
[Received July 26.]
No. 3029
SIR: Referring to the correspondence between the Department and this
Mission, beginning with instruction No. 1364, of April 14 last, and in
I have the honor to enclose, in Portuguese and English, copies of the note
which the Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs addressed to this office on
July 3.12
In accepting the invitation to be represented at the Conference on
Conciliation and Arbitration which is called to convene in the city of
Washington on December 10 next, the Brazilian Government states that two
lawyers versed in international law, with plenipotentiary powers, will be
accredited as its representatives.
In regard to Brazil’s attitude relative to the arbitration of judicial matters, a
personal note which the Minister addressed to me on July 2 states:13
“Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic establishes, among
the exclusive powers of the National Congress, that under No. 11,
which is couched in the following terms: ‘to authorize the
Government to declare war, if recourse to arbitration does not
occur or collapses, and to declare peace’.

“Brazil, therefore, as regards arbitration, is already bound by a
constitutional provision. She will be able to adopt, therefore, in
order to duly observe them, the most complete or the most ample
forms which may be proposed thereon. She is ready, nevertheless,
to yield, should it become necessary to do so, to intermediate
solutions which may result in congregating without constraint, in
complete fraternity, so advisable in the spirit of Pan American
meetings, the States of the continent.”
I have [etc.]
EDWIN V. MORGAN
11 Latter not printed.
12 Not printed.
13 This English translation and the Portuguese text of the note were
arranged in parallel columns; the Portuguese text has been omitted.

[Document 393]
The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
CARACAS, July 9, 1928.
[Received July 19.]
No. 1640
the honor to report that the Legation has today received a Note from the
enclosed an unsealed envelope addressed to The Honorable Frank B.
Kellogg, Secretary of State, Washington, D. C.14a
The Legation is informed that it contains the official reply from the Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Doctor P. Itriago Chacín, to the Secretary’s invitation
that Venezuela be represented at the Conference of Conciliation and
Arbitration which is to meet in Washington beginning December 10, 1928.
At a recent interview I had with the Minister of Foreign Affairs in
connection with other matters he remarked quite spontaneously: “I wish
you would tell Mr. Kellogg how very gladly the Venezuelan Government
accepted his invitation to participate in the proposed Conference in
Washington. We are firm believers in arbitration and conciliation and shall
never forget the conspicuous example the United States have set in that
respect and how helpful you have been to us in the past when our
international relations were troubled. President Gomez and the Venezuelan
people also approve heartily of Mr. Kellogg’s epoch-making plan to outlaw
War and we sincerely hope he will succeed.”
The envelope for the Secretary of State is transmitted herewith.
I have [etc.]

C. VAN H. ENGERT
14 Not printed.
14a The note, likewise addressed to the Secretary of State, has not been
printed.

[Document 394]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
WASHINGTON, July 12, 1928.
No. 593
SIR: As the Legation is aware, circular instructions regarding invitations to
foreign governments have not been carried out in respect to Ecuador due to
the nonrecognition of the present regime in that country.15 In view,
however, of the Department’s circular telegram of June 19, 1928,
instructing you to deliver to the Ecuadoran Government the invitation
quoted therein to participate in a conference on conciliation and arbitration
to be held in Washington commencing December 10, 1928, you may in
future deliver or extend all invitations received by the Legation under
circular instructions bearing dates subsequent to the date of the circular
telegram above mentioned, as well as the invitation to foreign governments
to be represented at the International Conference on Civil Aeronautics
communicated in circular instruction Diplomatic Serial No. 728 of June 18,
1928.16 Other circular instructions regarding the extension of invitations
dated prior to June 19, 1928, may be disregarded.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
15 De jure recognition was extended to the regime of Dr. Ayora on August
16 Not printed. For the proceedings of the conference, see International
Proceedings of the Conference (Washington, Government Printing Office,
1929).

[Document 395]
The Chargé in Colombia (Matthews) to the Secretary of State
BOGOTÁ, September 29, 1928.
[Received October 20.]
No. 1415
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 1057 of
April 14, 1928,17 with reference to the forthcoming Conference of
Conciliation and Arbitration and to report thereon as follows:
Mr. Piles18 several times before his departure took up with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs the subject matter of the instruction under reference but was
unable to obtain any definite information as to the steps which the
Colombian Government might take or its probable attitude towards the
conference other than the assurance that Colombia would be officially
represented thereat.
I took occasion to have a conversation on the subject with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs on September 27th and reiterated the hope of the United
States Government that the Government of Colombia will see its way to
ratify the Gondra treaty and deposit ratification thereof at Santiago, Chile,
before the conference. Dr. Uribe told me that he considered it highly
important for Colombia to ratify the aforesaid treaty and intended to present
it to Congress in the coming week. He said that he had presented it last year
but could arouse little interest therein and that it consequently died in
committee. He feels, however, that the chances of obtaining its ratification
in the present Congress are good. Up to the present, he informed me, the
Colombian delegates to the conference have not been decided upon nor
have any instructions been drawn up.
I have been endeavoring to ascertain informally and discreetly the views of
the Colombian Government on the general question of arbitration and

conciliation and of the probable nature of its instructions to its delegates.
My efforts have met with but little success and the one definite impression I
have gained is that there is at present little interest in the forthcoming
conference and little faith in conventions on arbitration and conciliation. …
I have [etc.]
H. FREEMAN MATTHEWS
18 Samuel H. Piles, retiring American Minister in Colombia.

[Document 396]
The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, October 13, 1928—noon.
[Received 2 p.m.]
invitation and notify as delegates Chilean Ambassador in Washington and
Manuel Foster Recas, distinguished Chilean attorney.
Note of acceptance avers that:
“It is a great pleasure for me to add that Chile has always
vigorously supported the progress of arbitration in America which
should now be applied as a general rule to the questions
susceptible to this treatment, while particular cases of
considerable importance should be submitted to special arbiters.”
CULBERTSON

[Document 397]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:40 a.m.]
Foreign Affairs informed me yesterday that the attitude of the Uruguayan
Government relative to the arbitration of juridical questions would be the
same as at the Rio de Janeiro Conference. The delegate[s] would be named
shortly and would go from here.
GRANT-SMITH

Establishment
of
permanent
commissions under treaty to avoid or
prevent
conflicts
between
the
American States, signed May 3, 1923
(Gondra Treaty)
[398] The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)
Washington, March 2, 1928.
[399] The Acting Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)
Washington, March 26, 1928.
[400] Report of a Meeting Between the Minister of Uruguay, the
Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad Interim of Panama
a.m.
[401] The Uruguayan Minister (Varela) to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 7, 1928.
[402] The Secretary of State to the Uruguayan Minister (Varela)
Washington, December 22, 1928.

[Document 398]
The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)22
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1928.
SIR: By Article 3 of the Treaty to avoid or prevent conflicts between the
American States, signed on May 3, 1923, at the Fifth International
Conference of American States, held in Santiago, Chile, a copy of which I
enclose for your ready convenience,23 it is stipulated that the two
Permanent Commissions provided for in the Treaty, shall be established
with their seats at Washington and at Montevideo, and that they shall be
composed of the three American diplomatic agents longest accredited in
those capitals, who, at the call of the foreign offices of the United States of
America and Uruguay, shall organize and appoint their respective chairmen.
Inasmuch as this treaty has been ratified by the United States of America,
Brazil, Cuba, Haiti, Mexico, Paraguay and Venezuela, and is now in force
as between those Governments, I have the honor, in fulfillment of the duty
entrusted to me by the Treaty, to invite you, as one of the three senior
American accredited diplomatic agents residing in Washington, to meet
with the two other senior American diplomatic agents at this capital, Mr. J.
Varela, Minister of Uruguay, and Señor Doctor Bicardo J. Alfaro, Minister
of Panama, who have been similarly invited, for the purpose of organizing
the Permanent Commission having its seat at Washington provided for in
the Treaty. I shall be obliged if I may be informed of the action taken on this
request.
I understand that the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Government of
Uruguay is similarly inviting the three senior American diplomatic agents
accredited to that Government for the organization of the other Commission
provided for in the Treaty, to have its seat at Montevideo.
Accept [etc.]

[File copy not signed]
22 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the Panaman Minister
and the Uruguayan Minister.

[Document 399]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)
WASHINGTON, March 26, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 258 of
March 13, 1928,24 wherein, with reference to the Secretary of State’s note
of March 2, 1928, you state that, as one of the three American diplomatic
agents longest accredited at Washington, you are ready at any time that may
be agreeable, to meet with Dr. J. Varela, Minister of Uruguay, and Señor Dr.
Don Ricardo J. Alfaro, Minister of Panama, the other two, for the purpose
of organizing, and appointing the Chairman of, the Permanent Commission
with its seat at Washington, provided for in Article 3 of the Treaty to avoid
or prevent conflicts between the American States, signed on May 3, 1923,
at the Fifth International Conference of American States.
A similar willingness having been expressed by Dr. J. Varela, Minister of
Uruguay, and understanding that Señor Dr. Don Ricardo J. Alfaro, Minister
of Panama, who is absent from this country, has deputized Señor Don Juan
B. Chevalier, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Panama at Washington, to
represent him at the meeting, I have the honor to invite your and their
attendance at my office in the Department of State on Thursday, March 29,
at eleven o’clock A.M. for the purposes above stated.
A like note is being addressed to Dr. Varela and to Señor Chevalier.
Accept [etc.]
ROBERT E. OLDS
24 Not printed.

[Document 400]
Report of a Meeting Between the Minister of Uruguay, the
Minister of Colombia, and the Chargé d’Affaires ad Interim of
Panama in the Office of the Acting Secretary of State on March
Mr. Olds informed the Minister of Uruguay, the Minister of Colombia and
the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Panama that he had invited them to
meet in order that they might organize the Permanent Commission to be
established at Washington in accordance with Article III of the Treaty to
Avoid or Prevent Conflicts Between the American States, signed at
Santiago, Chile, on May 3, 1923, which Commission was to be composed
of the three American diplomatic agents longest accredited in Washington.
It was understood that the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Panama was
representing the Minister of Panama by the latter’s consent, Dr. Alfaro
being at the present time on leave of absence in Panama
On the nomination of Dr. Olaya, seconded by Dr. Chevalier, Dr. Varela was
appointed Chairman of the Commission.
It was decided that the Chairman should notify the State Department of any
changes made in the personnel of the Commission caused by the
termination of the mission of one of the members and the assumption of his
place, on the Commission by another diplomatic agent.
The meeting then adjourned.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]

[Document 401]
The Uruguayan Minister (Varela) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 7, 1928.
No. 824
SIR: With reference to your note of March 2, 1928, I have the honor to
inform you that my Government advises me that in accordance with the
provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty to avoid or prevent conflicts between
the American States, signed on May 3, 1923, at the Fifth International
Conference of American States, held in Santiago, Chile, the Permanent
Commission having its seat at Montevideo has been established and is
composed by the Minister of Mexico, the Minister of Peru and the Minister
of Chile. The Minister of Mexico was elected Chairman of the Permanent
Commission.
I beg you to accept [etc.]
J. VARELA

[Document 402]
The Secretary of State to the Uruguayan Minister (Varela)
WASHINGTON, December 22, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of December
7, 1928, by which I am gratified to learn that the Permanent Commission to
have its seat at Montevideo, in accordance with the provisions of Article 3
of the Treaty to Avoid or Prevent Conflicts between the American States,
signed at Santiago, Chile, on May 3, 1923, has been established.
Thanking you for your transmission of this information, of which due note
has been taken, I avail myself [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE

Good offices of the United States in the
reestablishment of diplomatic relations
between Chile and Peru
[403] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, July 5, 1928.
[404] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[405] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[406] The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs (Rios) to the Secretary
of State
Santiago, July 11, 1928.
[407] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State

[408] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[409] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[410] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[411] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[412] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[413] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State

[414] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
Washington, July 24, 1928—noon.
[415] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[416] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[417] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[418] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[419] The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 7, 1928.
[420] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[421] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[422] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[423] The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 403]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, July 5, 1928.
DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: You will remember I informed you that the Chilean and
Peruvian delegations at Habana25 had in a very friendly spirit discussed the
question of a settlement of the Tacna-Arica matter.26 They had concluded
that the first step was for the two countries to renew diplomatic relations.
These delegations agreed that when they returned home they would talk
with their respective governments and prepare to press for such a
movement. I waited several months to make sure that there had been
created a proper sentiment for such a step. I then inquired definitely of the
Chilean and Peruvian Governments if they would be willing to renew
diplomatic relations and exchange ministers. I received prompt assurance
from President Leguia that he would be willing to exchange ministers if I
proposed it but did not care to take the initiative. I also received positive
assurances from the Chilean Government, through its Ambassador. I then
concluded to send a note to each Government suggesting the renewal of
diplomatic relations and the exchange of ministers. I enclose you a copy of
one of the notes.27
In several conversations which President Leguia has had with Ambassador
Moore and with Mr. Hanna, the Chargé d’Affaires before Ambassador
Moore’s arrival, Leguia has shown a much greater disposition to settle the
Tacna-Arica difficulty than ever before. In fact, he suggested to me a
proposition which I have not yet taken up with Chile and which is an
advance over anything that he has heretofore agreed upon. I have also had
reports from the Chilean Ambassador here that indicate a greater
disposition in Chile to adjust the matter than ever before. If we can get them
to exchange ministers I shall then take up again the question of settlement
and I hope very much that settlement can be arranged before I go out of
office.

I am sending this on for your information. I did not suppose you would care
to be bothered about the details.
Faithfully yours,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
25 See “Sixth International Conference of American States,” etc., pp. 527
27 See telegram No. 44 to the Ambassador in Chile, infra.

[Document 404]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
44. Please present the following note to the Foreign Minister. I am sending
this note because of the assurances which I have received from the Chilean
Ambassador in the United States that Chile would be willing to accredit a
diplomatic representative to the Government of Peru, and because of the
Peruvian President’s assurances that he would be willing to accredit a
diplomatic representative to the Government of Chile. At the same time, I
am sending a note in exactly the same form to the Foreign Minister of Peru.
These communications will not be made public until replies have been
received from both Governments.
Please present this note in person to the Foreign Minister, and impress upon
him, and, if the opportunity arises, also upon the President, the importance
of an unconditional and friendly acceptance of this suggestion, and
particularly that the answer should carefully avoid the reopening of
discussions in regard to the Tacna-Arica question or the inclusion of any
matter of a controversial nature. The same representations are being made
to the Government of Peru.28
“Excellency:
During the last few months I have been most gratified to observe
the mutual growth of a more friendly feeling between Chile and
Peru which is a tribute to the high-minded statesmanship of both
Governments and an evidence of the desire of the people of both
countries to establish a basis of cordial and permanent
understanding.

I am sure that Your Excellency understands that I have given the
most careful consideration to find a way that my Government and
I may be of the greatest service to these Governments. After long
and careful deliberation I have now come to the conclusion that
an accommodation of mutual interests would be promoted should
the Governments of Chile and Peru reestablish diplomatic
relations through the appointment of diplomatic representatives at
Lima and at Santiago. I feel confident that such a reestablishment
of diplomatic relations is consistent with the highest interests of
the two great nations and presents an opportunity for the
respective representatives to interpret not only the high ideals
which I have been happy to find animating both Governments but
also the basic good will which I am convinced exists in each
country towards the other, and that it would also afford a
favorable means for facilitating the definite removal of all
existing misunderstandings and hence lead to permanent
readjustment of the relations between the two countries mutually
satisfactory to both. I firmly believe that such a generous action
would appeal to the sentiment of the peoples of the respective
countries and be applauded by all the nations of the Western
Hemisphere as a step in the interest of permanent peace and good
will.
I am fully aware of Your Excellency’s earnest desire to establish
better relations among the countries of this hemisphere and I have
therefore the honor to suggest in full confidence that it will meet
with your approval and acceptance, that your Government signify
its readiness to reestablish diplomatic relations with the Peruvian
Government and indicate your willingness to appoint a diplomatic
representative near the Peruvian Government at an early mutually
convenient date.
A similar inquiry is being made to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Peru.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest
consideration.

(Signed) Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States
of America.
His Excellency Señor Don Conrado Rios Gallardo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Chile, Santiago, Chile.”
KELLOGG
28 Quoted portion not paraphrased.

[Document 405]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
52. Placing reliance upon the positive assurance of President Leguia that he
would accept my suggestion to exchange diplomatic representatives with
the Republic of Chile, I am sending concurrently with this telegram a
communication to the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Chile in exactly
the same form as the following note which you are instructed to deliver to
the Foreign Minister of Peru. It is suggested that you present this to him in
person and impress upon him and the President the importance of a friendly
and unconditional acceptance of this suggestion, and more especially that
the answer should carefully avoid the reopening of discussions in regard to
the Tacna-Arica question or the inclusion of any matter of a controversial
nature. The same representations are being made to the Government of
Chile. The Chilean Ambassador has assured me that Chile will accept my
invitation to exchange Ministers with Peru. I feel certain that this action will
redound to the honor and credit of Peru, and will be regarded as a liberal
and broad-minded step. These communications will not be made public
until replies have been received from both Governments.
[Here follows the text of the note, the same, mutatis mutandis, as that
contained in the Department’s telegram No. 44, of the same date, to the
Ambassador in Chile, printed supra.]
KELLOGG

[Document 406]
The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs (Rios) to the Secretary
of State29
[Translation]
SANTIAGO, July 11, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have experienced great pleasure in acquainting myself with the
communication dated the ninth instant, in which Your Excellency is pleased
to let me know that you have been most gratified to observe the mutual
growth of a more friendly feeling between Chile and Peru, which Your
Excellency deems to be a tribute to the well-marked public spirit of both
Governments and an evidence of the desire to establish a basis of cordial
and permanent understanding between the two peoples.
Your Excellency lays stress on the great and careful attention with which
you have selected the means by which the Government of the United States
and Your Excellency will be able to assist the two countries and state that
after long and careful deliberation Your Excellency has come to the
conclusion that an accommodation of their mutual interests would be
promoted thanks to the reestablishment of diplomatic relations through the
reciprocal appointment of their respective agents. Your Excellency believes
that such a course is consistent with the highest interests of Chile and Peru,
and would present to their representatives an opportunity to interpret not
only the ideals of their Governments, but also the basis of good will which,
as Your Excellency is convinced, exists between the two nations; and that it
would also afford a favorable means for facilitating the definite removal of
all misunderstandings which exist between them and lead them to a
permanent reestablishment of the relations between the two Republics in a
satisfactory manner. Your Excellency believes that the resumption of
diplomatic relations would appeal to the sentiment of the peoples of Chile
and Peru and would, in addition, be applauded by all the nations of the
Continent as a step in the interest of peace and conciliation. Your

Excellency especially mentions the desire of my Government to contribute
towards bringing closer the ties between the American peoples and, on that
ground, you see fit to suggest, in full confidence that it will be accepted and
approved, that Chile signify its readiness to reestablish diplomatic relations
with the Peruvian Government and indicate its willingness to appoint its
representative in this country at an early mutually convenient date. Your
Excellency ends with the statement that a similar invitation is being made to
His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Peru.
I must first express to Your Excellency the earnest thanks of my
Government for your very cordial initiative and the friendly interest
prompted by it, affording favorable means for facilitating the definite
removal of the difficulties pending between Chile and Peru. The
inspirations of invariable harmony and concord which have always guided
the international policy of Chile being well known to Your Excellency, Your
Excellency had reason to feel assured that this invitation was bound to be
received by us in a frankly favorable spirit.
The honor, therefore, devolves upon me to inform Your Excellency of our
full acceptance, feeling assured that we are thus responding not only to the
desire for peace which guided the thoughts of my Government but also the
broad spirit of conciliation which animates our people as a reflex of their
profound faith in the progress and welfare of all the countries of America
under the protection of an atmosphere of international tranquillity and trust.
Harboring the flattering hope that this initiative and the open way in which
it is met by Chile, will soon yield the results sought by Your Excellency’s
high purposes for a better realization of the ideals of union and fraternity in
which all the peoples of America join, it affords me satisfaction to say that
my Government is ready to arrange the measures that may be necessary for
a resumption of its diplomatic relations with Peru in the manner suggested
by Your Excellency.
I avail myself [etc.]
CONRADO RIOS GALLARDO

29 Transmitted to the Secretary of State by the Chilean Ambassador in a
covering note of July 12.

[Document 407]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:10 p.m.]
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“Lima, July 11, 1928.
Mr. Secretary: Through His Excellency the Ambassador of the
United States in Lima I have had the honor to receive the
important communication of Your Excellency dated yesterday in
which, referring to the growth of more friendly feeling between
Peru and Chile and to the conviction which Your Excellency
entertains that beneficial results for both countries will be
obtained from the reestablishment of diplomatic relations between
their respective Governments, Your Excellency suggests that the
Government of Peru signify whether it is disposed to reestablish
those relations and is willing to appoint a representative in
Santiago at an early mutually convenient date.
In reply I have the honor to state to Your Excellency that in
deference to your friendly invitation my Government is disposed
to reestablish diplomatic relations with the Chilean Government
and to appoint someone to represent it in Santiago on the date
which is to be fixed by common agreement.
In thus acting upon the suggestion of Your Excellency I avail
myself of this opportunity to repeat to the Secretary of State the
assurances of my most high and distinguished consideration.
Signed, Pedro Jose Rada y Gamio.”

2° Not printed.

[Document 408]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)31
47. Please present my compliments to the President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and express to them the gratification I feel. I am sure their
action will be for the best interest of Chile and be considered by all the
world as a high-minded and honorable step.
KELLOGG
31 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Ambassador in Peru,
as telegram No. 57.

[Document 409]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
58. Upon receiving this morning Peru’s acceptance of my suggestion that
Chile and Peru reestablish diplomatic relations through an exchange of
diplomatic representatives, I called in the Chilean and Peruvian
Ambassadors and told them that my proposal had been accepted by both
Governments without conditions, and that, while I should be glad, of
course, to render them any possible assistance in the way of making
arrangements regarding requests for agréments, I suggested that they would
probably be able to arrange this matter themselves. As a result of this
conference, both Ambassadors said that they would immediately cable their
Governments and ask for the earliest date on which they would be ready to
request agrément for their representative to the other country, and also the
name of the person proposed for this office. Both Ambassadors will meet
again when they receive answers to their requests. They will keep the
Department informed, and will advise each other of the name of the
proposed representative. Both Ambassadors will suggest to their
Governments that they consider the question of giving the representatives
the rank of Ambassador. I told the Ambassadors that while that of course
was not a matter on which I was entitled to comment, nevertheless, I
thought that this would be a very nice solution. Repeated to Chile as
instruction No. 48.
KELLOGG

[Document 410]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
Government would like to know whether Peru will agree to appointment of
Ambassadors or only Ministers. It will be in a position to give name and
date on which request of agrément may be made when this preliminary
question is answered. Chilean Ambassador has already discussed this
matter with Peruvian Ambassador who has cabled his Government. Chilean
Ambassador is very anxious for a prompt reply in order that the program
may not be delayed. If you perceive no objection you may informally use
your good offices in the sense of expediting the reply on this question.
KELLOGG

[Document 411]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, July 17, 1928—noon.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]
our country desires it, he could see no objection to appointment of
Ambassadors. It is probable that this question would have to go before
Congress which meets July 28th.
The President said he is surprised and delighted at the way the matter has
been received in Peru and the world generally.
MOORE

[Document 412]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
62. The Chilean Ambassador advises Department his Government will be
ready to send a message to the Chilean Congress on July 28 regarding the
reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Peru and the opening of an
Embassy in Lima and that they will be ready to sign a decree the same day
naming their Ambassador.
Chilean Ambassador states that they of course do not insist on this date but
that date or any date thereafter agreeable to Peru will be agreeable to Chile.
The Chilean Ambassador suggested this date to his Government as it is the
national anniversary of Peru and he thought it would be a nice compliment
and friendly gesture to Peru to do it on that date. The Peruvian Ambassador
has been informed of the above. You may also bring this to the attention of
the proper authorities.
KELLOGG

[Document 413]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:10 p.m.]
Leguia yesterday he said that he saw no reason why Chile should not go
ahead with the procedure mentioned therein.
[Paraphrase.] The President was gratified by this indication of good will on
Chile’s part and added hopefully these words: “We will see how far she is
willing to go.” [End paraphrase.]
MOORE

[Document 414]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 24, 1928—noon.
undertakes to send a message to the Peruvian Congress, July 28, with
regard to the reestablishment of diplomatic relations with the Government
of Chile and that he will be prepared to sign a decree on the same date
designating an Ambassador. The agreement is, of course, that both
Governments take action simultaneously. The Peruvian Ambassador in
Washington has received no instructions. Please confirm as soon as possible
if President Leguia agrees to take the same action as the Republic of Chile
on July 28 in order that the Department may communicate this to the
Chilean Ambassador in Washington in time for the Government of Chile to
take the proposed action the same day.
KELLOGG

[Document 415]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
83. Your 64. The President says that the Peruvian Ambassador in
Washington has been given full instructions in the matter. He says that
under the Peruvian Constitution his message to Congress at the inaugural
session is limited to a report on past activities and cannot initiate new
legislation, and that Congress is also unable to enact legislation at that
session. Also he cannot name an Ambassador without the approval of the
Senate.
[Paraphrase.] The President stated that he hopes that his inability to act
simultaneously with Chile in the way suggested would be perfectly clear,
and that it would not be misinterpreted as a lack of good will by him. The
President repeated his anxiety on this point two or three times. He stated
that he would communicate with Congress on this subject immediately after
the close of the national holidays on July 31. [End paraphrase.]
MOORE

[Document 416]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
apparently sent later stating that President Leguia will send a message to
Congress on July 28, for the establishment of an Embassy in Santiago.
While Peruvian Ambassador was at Department showing this telegram, the
Chilean Ambassador arrived and the Peruvian Ambassador read it to him
also. It was agreed by them that both Governments would, therefore, send a
message to their respective Congresses on July 28 asking for the
establishment of Embassies in the other country. The Peruvian Ambassador
is immediately telegraphing in this sense to his Government.
The Department considers it very important that there should be no
misunderstanding or slip up in the program. It would be most unfortunate if
one country sent a message to Congress on the 28th and the other failed to
do so. It is a definite understanding that both countries will now do so on
July 28. Please keep in close contact with the situation to know that this is
definitely understood in Lima.
The Chilean Ambassador while at the Department advised the Peruvian
Ambassador that as it is customary for Chiefs of State to exchange
telegrams on their national anniversaries, President Ibanez would like to
send a congratulatory message on the 28th to President Leguia and inquired
of the Peruvian Ambassador whether he thought that this would meet with
the approval of President Leguia or whether the latter would feel that the
President of Chile was anticipating matters. The Peruvian Ambassador
stated that he thought that this would be considered as of very delicate
attention and appreciated as such. The Chilean Ambassador then indicated
that Ibáñez would send such a message.
KELLOGG

[Document 417]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
President Leguia will submit to the Peruvian Congress on July 28 a project
for establishing an Embassy at Santiago and that Congress will act upon it
after July 31 when it has completed its organization, but that the President
cannot name an Ambassador until the position has been legally created.
MOORE

[Document 418]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:12 p.m.]
84. Emiliano Figueroa Larrain, formerly Deputy, Cabinet Minister, Minister
to Argentina 1911, President of the Republic prior to Ibáñez, offered and
accepted appointment as Ambassador to Peru. Appointment generally
COLLIER
32 Not printed.

[Document 419]
The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, August 7, 1928.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the Peruvian
Congress has approved the Bill which was introduced by the Executive
Power creating an Embassy of Peru in Chile.
I avail myself [etc.]
HERNAN VELARDE

[Document 420]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 1:44 p.m.]
97. I have been requested by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to ask for the
good offices of the United States for the formal agrément from the
Government of Chile for Cesar A. Elguera as Ambassador to Chile. As
soon as I am informed of the receipt of the Chilean reply, the name will be
made public here.
MOORE

[Document 421]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
immediately communicated to the Chilean Ambassador in Washington.
Yesterday he cabled his Government and now has received a reply stating
that the Chilean Government is very happy to accord agrément for Señor
Elguera as Peruvian Ambassador to Chile.
WHITE

[Document 422]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, October 8, 1928.
[Received October 24.]
No. 108
have the honor to report that the Chilean Ambassador, Señor Emiliano
Figueroa Larrain, presented his credentials to President Leguía on October
His remarks, together with President Leguía’s reply, as they appeared in La
Prensa on October 4, are enclosed herewith. La Prensa, of October 6, also
published the remarks made by President Ibáñez of Chile when the
Peruvian Ambassador, Doctor Elguera, presented his credentials on October
5. His remarks terminated with the following paragraph:
“I desire that the differences which have separated us for so long
a time may be immediately settled in a definite manner on a basis
of justice and greater equity”.
A high official of the Foreign Office here told me that he considered this
reference by President Ibáñez to “justice and greater equity” as especially
significant.
I have [etc.]
MATTHEW E. HANNA
[Enclosure—Translation]
Remarks of the Newly Appointed Chilean Ambassador to Peru (Figueroa) on the Occasion of the
Presentation of His Letter’s of Credence on October 3, and Reply of President Leguía

YOUR EXCELLENCY: I am particularly pleased and honored to place in Your
Excellency’s hands the letters of credence with which His Excellency
Carlos Ibáñez del Campo, President of Chile, accredits me as Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary before the Government of Peru.
These credentials are of transcendental importance. They embody the desire
to renew, on a stable and definitive basis, the political relations of two
countries which should end their differences in order to collaborate more
fully for the progress of the Continent.
My mission, Your Excellency, has as its special object the cultivation of the
spirit of cooperation and harmony in the reciprocal relations of Peru and
Chile, whose mutual intelligence all America hopes will produce worthy
results. This situation has, moreover, given the Secretary of State of the
United States the opportunity to take the happy initiative in paving the way
for your Government and mine to renew diplomatic relations, as a
consequence of the spiritual friendship already awakened between the two
peoples.
A desire for frank concord reigns today over the relations of the greatest
nations of the world, and an intense seeking for tranquility and harmony is
clearly visible in all manifestations of the popular will. And these nations of
America which guard the treasure of their youth and natural riches, must
live a life of frank understanding and fruitful economic cooperation.
Toward the realization of these ends I shall bring all the earnestness
animating not only my Government but me personally, and I entertain the
firm conviction that in the discharge of this task I can count upon the
wholehearted assistance of Your Excellency and of your worthy colleagues
in the Government of Peru.
Permit me, Your Excellency, to express my sincerest wishes for the
prosperity of Peru and for the personal happiness of Your Excellency.
In reply, President Leguía spoke as follows:
YOUR EXCELLENCY: It is with especial pleasure that I receive the letters accrediting
you in the high position of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary

of the Government of Chile before my Government.
There was a time, Your Excellency, when the traditions of the past united us
fraternally in the shadow of a history forged by common heroes on a soil
whose continuity was marked by the hand of God.
In the course of time peoples unite or separate, according to the voice that
moved them. There was an epoch during which predominated dissolving
forces which provoked the perpetual anarchy of the universe; but today, by
the law of evolution which transforms primitive instincts into intelligence,
forces of cooperation dominate the world; these forces weld men and
peoples and establish the reign of peace and love.
Believing thus, His Excellency the Secretary of State, Mr. Frank B.
Kellogg, proposed the suggestion, which we accepted, that diplomatic
relations between our two peoples be reestablished. These relations were
broken in a moment when human conscience had not revealed its strength
for transforming the past, embittered by wars, into the present, illuminated
by peace.
We live, Your Excellency, in an historic moment. Your presence in the
ancient house made illustrious by the legendary life of Pizarro; your words
which demonstrate the sincerity of your convictions; the generous attitude
of His Excellency, the President of Chile, statesman and patriot,—all seem
to anticipate the coming of an hour which posterity shall bless:—the hour
for liquidating, with justice and abnegation, the errors of the past, as you
have so well said, in a manner which shall reestablish firmly and
definitively the friendship between Peru and Chile, in order, that, in the
future, without fear nor distrust, the ancient brotherhood which our strength
and glory generated, may be achieved anew.
Your Excellency, in acknowledging your high diplomatic rank, it gives me
pleasure to offer you all the assistance of my Government for the greatest
success of your mission and to request that you transmit to your country my
best wishes for the prosperity of Chile and the personal happiness of your
worthy President.

33 Not printed.

[Document 423]
The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, October 8, 1928.
[Received October 30.]
No. 26
SIR: I have the honor to report that the new Peruvian Ambassador to Chile,
señor don César A. Elguera, with three secretaries, Javier Correa y Elías,
Hector Adolfo Morey and Javier Delgado Yrigoyen, arrived in Santiago
from Peru on the 3d instant, and on October 5 señor Elguera was officially
presented to President Ibáñez.
In presenting his credentials to the President, Ambassador Elguera said:
“On presenting the letters which accredit me as Ambassador of
Peru to your country, I intend [extend?] the sincerest good wishes,
in the name of my Government and in my own, for the prosperity
of your country and your personal happiness.”
In the following brief reply by President Ibáñez, it will be noticed that he
pays a tribute to the part played by Secretary Kellogg in bringing about the
resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries. The
President said:
“On recognizing Your Excellency as the Ambassador of Peru to
my Government, I wish to pay my tribute in the first place to the
eminent American statesman, Mr. Kellogg, whose felicitous
initiative it was to invite us to renew our diplomatic relations.
“In this act of historical significance of our countries, I make the
sincerest good wishes for the prosperity and greatness of Peru,
and for the happiness of the eminent citizen who rules her
destinies, His Excellency señor Leguía, and I assure you, Mr.

Ambassador, that in my country and in my Government you will
meet with all the facilities necessary for the discharge of your
noble mission.
“At the same time I pray that Divine Providence may illumine our
relations and strengthen the desire of peace and concord which
exists in our peoples, to the end that they may soon move forward
together, as they were born together, to independence.
“I wish that the differences which have separated us for so long
may be speedily and definitively resolved according to principles
of justice and greater equity.”
I have [etc.]
W. S. CULBERTSON

Tacna-Arica dispute: Beginning of
direct negotiations between Chile and
Peru at the suggestion of the United
States34
34 For previous correspondence concerning the Tacna-Arica dispute, see
[424] The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[425] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[426] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[Washington,] October 2, 1928.
[427] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
Washington, October 2, 1928—noon.

[428] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[429] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[Washington,] October 5, 1928.
[430] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
Washington, October 5, 1928—noon.
[431] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[432] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[Washington,] October 8, 1928.
[433] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State

[434] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
Washington, October 29, 1928—noon.
[435] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[436] The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 424]
The Ambassador in Peru (Moore) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:25 p.m.]
60. I saw President Leguia. At present the Tacna-Arica situation is as
follows: President Leguia prefers and is anxious to have President Coolidge
render a decision settling the entire controversy, and he will unquestionably
stand by that decision. I am satisfied that President Leguia’s reason for this
is that while he is most anxious to get the matter out of the way, he does not
want any responsibility before the public that can be avoided. President
Leguia would, of course, accept internationalization of the whole zone. If
the plantations, port and city of Arica were internationalized, he would
divide the disputed territory in two. He would exchange Ministers,35 but he
will not take the initiative in suggesting this. There is a remote possibility
that he might agree to divide the territory and have an international
commission decide the compensation to Peruvian individuals for damages
to their property or for property taken from them. President Leguia is
unalterably opposed to turning the territory over to Bolivia. There is no
question of a sincere desire for a settlement. If the Department has any
suggestions, or cares to feel out Chile on any suggestions, the time is now
propitious to do so as there is no question that Peru is receptive but fears the
political consequences of initiating any movement. I am awaiting the
Department’s suggestions or instructions.
MOORE

[Document 425]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Moore)
[Paraphrase]
“There is a remote possibility that he might agree to divide the
territory and have an international commission decide the
compensation to Peruvian individuals for damages to their
property or for property taken from them.”
It seems to me that the time is now propitious to inaugurate in some way
conversations looking to the settlement of the Tacna-Arica question. In a
short time Ambassadors will be resident in each country. In view of the
improved feeling between the two countries, can you ascertain from
President Leguia how far he would be willing to go in the settlement of this
matter? I gather from President Leguia’s statements to you that he will not
agree to the transfer of any of the territory to Bolivia. I do not believe that
Chile will agree to neutralization. It seems to me, therefore, that the division
would be the best. The first proposition I ever made was for division.
However, I do not desire to make a definite proposition to either country at
present, but I should like to have President Leguia’s agreement in principle
on a settlement before I make any further propositions.
KELLOGG

[Document 426]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[WASHINGTON,] October 2, 1928.
The Chilean Ambassador called on the Secretary on Monday afternoon,
October 1, at the Secretary’s request. The Secretary stated that he had been
giving careful consideration for some time to the boundary question matter.
He stated that he had been afraid, when there had been difficulties in the
past and especially now that a more friendly spirit existed between both
Governments and peoples, that something might happen over the boundary
matter which would make the definitive settlement of the Tacna-Arica
question more difficult. He added that he was very much encouraged from
what he had heard from the Ambassador and also from our Ambassador in
Chile and from messages he had just received from Ambassador Moore that
a settlement could soon be arranged. The Secretary thought the prospect
was much brighter now than at any time in the past and, this being so, he
was especially anxious that nothing should occur now to interfere with the
settlement. He, therefore, thought that the suggestion made by the Chilean
Ambassador some time ago, that this question be settled by adjourning the
work of the Commission until the whole problem could be disposed of, was
a very good one.
The Secretary stated that there were two ways in which this could be done:
the work of the Commission could be suspended while the two
Governments attempted by direct negotiations to settle the boundary, or else
it could go over entirely pending a definite settlement of the Tacna-Arica
question. The Secretary thought the latter the best because the discussion
over the Tarata boundary might possibly cause some feeling which would
make the other settlement more difficult and, if the other settlement should
be made, it would automatically solve this boundary question.
The Ambassador stated that he fully agreed and he thought it would be
much better to suspend all operations for some time in order to give the

Governments a chance to arrive at a settlement. He inquired whether the
Secretary had any news indicating that Peru would accept a division of the
territory. The Secretary said that he did not; that he had merely strictly
confidential information from Ambassador Moore that the President would
like to make a direct settlement with Chile when the renewal of diplomatic
relations becomes effective, and that the agreement reached could then be
submitted to the Arbitrator for his approval. Ambassador Moore did not
indicate anything else except that there were certain other points in
connection with the settlement which President Leguia wished him to
discuss with the Secretary upon his arrival here.
The Ambassador stated that he was most sanguine that a settlement would
be made and he hoped within the next two months, and that he would
immediately telegraph his Government regarding the Secretary’s
suggestion. The Secretary, for his part, said that he would immediately take
the matter up with the Chargé d’Affaires in Lima and also with Ambassador
Velarde here to obtain the consent of both Governments for a disposition of
the matter.
F[RANCIS] W[HITE]

[Document 427]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 2, 1928—noon.
77. As you know, the Tacna-Arica Boundary Commission on several
occasions has become involved in very difficult situations which threatened
not only to destroy the harmony of the meetings but also, if unchecked, to
prejudice the new friendly spirit between the two Governments and people.
In order that nothing may now be done to make a settlement more difficult,
which settlement I hope will soon be reached, I desire that you call on
President Leguia at once and, after explaining the circumstances mentioned
above which bring me to this view, suggest to him that the Commission
suspend its operations completely for a period of four months. The
expenses of the Commission would stop immediately, and would not be
resumed unless it should become necessary for the Commission to resume
action later. I hope very much that the entire Tacna-Arica question will be
settled before that time, in which case there will be no need for the
Commission to make a decision, since Peru will receive very much more
territory under a settlement of the entire Tacna-Arica question than that
country could possibly receive from the Commission. Please take this
matter up immediately and cable the reply of President Leguia. A similar
suggestion has been made to the Government of Chile. If both Governments
are in agreement, each can then issue instructions to its member on the
Commission to vote for the postponement in question. Neither party will be
prejudiced in the least by this action. It will save expense, and if a
settlement is eventually made, as I hope and believe it will be, the necessity
for further action will be obviated. I urge strongly that this course be
pursued.
KELLOGG

[Document 428]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:15 p.m.]
seen, says that I may inform you that he accepts your suggestion in the
same spirit that he accepted your earlier suggestion to renew diplomatic
relations with the Government of Chile. President Leguia gave me this
answer without hesitation, adding that the suspension of the proceedings of
the Boundary Commission will be regarded as a diplomatic victory by the
Government of Chile in its efforts to maintain its claim to territory never
embraced in the Treaty of Ancon.36
HANNA

[Document 429]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[WASHINGTON,] October 5, 1928.
The Chilean Ambassador called on Mr. White on the afternoon of October 4
to say that he had been advised by his Government that it agreed to the
suspension of the work of the Boundary Commission. It was agreed that
General Morrow would call a meeting when advised by the Department that
both the Chilean and Peruvian Ambassadors had informed us that the
delegates of their Government on the Commission had been instructed to
vote for the adjournment. General Morrow would then suggest the
suspension of the work of the Commission for four months and the other
two Commissioners would both agree. The Secretary would then give out a
press statement saying that this had been agreed upon by both
Governments. The Ambassador agreed to this and said he thought it was the
best way as it would not be necessary for either Government to suggest the
postponement. He added that he hoped a settlement would be made quickly.
This is the honeymoon in the relations between the two Governments and
should be availed of immediately before them is any cooling off of
relations.
F[RANCIS] W[HITE]

[Document 430]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 5, 1928—noon.
him I sincerely appreciate his action in this matter. I am pleased that the
work of the Boundary Commission may be suspended for a while, because I
feel that it will aid in a settlement.
Please tell President Leguia that I see no reason why this suspension should
be considered a diplomatic victory for Chile, since the suggestion came
from me and not from the Government of Chile. I made the proposal to both
Chile and Peru, and I received the acceptance of Peru before that of Chile.
The reason for my proposal is, that if a settlement is made, obviously there
is no need for delimiting the boundary between Tacna and Tarata, and, since
a most favorable opportunity now exists for a settlement and since all
indications are that it will be possible to arrive at a settlement shortly, I
desired to remove every possible source of friction that might interfere with
such a settlement or make it more difficult. The postponement, therefore,
cannot be considered a diplomatic victory for either side but merely as a
common-sense arrangement to do everything possible to make conditions as
favorable as possible for promoting a settlement.
KELLOGG

[Document 431]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 9:45 p.m.]
President Leguia. He made the following comment: “We will see if we can
reach some agreement.” The President then expressed surprise that the
Chilean Ambassador had not yet requested an audience to discuss the
Tacna-Arica question. The President said that if the Ambassador does not
do so soon, he will take the initiative. He added that Ambassador Elguera
has instructions to commence negotiations in Santiago. The President then
stated that the atmosphere was now favorable and that he did not want to
delay for fear that it may change because of some unforeseen incident.
HANNA

[Document 432]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[WASHINGTON,] October 8, 1928.
The Bolivian Minister, Señor Don Eduardo Diez de Medina, accompanied
by Señor de la Barra, First Secretary of the Legation, called on the
Secretary of State on Monday, October 8.
The Minister stated that his Government had been informed in Lima that
diplomatic relations having been reestablished between Chile and Peru
direct negotiations would now be carried on by those Governments with a
view to settling the Tacna-Arica question, and the Bolivian Government
was fearful that a settlement might be made without the participation of the
United States and that there might be economic arrangements concluded at
the same time which would be very unfavorable. The Minister stated that he
had a book, written by the present Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile
shortly before he assumed office, in which the latter pointed out that, before
there was an American representative in Bolivia of the trustees for the bond
issue of 1922, Chilean products occupied the first place in the list of
imports into Bolivia and that, since that time, American products have
occupied the first place and Chilean products have dropped to third place,
and that, therefore, in view of the very large and close commercial relations
between the United States and Bolivia, no settlement involving Bolivia
should be made in Washington.
The Secretary replied that he knew of no exclusive commercial agreement
under contemplation between Chile and Peru although, of course, it had
been stated that a commercial treaty would be concluded when the Tacna-
Arica question was settled. The Minister stated that he did not have in mind
an exclusive commercial agreement but that Chile and Peru might make an
agreement giving one another lower tariff rates or even putting certain
goods on the free list and that this was looked upon with concern in Bolivia.
The Secretary stated that he did not know that there was any conflict

between Bolivian commerce on the one hand and Chilean and Peruvian on
the other; that Chile imports mostly cotton and sugar from Peru which are
not produced by Bolivia and, on the contrary, Peru takes from Chile mostly
fruits and nitrates which also are not produced in Bolivia. The Minister
replied that that was quite true; that what he had referred to was the
unfavorable position in which the United States would be put in trade with
these countries. The Secretary immediately replied that, in a political
controversy of the importance of that of Tacna-Arica, he certainly would
not let any question of self-interest on the part of the United States enter
into it. In fact, he did not think that American commerce would be
adversely affected but, even so, he was endeavoring to settle the question on
its merits and to be helpful to the sister Republics concerned. He was not
concerned with trying to obtain any material advantage for the United
States in settling it nor would he let any possible self-interest prevent a
settlement and he could not and would not take any measures to prevent
Chile and Peru from arriving at a settlement solely between themselves.
The Minister stated that he understood this but that he was very anxious, of
course, to see that nothing happened to the detriment of Bolivia. … The
Secretary said that he trusted nothing of this sort would come about but that
the Minister of course must understand that he is unable to bring Bolivia
into the negotiations. As the Secretary had said at the outset of this matter
when Bolivia had asked to come into the good offices, the Tacna-Arica
question was a matter which had been submitted by Chile and Peru for the
arbitration of the United States and then to the good offices of the Secretary
of State and, unless he were given fuller authority in the settlement or were
requested by the two parties at interest, he could not bring a third party into
the negotiations. The Minister stated that he took note of what the Secretary
said and that he very much regretted that the last hope of Bolivia was
denied her as, without the support and friendly aid of the United States, she
could do nothing.
The Secretary replied that the friendly support and interest of this
Government in Bolivia had never been and was not now withdrawn. The
Secretary was merely stating the facts as they are and when he had been
given an opportunity to make a suggestion for a settlement” he had
suggested that the territory be given to Bolivia. The Secretary thought and

still thinks that this is the best solution of the whole matter and that, if both
parties do not wish to give the entire territory to Bolivia, at least they should
give a zone of land including the railroad and city and port of Arica.
The Minister expressed his great gratification and said that in order that
there might be no misunderstanding he would summarize his position as
follows: He had not and of course could not ask that the United States
Government do anything to prevent a direct settlement between Chile and
Peru. On the other hand, the only strength that Bolivia has is in the justice
of its case and in the friendly support of the United States, and that should
this support be withdrawn from Bolivia it would be without remedy. Bolivia
would welcome a settlement between Chile and Peru … The Minister was
very gratified that the friendly interest of the United States Government in
Bolivia continued and he wanted to ask that the position and desires of
Bolivia should not be forgotten if a favorable opportunity should arise to do
something in Bolivia’s behalf. The Secretary told the Minister that of course
he would be glad to bear this in mind.
F[RANCIS] W[HITE]

[Document 433]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 9 p.m.37 ]
121. Last evening President Leguia summoned me to his office and gave
me an oral statement of the progress of his negotiations with the Chilean
Ambassador. The principal points of these are as follows:
Two conferences have taken place. At the first conference the only
important matter discussed was the suggestion of the President that the
negotiations take place at Lima. The Government of Chile accepted this
suggestion. At the beginning of the second conference the President told the
Ambassador, in answer to the Ambassador’s inquiry as to Peru’s attitude,
that he felt that justice demanded the return to Peru of the entire territory in
dispute. He substantiated this by reviewing the arbitral proceedings which
he interpreted as clearly indicating the right of Peru to the territory. He
emphasized especially Peru’s acceptance of a plebiscite contrary to her
interests, the failure of the plebiscite due to the acts of Chile, and the
Lassiter motion.38 The Ambassador declined to consider a solution on this
basis and proposed a division of the territory. The President objected
because Tacna has no feasible outlet except through the port of Arica and
because the two provinces form a single economic unit. The Ambassador
then asked the President to make a further suggestion and, in reply, the
President told the Ambassador that he would agree to placing the entire
territory under the administration of the United States. This proposition was
submitted by the Ambassador to his Government. He is now awaiting a
reply.
I reminded the President that if the United States refused to act in the
capacity indicated, his last suggestion would be futile. The President replied

that in that event the United States might consent to act as administrator in
conjunction with some other neutral country or countries. I then asked the
President if he would accept an administration of the territory under some
country or countries other than the United States. He answered in the
affirmative. I stated that in the latter event many would consider Bolivia as
the logical administrator. In reply to this he made it clear again that he
would not consider turning the provinces over to Bolivia.
The President stated that he felt he ought to tell me that the Ambassador is
not friendly to the idea of having the United States act as administrator of
the territory, and had inquired why the President insisted on this, in reply to
which the President had stated frankly that it was “to keep Chile in order.”
The President stated that he was informed that Chilean public opinion was
pressing the Government of Chile to reach a settlement.
Day before yesterday I saw the Chilean Ambassador. He appeared to be
very much discouraged, even pessimistic. He informed me that to the
suggestion of the President that the entire territory be returned to Peru, he
had made the counter-proposal of dividing the territory along the railway,
giving to Peru the portion of Arica north of the railway in exchange for the
portion of Tacna south of the line, and making a free port of Arica under the
administration of Chile. He did not mention the President’s forming the
territory into an independent state.
It is my belief that the proposal of the President that all the territory in
dispute be returned to Peru was made to place on record his claim that such
a settlement would be the just settlement, and to establish a favorable point
of departure for subsequent concessions to the views of Chile.
HANNA
37 Telegram in two sections.
Relations, 1926, vol.  I, p. 456, and subsequent correspondence.

[Document 434]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Hanna)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 29, 1928—noon.
(1) Regarding President Leguia’s suggestion that Chile and Peru
agree to place the territory under the administration of the United
States, please say to President Leguia that while this country
would be glad to do anything it consistently can do to adjust those
differences, it is unable to assume any obligation to govern the
territory either alone, or in conjunction with some other neutral
country to administer it.
(2) I am very anxious that Chile and Peru make an amicable
adjustment of this long-standing difficulty and I cannot urge this
too strongly. Both sides must make sacrifices. I am certain that
the advantages of settlement will far outweigh any sacrifices and
will commend itself to every nation in the world.
(3) For your information, it seems to me that a division of the
territory on a line north of the railway with Chile contributing
some territory northwest of Arica and Tacna some territory on the
southeast, so that the railway will be on territory of Chile and the
city of Arica be made a free port, would be a reasonable
adjustment. Arrangements could be made that the Morro be set
aside as a national monument; that both Tacna and Arica be
demilitarized with no forts at any place; that the Arica-Tacna
railway have full rights in the harbor; and that Peru enjoy not only
the rights of a free port but additional guarantees regarding equal
charges, port dues and any other charges. This information is for

you, but I do not desire to make any offer. I think it would be
unwise so long as the negotiations are between the two countries.
Embassy in Chile, together with this reply.
KELLOGG

[Document 435]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, November 1, 1928—noon.
message to President Leguia. He manifested regret because the United
States would not participate in the administration of the territory in dispute,
but stated that on October 28 the Chilean Ambassador had informed him
that the Government of Chile refused to accept his proposal to neutralize
the entire territory under the administration of the United States. He stated
that the Ambassador then proposed that the territory be divided along a line
10 kilometers north of the railway from Arica to La Paz, the port of Arica to
be under the administration of Chile. He stated that Peru is unable to accept
this proposal which would transfer to Chile not only a large portion of
Tacna but a portion of Tarata as well, and that Peru, of course, could not
agree to surrender to Chile the port of Arica. He said that he was willing to
make Arica a free port under neutral control, but he positively could not
accept less, and would preferably permit the negotiations to fail because a
less favorable solution would outrage Peruvian sentiment and would result
in the overthrow of his Government.
He stated that if Chile would agree to make Arica a free port under neutral
control, say of Uruguay and Venezuela, which have no boundary disputes
with either Chile or Peru, he believes a way could be found to divide the
balance of territory and adjust the remaining problems. With regard to the
railway, he said that he objected to Chile’s insistence on retaining it,
because it was constructed by Chile upon territory in dispute under the
Treaty of Ancon, despite Peru’s protest made at that time. He stated,
however, that Peru was willing to make a financial sacrifice and purchase

the railway from Chile. The President has not yet given his answer to the
proposal of the Ambassador.
The President seemed despondent. He seems to think that Chile is
intransigent, especially with regard to the port of Arica. He thinks that the
negotiations hinge on the disposition of that port. He thinks that they will
fail if Chile refuses to accept some practical arrangement regarding it which
will satisfy the national sentiment of Peru. It is my belief that he thinks that
if such an arrangement can be agreed upon, he will find it possible to make
reasonable concessions regarding the railway and the division of the
territory.
HANNA
39 Telegram in two sections.

[Document 436]
The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:25 p.m.]
126. This morning Foreign Minister again stated that nobody in Chile
would accept an agreement to give up the city of Arica. Foreign Minister is
willing to give full commercial privileges to Peru in the city of Arica
including free port and to erect a monument on Morro.
The Foreign Minister added that he fears war if the Tacna-Arica question is
not settled. Without taking this statement too seriously, one must recognize
that it reflects a general feeling, shared by the President, that Chile must
still liquidate a war on her northern frontier. One reason for the delay in
adhering to the anti-war treaty40 is the sincerity of this feeling.
CULBERTSON

Boundary disputes

Bolivia and Paraguay41
[437] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Bolivia (McGurk)
Washington, February 4, 1928.
[438] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, February 6, 1928.
[439] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[440] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[441] The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State

[442] The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[443] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[444] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
[445] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[446] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreech) to the Secretary of State
[447] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)

[448] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[449] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[450] President Guggiari to President Coolidge
Asunción, December 9, 1928.
[451] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Bolivia (Butler)
[452] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[453] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State

[454] The Chargé in Bolivia (Butler) to the Secretary of State
[455] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[456] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[457] The Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg) to the Bolivian Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs (Palacios)
[Washington,] December 10, 1928.
[458] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[459] The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[460] The Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zubizarreta) to the
Chairman of the International Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg)
[461] The Bolivian President (Sites) and the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs (Palacios) to the Chairman of the International
Conferenee of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration
(Kellogg)
[462] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[463] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[464] President Coolidge to President Guggiari

Washington, December 12, 1928.
[465] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[466] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[467] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
[468] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[469] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[470] The Minister in Bolvoia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State

[471] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[472] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[473] The Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg) to the Bolivian
Minister for Foreign Affairs (Elio)
Washington, December 14, 1928.
[474] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[475] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State

[476] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[477] The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[478] The Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zubizarreta) to the
Chairman of the International Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg)
[479] The Bolivian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Elio) to the Chairman
of the International Conference of American States on Conciliation and
Arbitration (Kellogg)
[480] The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State

[481] The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State
[482] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)

[Document 437]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Bolivia (McGurk)42
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1928.
No. 333
SIR: In connection with recent despatches regarding the boundary dispute
between Bolivia and Paraguay, the Department desires you to know for
your confidential information and guidance that while the Government of
the United States is of course always willing to lend its good offices in the
cause of international harmony it does not wish at the present time, while
the Tacna-Arica controversy is still pending,43 to be placed in the position
of undertaking to settle the boundary dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay,
either by arbitration or other procedure. It would therefore be somewhat
embarrassing if either party should formally request this Government to act,
as a refusal would probably be seized upon by the elements anxious to
lessen the prestige of the United States.
Since it seems possible that the President of Bolivia or the Minister for
Foreign Affairs may mention this matter to you, the Department feels that
you should keep its attitude in mind and be guided accordingly, without
conveying the impression that you have any definite instructions on the
subject.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
42 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Minister in
Paraguay, as instruction No. 406.

[Document 438]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1928.
No. 412
SIR: The Department has received and read with interest your despatch, No.
Leguía in a friendly settlement of the existing boundary difficulties between
Bolivia and Paraguay. It appears from this despatch that President Leguía
has suggested to the Bolivian and Paraguayan Governments that they
should seek the assistance of the United States in bringing the dispute to a
peaceable conclusion.
[Here follow two paragraphs in the sense of the Department’s instruction
FRANK B. KELLOGG
44 Not printed.

[Document 439]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
BUENOS AIRES, May 28, 1928.
[Received June 21.]
No. 285
SIR: I have the honor to report that the Paraguayan and Bolivian Boundary
Commissions have resumed the negotiations which as the Department was
suspended in order that the Delegates might consult with their respective
Governments respecting the suggestions made by the Argentine
Government with a view to furthering a friendly settlement of this
The Paraguayan and Bolivian Delegations are presided over by Dr. Eusebio
Ayala and Dr. Sanchez Bustamante, respectively. Dr. Isidoro Ruiz Moreno,
the legal counselor of the Argentine Ministry for Foreign Affairs, will
continue to act as friendly observer.
The first meeting, which occurred on May 7, was purely ceremonial in
character, a tribute being paid to the memory of the late Dr. Diaz Leon, one
of the authors of the protocol of April 22, 1927, (see Embassy’s despatch
ones, however, are reported to have been devoted to lengthy discussions of
the Argentine proposals, especially the suggestion that the dispute be
submitted to arbitration. Although it seems that both delegations are in
principle in accord with these suggestions, there have arisen, nevertheless,
differences of opinion respecting the old question of the “modus vivendi” or
the determination of the “status quo” that must prevail until the arbitral
decision has been given. According to the Nación of May 19, the Bolivians
consider that the first clause of the Argentine proposal (arbitration) means
that the basic question of the delimitation of the frontier must be

immediately settled, once and for all. The Paraguayans, on the other hand,
interpret this suggestion as an invitation to proceed simultaneously with the
arbitral settlement and the agreement respecting the “modus vivendi” that
must prevail during the course of the arbitration. It is said that this “modus
vivendi” would imply a temporary boundary quite different from the line of
actual occupation. The other two Argentine suggestions have also given rise
to certain divergences of opinion.
During the last ten days only the briefest and most non-committal reports of
the conferences have appeared in the press, although it is known that active
negotiations are still in progress.
A member of the Embassy was recently informed by Dr. Ruiz Moreno that
it is most important for both countries to withdraw their troops from the
forts in the disputed zone, as their presence there tends to excite and
inflame popular feeling in both countries. The question must be settled
peaceably, he said, for a war between Bolivia and Paraguay would be a long
affair, consisting of guerilla fighting, Bolivia’s superior strength over her
opponent being neutralized by her greater distance from the field of war.
Dr. Moreno vigorously denied that Argentina would ever assume the role of
mediator in the controversy, and added that she would confine herself to the
giving of good offices and friendly advice.
I have [etc.]
ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Document 440]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
BUENOS AIRES, July 19, 1928.
[Received August 16.]
No. 339
that the negotiations that have been in progress in Buenos Aires to define
the boundary between Bolivia and Paraguay have been suspended, as the
two delegations have been completely unable to reach any definite
agreement.49
The final session was held on July 12th at the Argentine Foreign Office. At
this meeting a statement was drawn up announcing the suspension of the
conference until the Governments of both interested countries shall have
reached a new understanding and setting forth the viewpoints of each
delegation. The penultimate paragraph declares that only peaceful means
will be used to settle this question, “except in case of legitimate defense”.
A copy of this document, as published by La Prensa, and a translation
thereof are transmitted herewith.
During the course of this session, which was also attended by the Argentine
Minister for Foreign Affairs and several other officials of the Foreign
Office, Dr. Gallardo50 expressed the opinion that although the Conference
had not achieved a definite solution of this old problem, it left the road open
for subsequent settlement and that this settlement would be aided by the
exchanges of views that had taken place. He added that he hoped the two
Governments would find it convenient to renew the negotiations in Buenos
Aires, although Argentina would view with equal satisfaction any
adjustment reached in another country.

Drs. Zubizarreta50a and Sanchez Bustamante, the Presidents of the
Paraguayan and Bolivian Commissions, replied to Dr. Gallardo and
expressed their thanks for the hospitality accorded by the Argentine
Government.
The text of the Argentine proposals that have formed the subject of the
recent deliberations, have been made public by the Argentine authorities. A
copy and translation of these suggestions, as published in La Prensa of July
13th, accompany this despatch.
At the regular weekly diplomatic reception on July 18th I asked the
Minister for Foreign Affairs if he would tell me the significance of the
suspension of these negotiations. As is frequently the case, the Minister was
noncommittal and confined his remarks to generalities. Nevertheless, I
inferred that he was disappointed at the failure of the plenipotentiaries to
reach an agreement—a failure reflecting on the efficacy of the good offices
offered by the Argentine Government causing some little chagrin in official
and press circles.
The visit to Buenos Aires at this time of the president-elect of Paraguay has
given rise to speculation as to the effect it will ultimately leave upon this
boundary question and whether the visits made by Dr. Guggiari to
Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Chile will result in these four countries
showing partiality to the Paraguayan claims. As yet there is only vague
rumor on this hypothesis on which reliance cannot be placed but I shall
report any reliable information I may be able to obtain.
I have [etc.]
ROBERT WOODS BLISS
[Enclosure 1—Translation51 ]
Statement Issued July 12, 1928, by the Bolivian and Paraguayan Plenipotentiaries Suspending the Conference To Define Boundaries
At a meeting held in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the purpose of
agreeing upon the Act of Suspension of the Conference on Boundaries

between the two countries, the Plenipotentiaries of Bolivia and Paraguay
hereby declare:
That it has not been possible for them to reach an agreement regarding the
questions considered at the Conference.
Consequently, they are of the opinion, in accordance with the provisions of
the Protocol signed in Buenos Aires on April 22, 1927, that the moment has
arrived to inform the Government of the Argentine Republic concerning the
reasons for their dissension; they do therefore
RESOLVE:
To suspend the Conference until a new agreement is reached by
the Foreign Offices of both countries, and they leave on record
their recognition of the high impartiality with which the
Argentine Government has attended the deliberations held until
now.
The Commission of Plenipotentiaries of Bolivia states:
I. That it fully accepts the terms of the final act proposed by the
Argentine Observer, Dr. Isidoro Ruiz Moreno, under authority
from his Government, and reaffirms the four points embodied in
said act:
1. That the settlement of the controversy should be
based upon the uti possidetis of 1810;
2. That, in the event that it proves impossible to arrive
at a direct understanding, it will be necessary to
determine the bases of legal arbitration;
3. That the advances that have been made by either
country have created a de facto, situation that confers
no right and that cannot be submitted to the arbitrator in
order to support their respective contentions;

4. That in view of the present state of the negotiations it
refers their continuation to the Foreign Offices.
II. That since the Paraguayan Delegation did not accept the
proposal
for
demilitarization,
selected
by
the
Bolivian
Commission of Ministers Plenipotentiary from the two optional
terms of the second point of the friendly suggestion made by the
Argentine Government, nor the third point of said suggestion, the
Government of Bolivia maintains unalterable its opinion as
regards the arbitral zones abolished by mutual agreement in 1913,
and with regard to the status quo of possessions agreed upon in
1907, reserving its right to present claims for any advances which
may have overstepped the bounds of those possessions.
III. That since the conditions under which said status quo was
agreed upon have changed, it deems it necessary that new
formulae be considered which shall meet the present situation and
the legitimate interests of both countries.
IV. That in compliance with the agreement entered into by Bolivia
and Paraguay in the Gutierrez-Diaz Leon Protocol, the arbitration
cannot be an indeterminate one, but should devolve upon zones
fixed by mutual agreement, and that since both parties have
declared themselves in favor of a juridical arbitration, no
possession, regardless of the time that has elapsed, can prevail
against legitimate rights founded upon titles and acts emanating
from the Spanish Crown, in determining the jurisdiction of the
Audiencia of Charcas and the territory of the Province of
Paraguay.
The Commission of Plenipotentiaries of Paraguay states:
I. That the representatives of Bolivia have not accepted the proposal made
by the exponents relative to the dismantling and abandonment of the fortins
founded by both countries subsequent to 1907.
That said proposal corresponded with the idea suggested by the Argentine
Republic of demilitarizing the military posts or positions referred to, and

which was accepted, in principle, by the Governments of Paraguay and
Bolivia.
III. That the representatives of Bolivia confined themselves to proposing the
reduction and balancing of the military forces of the fortins of both
countries.
IV. That the representatives of Paraguay rejected the Bolivian proposal as
being insufficient and hardly in accord with the Argentine suggestion.
V. That the representatives of both countries stated that they accepted
arbitration as a means of settling the boundary controversy, but disagreed
fundamentally as to the manner of classifying and stating the question.
The Paraguayan Delegates considered the question, in accordance with all
the antecedents, as a boundary dispute between the territory of the former
Province of Paraguay, which extends west of its river and to which the
Republic of Paraguay is successor, and the territories of the former District
of Chiquitos and of the entities or provinces of Alto Perú out of which
Bolivia was formed.
The proposal of the Bolivian Delegates implied the redemption of the entire
territory of the Chaco Boreal, with the still more grave feature of fixing as a
disputed and arbitrable zone the territory included between the parallel
coinciding with the mouth of the Apa River and the Pilcomayo River up to
59° [west] of Greenwich, and to leave to Bolivia, without discussion, all the
rest of the territory of that geographic unit. This Bolivian proposal was
rejected absolutely by the Delegates of Paraguay as being contrary to the
sovereignty of this country and all the diplomatic antecedents relative to the
settlement of the controversy.
VI. That a new modus vivendi not having been agreed upon, the Delegation
of Paraguay reaffirms and ratifies the legal existence of the status quo
agreed upon in 1907 as well as its scope and meaning in accordance with its
thesis set forth in previous conferences, and reserves the right of its country
to present claims for the violation of said pact.

VII. That the Delegation of Paraguay accepted the formula suggested by the
Argentine Observer for the Act of Suspension of the Conference relative to
arbitration and the uti possidetis of 1810, but it was unable to agree to item
III of said formula because the representatives of Bolivia considered it
tantamount to a condemnation of all the possessory acts, however old these
may have been, and not subject to the zone of the status quo.
Upon closing, both Delegations agree in declaring that the dispute in which
their respective countries are involved shall be settled only by pacific
means, except in the case of self-defense.
In testimony whereof, they sign this Act in triplicate in the City of Buenos
Aires, on the twelfth day of July nineteen hundred and twenty-eight.
[Enclosure 2—Translation52 ]
1. That Paraguay agree to proceed directly to arbitrate the
fundamental question.
2. That Bolivia and Paraguay proceed to demilitarize all their
fortins or to withdraw those that are opposite each other to a
distance of fifty kilometers each; this act to be verified by a
military commission from a third country.
3. That it be declared that the advances which either country may
have made have created a de facto situation which does not give
them any right nor can said advances be alleged before the
arbitrator as the basis of their claims.
48 Latter not printed.
49 See “Minutes and Documents of the Conferences of Paraguayan and
Bolivian Plenipotentiaries held in Buenos Aires under the auspices of the
Argentine Government” in Proceedings of the Commission of Inquiry and
(Washington [, 1929?]), pp. 265 ff.
50 Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs.

that he is leaving for Paraguay on Sunday, May 27, and that Dr. Gerónimo
Zubizarreta will act as Chairman of the Paraguayan Delegation, of which he
is now a member.”—Proceedings of the Commission, p. 359.
51 Translation from Proceedings of the Commission, p. 403, is substituted
for the file translation.
52 Translation from Proceedings of the Commission, p. 333, is substituted
for the file translation.

[Document 441]
The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:05 p.m.]
41. The Bolivian Government through the Minister of Finance has
requested me to ask the Department to use its best course to obtain the
adhesion of Paraguay to the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war,53
since the Bolivian Government thinks that such action would facilitate the
settlement of Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary question.
KAUFMAN

[Document 442]
The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
46. Bolivia has signed today and delivered to the Legation the multilateral
treaty which will be forwarded by pouch.53a The President and the Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs Palacios requested my presence at the Palace
yesterday afternoon and informed me that Paraguay has violated the mutual
understanding in both [sic] construction of three forts in disputed territory.
Both requested me to notify the Department in the effort to use good
influence with Paraguayan Minister in the hope of stopping construction
until such time as the matter can be arranged amicably. My answer was that
I would convey the foregoing message to the Department.
KAUFMAN
[Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 185].

[Document 443]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
approved. Take no further action without definite instructions.
KELLOGG

[Document 444]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
9. The Department has been informally advised through the Bolivian
Legation that Paraguayan troops are building a fortress 30 kilometers from
the Bolivian fortress Sorpresa, located 1 kilometer from Chamar Lagoon.
At the northwest of Arce and 40 kilometers from the said point they are also
building another fortress called Boqueron. The Legation calls attention to
the seriousness of the situation which may arise through construction of
these fortresses so close to those of Sorpresa and Arce. Report by telegraph
any information in your possession regarding matter without discussing it
with any officials.
KELLOGG

[Document 445]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:28 p.m.]
15. Information in Department’s telegram No. 9 exaggerated. Socalled
fortresses only observation outposts, having only 25 to 30 men. No
fortifications other than light arms. All Paraguayan fortifications are in
indisputable territory of Paraguay. Full report by mail.
KREECK

[Document 446]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreech) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:55 p.m.]
25. Hostilities have commenced between Bolivian and Paraguayan soldiers
near the Paraguayan Fort Galpon.
Bolivia has been constructing a new fort near Galpon. On December 5th a
troop of Bolivian soldiers advanced near Fort Galpon. At first friendly, later
opened fire which was returned by the Paraguayans causing many
casualties dead and wounded; Bolivians withdrew, repulsed.
Paraguay, in the interest of peace and having accepted the Kellogg Pact,
desires Washington to invoke the convocation of the Commission of Inquiry
provided for in the Gondra Treaty to which both countries are parties.54 It is
suggested the Commission at Montevideo assume charge inquiry because of
its convenience to both Governments.
Casualties follow in this Legation’s despatch No. 661; complete picture of
conditions set forth therein, consult it; also very important despatch No.
KREECK
54 For correspondence concerning the establishment of permanent
55 Neither despatch printed.

[Document 447]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
[Paraphrase]
pleased to do everything I properly can do which would be acceptable to
both parties with the view of bringing about a friendly settlement of the
present difficulties or of averting further hostilities, I cannot, of course,
invoke the convocation of a Commission of Inquiry under the Gondra
Treaty in the case of a dispute to which the Government of the United
States is not a party. It will be necessary, therefore, in accordance with
article 3 of the Gondra Treaty, for the Paraguayan Government, if it cares to
do so, to request the convocation of the Commission of Inquiry. The
Paraguayan Chargé has just called and left a note describing the recent
incident at Fort Galpon,56 but he has made no request for any action such as
you say the Paraguayan Government desires the Government of the United
States to take.
KELLOGG
56 Note not printed.
57 Neither printed.

[Document 448]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
Minister in Washington, is now on his way to Montevideo officially to
request Uruguayan Government to convoke Commission of Inquiry
provided by the Gondra Treaty. Official Paraguayan note to Bolivia gives
notice of its action in the following words:
“My Government, on deploring the necessity in which it has been
placed by resorting to this proceeding, is pleased in declaring its
decision of not using its means of defense except in case of being
compelled to repel an aggression and its plan of confiding the
solution of its questions to legal arbitrators. Your Excellency’s
Government should give this note the status of the official
communication to which the second article of the treaty
mentioned refers.”
Presence of Bolivian troops at Menonipple [Mennonite] colony reported
despatch No. 665 en route59 is additional evidence of Bolivian aggression.
Latest information concerning conflict: Bolivian forces, 22 dead or critical;
wounded unknown; 29 taken prisoner, including two officers. Paraguayan:
no fatalities, several wounded. Bolivian troops in district of conflict, 4800;
Paraguayan, 1600. Quiet reigns, acclaim for peace is everywhere here.
KREECK
reference.

[Document 449]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
27. Bolivia’s answer to Paraguay’s request for convocation of Gondra
Treaty was to give passport to Paraguayan Minister at La Paz. Paraguay
will give Bolivian Minister his passport tomorrow.
KREECK

[Document 450]
President Guggiari to President Coolidge60
[Translation]
ASUNCIÓN, December 9, 1928.
I perform a duty of international solidarity in informing Your Excellency
that following a frontier incident between Paraguayan and Bolivian military
troops, the Bolivian Government delivered passports to the Chargé of our
Legation in La Paz as a reply to the communication in which my
Government informed it of its determination to resort to the proceedings
established in the treaty to prevent conflicts between American States
adopted by the Fifth International Pan American Conference, and of which
our two countries are signatories. I salute Your Excellency with my highest
and most cordial consideration.
JOSE P. GUGGIARI
60 Received in the Department of State December 11.

[Document 451]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Bolivia (Butler)
[Paraphrase]
31. The Bolivia-Paraguay situation is giving the Department much concern.
The Department hesitates to make any suggestions for fear it may
complicate the situation, since the Government of Argentina has been
mediating this question for many months and any suggestions from the
Government of the United States might be misunderstood. However, it is
the understanding of the Department that Paraguay has suggested the
constitution of Commission of Inquiry under the Gondra Treaty, and the
Department is very anxious to learn immediately Bolivia’s attitude in regard
thereto. Please expedite reply.
KELLOGG

[Document 452]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[Paraphrase]
62. The Department is sending the following telegram to the Legation in
Bolivia:
supra.]
Please telegraph immediately your views as to whether any suggestion from
the Government of the United States to the Government of Bolivia along
the line of accepting the constitution of a Gondra commission would be
misunderstood in Argentina. Of course I do not wish to interfere with the
Argentine mediation. What action, if any, does the Government of
Argentina contemplate in the present situation?
KELLOGG

[Document 453]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
28. By the breaking of diplomatic relations Bolivia refuses to accept the
Gondra Treaty as set forth by Paraguay. The Paraguayan Government has
the opinion that Bolivia must accept the provisions of the Gondra Treaty to
which both countries are signatory parties. In the interest of peace and the
purpose of the Kellogg Pact, it is believed that the American Government
should counsel Bolivia to accept the provisions established in that treaty.
KREECK

[Document 454]
The Chargé in Bolivia (Butler) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 2:15 p.m.]
suggests commission of investigation under the Gondra Treaty. An official
communication from the Government of Bolivia states that such an
investigation would be incompatible with the dignity of Bolivia in view of
the unprovoked aggression by Paraguay. The Government of Bolivia holds
that the Chaco question is under the Gutierrez-Diaz Leon protocol, and it
considers Paraguay’s action a motive for rupture of diplomatic relations.
The Government of Bolivia refuses conciliation which does not include
prior and full reparation for outrage to its sovereignty and dignity. Foreign
Office states there is no further information. Attitude of Government is
supported by Senate resolution. A large popular demonstration against
Paraguay took place in La Paz on Sunday.
BUTLER

[Document 455]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 7:30 p.m.]
me that recently, before the present Bolivia-Paraguay incident occurred, he
had offered his services as friendly adjuster, but not as arbitrator, of the
differences between Bolivia and Paraguay. President Irigoyen said that
Paraguay immediately accepted his offer, frankly and unreservedly, but that
Bolivia, while expressing its appreciation for the friendly and timely offer,
referred to the suspended meetings of the representatives of the two
countries previously held at Buenos Aires, which Bolivia considered were
still open to continuation. President Irigoyen said that he had since made no
further move, but had held himself ready to act as a friendly adviser in
reaching a solution of the problem if Bolivia and Paraguay so desired.
I gathered that President Irigoyen would not desire the Government of the
United States to advise either party to accept his offer. I therefore counsel
that if you take any action, it be along the lines of urging the Governments
of both countries to find a way of settling their differences amicably.
Foreign Minister read to me two telegrams from the Minister of Argentina
in Bolivia which reported a very tense situation in Bolivia, with serious
possibilities of war; that Bolivia had received from Chile an assurance of
neutrality in case of war, and that Chile had offered her good offices as
mediator.
The Foreign Minister also told me that he had been informed that the
Government of Chile intended to address identic notes to the Governments

of Argentina and Brazil stating that it considered Bolivia to be the
ageressor.

Buss

[Document 456]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
at its inaugural plenary session this morning passed a resolution regarding
Bolivian-Paraguayan difficulty, the text of which has doubtless been cabled
down by the press.61 Copies have been sent to Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of Bolivia and Paraguay. It is therefore of the utmost importance to the
Department to know what action if any is being taken by Argentina. The
Committee will meet December 11, 4 p.m. If possible, please cable before
that time any information available regarding Argentina’s attitude and
action.
KELLOGG
61 For text of resolution, see telegram dated Dec. 10 to the Bolivian Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs, infra. For correspondence concerning the

[Document 457]
The Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg) to the Bolivian
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Palacios)62
[WASHINGTON,] December 10, 1928.
As directed by the International Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration which convened in the city of Washington this
morning, I have the honor to transmit herewith the following resolution
which was unanimously adopted by this Conference:
“(1) To express to the Governments of the sister
Republics of Bolivia and Paraguay the keen desire and
the hope which it entertains that their present
differences shall be arranged pacifically and in a spirit
of justice, concord and of fraternity;
“(2) To convey in a cordial and respectful manner to
those Governments, in conformity with the tradition of
this continent and with the general practices of modern
international law that nations under circumstances such
as the present have at their disposal organisms and
means adequate and efficient to find solutions which
harmonize the preservation of peace with the rights of
States;
“(3) To transmit this resolution by telegraph to the
Governments of Bolivia and Paraguay;
“(4) To form a Committee which shall report to the
Conference with respect to the conciliatory action
which, if necessary, it might render cooperating with

the instrumentalities now employed in the friendly
solution of the problem.”
FRANK B. KELLOGG
62 The same, on the same date, to the Paraguayan Minister for Foreign
Affairs.

[Document 458]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[Paraphrase]
United States does not intend to take any independent action. It certainly
would not take any action which would conflict in any way with the
commendable efforts of the Government of Argentina to adjust the
difficulties between Bolivia and Paraguay. The only thing which was done
here was the forwarding by the Conference of the resolution unanimously
adopted yesterday by all the delegates. I simply signed the resolution as
Chairman of the Conference. You will notice that this is along the lines
suggested in your telegram.
KELLOGG

[Document 459]
The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
119. Member of Secretariat telephoned from Lugano that Council had
adopted resolution in afternoon session which had first been released to the
press. Under this Briand, as acting [President] despatched identical notes to
the Paraguayan and Bolivian Governments inviting attention to the frontier
incidents between them which constituted “menace to peace” and recalled
their obligations under the Covenant as members of the League to settle
their differences by pacific means.63 The messages made it clear that no
specific means were recommended.
My informant stated that the members of the Council had been convinced
that they would be delinquent if they evaded their clear duty in this
connection; nevertheless they had all borne deeply in mind the relation of
the United States to this question and had endeavored so to frame the
message that it could not be interpreted as contravening the Monroe
Doctrine or conflicting with any possible action on our part.
WILSON
63 League of Nations, Documentation Concerning the Dispute Between

[Document 460]
The Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zubizarreta) to
the Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg)
[Translation]
ASUNCIÓN, December 11, 1928.
I have had the honor of receiving your cable transmitting the expression of
wishes of the Conference on Arbitration under your worthy chairmanship,
inspired by noble ideals of comity and fraternity which my Government is
the first in furthering. On conveying to that Conference, through Your
Excellency’s high intermediary, that this Government fully shares those
feelings, it takes pleasure in stating that upon requesting the call of the
Commission created by the treaty signed May 3, 1923 at the International
Conference of American States the Paraguayan Government has offered
effective evidence thereof. Unfortunately the Paraguayan Government has
not met until this moment with the just and due correspondence on the part
of Bolivia, who, upon challenging a peaceful procedure of justice,
announces her determination to exact prior satisfaction which she says is
due her because of facts the investigation of which she refuses, thus setting
herself as judge of her own actions and of alleged offenses. Both my
country and my Government can tell the world at large that if peace were
disturbed the responsibility for such a crime of lese civilization and
humanity could justly be ascribed to Bolivia. Paraguay is and has always
been disposed to submit to legal means the settlement of her difficulties.
GERONIMO ZUBIZARRETA

[Document 461]
The Bolivian President (Sites) and the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs (Palacios) to the Chairman of the International
Conferenee of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration
(Kellogg)
[Translation]
LA PAZ, December 11, 1928.
I have the honor of referring to the cable in which Your Excellency on
behalf of the International Conference on Conciliation and Arbitration
invites Bolivia to follow a procedure of peace and international justice in
her differences with the Republic of Paraguay and I am thankful the
valuable and significant wishes expressed by the Conference which the
people and Government of Bolivia appreciate in their lofty and significant
meaning. The whole international tradition of Bolivia is inspired by a
positive and sincere demotion to the principle of arbitration and to the
condemnation of war as a political system towards her neighbors, the
involuntary case of mere self-defense excluded, and Bolivia shall not depart
from these standards of civilized life and human solidarity. Attacked in this
moment in her sovereignty and dignity by military forces of the Paraguayan
army in a violent and unexpected aggression which gives the lie to and
shatters the feelings of American brotherhood, Bolivia requires a
satisfaction that may erase that offense and give back to the Bolivian people
serenity and confidence enough to permit its acceptance of the
determinations of this Government in favor of solutions to harmonize the
preservation of peace with the rights of States. There are commitments
between Bolivia and the Republic of Paraguay to accept an arbitration at
law on bases to be covenanted and determined for the controversy now
dividing them, and there is a suggestion by the Argentine Government that
both Bolivia and Paraguay accepted as the procedure to define the

controversy, and Bolivia shall not deviate from those commitments.
Following the satisfaction which she expects within the strict standards of
international law Bolivia will always be disposed to follow the noble
inspirations of the principles referred to by Your Excellency and to which
she is devoted and of the countries whose friendship she deeply appreciates.
SILES
ALBERTO PALACIOS

[Document 462]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
29. At the meeting of the diplomatic corps today it was the unanimous
opinion that only the American Government could cause Bolivia to
recognize its treaty obligations and that its failure to do so would cause the
Gondra Treaty and the Kellogg Pact to be of no value.
KREECK

[Document 463]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[Received December 14—11 a.m.]
30. Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs has received reliable
information that coincident with the withdrawal of the Bolivian delegates
from the Conciliation and Arbitration Conference at Washington,64 Bolivia
at the same time obtained from Chile assurances of its neutrality in the
event of war, and immediately thereafter issued an order, now in actual
operation, for the concentration of troops at Suarez. An ultimatum or
declaration of war will be made by Bolivia when concentration is effected.
Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs feels that war is imminent unless
the United States acts to prevent.
KREECK
64 The Bolivian Minister in Washington temporarily withdrew from the
Conciliation Conference, but apparently was instructed on December 11 to

[Document 464]
President Coolidge to President Guggiari
WASHINGTON, December 12, 1928.
I have received Your Excellency’s telegram of December 9 in relation to the
regrettable conflict that has taken place between Paraguay and Bolivia and,
in thanking Your Excellency for advising me regarding this matter, I desire
to express the most fervent hope that the difficulty between your country
and Bolivia will soon be composed to the entire satisfaction of both parties.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

[Document 465]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[Paraphrase]
33. Please telegraph the Department immediately as completely as possible
the situation with regard to measures being taken to bring about a
settlement. Has the Government of Argentina taken any action to compose
the present difficulty? It is important that we know exactly what the
Government of Argentina is doing in the matter in order that the Conference
may be informed as to any action that would conflict with such measures,
or which might be misunderstood as interference in the mediation
undertaken by the Government of Argentina.
KELLOGG

[Document 466]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
66. It is urgently necessary for Department to know exactly what, if
anything, Argentina is doing at the present time. It is not clear from your
or is mediating in this question. If the Argentine Government has done
nothing since the recent outbreak, I presume it would not take umbrage at
any action taken by the Conference with a view to composing the present
difficulty. If, on the other hand, Argentina has taken some action, the
Conference would naturally want to take that into consideration.
KELLOGG

[Document 467]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
cables. The Gondra Treaty has not been ratified by Bolivia and hence is not
in effect as between Bolivia and Paraguay, nor is the Kellogg Pact in force,
so neither of these treaties can be invoked in the present instance.
[Paraphrase.] Please telegraph the Department immediately as completely
as possible the situation with regard to measures being taken to bring about
a settlement. Has the Government of Argentina taken any action to compose
the present difficulty? It is important that we should know exactly what the
Government of Argentina is doing in the matter in order that the Conference
may be informed as to any action that would conflict with such measures,
or which might be misunderstood as interference in the mediation
undertaken by the Government of Argentina. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 468]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 9:20 p.m.]
95. Foreign Minister states that the Government of Argentina is doing
nothing at the present time in the way of mediation and has no objection to
any action which the Conference may take.
WHITE for BLISS

[Document 469]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
34. The International Conference of American States on Conciliation and
Arbitration will hold a plenary session tomorrow morning at 11 o’clock to
receive the report of the Special Committee appointed by the Conference to
consider the situation which has developed between Bolivia and Paraguay. I
understand that this report will recommend to the Conference that the
Conference tender its good offices to the Governments of Bolivia and
Paraguay for the purpose of aiding them in providing such conciliatory
measures as may be found appropriate to the end that conflict may be
avoided and peace maintained. Please go at once to the President of the
Republic and give him the above information and tell him that I earnestly
urge that nothing shall be done to make abortive the tender of good offices
by the Conference which I hope will be found welcome.
Like message being sent to Paraguay.65
KAUFMAN
65 Sent as telegram No. 15.

[Document 470]
The Minister in Bolvoia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, December 14, 1928—noon.
[Received 1:40 p.m.]
61. Department’s telegram 34. President states that as soon as tender of
good offices is received he will call Cabinet meeting and that he personally
will use all influence for peaceful solution.
New Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister Palacios66 requested me to
determine the Department’s attitude concerning offer of mediation from
League of Nations. Bolivian Government must send reply today and it is
anxious to retain friendly cooperation of the United States. I am convinced
that the Bolivian Government will follow any suggestions of the
Department. Please reply by telegraph immediately.
KAUFMAN
66 Alberto Palacios was Acting Minister; the new Minister was Tomas
Manuel Elio.

[Document 471]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[Received December 15—11 p.m.]
received at the Legation December 14, 3 p.m., inexcusable delay for double
priority message.
I immediately advised the President and the Minister of Foreign Affairs
who expressed gratification of the act and dispatched their accord and
acceptance in an official note numbered 970 which was received at the
Legation at 6 o’clock this afternoon. Text of the note follows:
“Mr. Minister: I have had today the pleasure of receiving the visit
of Your Excellency made with the object of transmitting to me a
message from the Most Excellent Mr. Kellogg which expresses
the anticipation that the Conference of Conciliation and
Arbitration may offer its good offices to Paraguay and Bolivia for
the settlement of the conflict pending between the two countries
and that he desires that every act opposed to the maintenance of
peace be avoided.
It is superfluous to repeat to Your Excellency that which I have
said in divers official documents of extensive diffusion which is
that my Government does not consider itself culpable for the
incident which occurred the fifth of the month near Fort Galpon,
that she has taken the lead in proposing that there be opened an
impartial investigation of the evidence to discern the
responsibility and finally that she does not avoid any proceeding
destined to solve the conflict by peaceable means.

I fulfill with pleasure a charge from the Most Excellent President
of the Republic of Paraguay in saying to you that Paraguay will
not be the one who breaks the bounds of sanity or provokes a war.
In thanking Your Excellency, etc., signed Zubizarreta, Paraguayan
Minister for Foreign Affairs.”
In the following words the President charged me to make known to
Secretary Kellogg his personal appreciation of the offer:
“Tell your Government I give my most solemn promise that
nothing shall be done by this Government to mar or hinder the
tender of good offices by the Conference which I heartily
welcome.”
Notice of Bolivian mobilization of troops on the Pilcomayo has reached
Asunción.
Through the Spanish Chargé d’Affaires, the Spanish Government offers its
good offices “although it recognizes that exhortation to peace made by
adequate organisms and believe as the mother country that it fulfills an
indispensable and very honorable duty in uniting its voice to that of said
organisms.”
Confidentially, it was stated European intervention is not desired.
KREECK
67 See footnote 65 supra.

[Document 472]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman)
[Paraphrase]
by unanimous action (except Bolivia which was not present and Paraguay
which refrained from voting) offered its good offices, and since I am
Chairman of the Conference, I do not desire to suggest anything which
might interfere with the action of the Conference or the acceptance of its
good offices which I am exceedingly anxious to have Bolivia give.
KELLOGG

[Document 473]
The Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg) to the Bolivian
Minister for Foreign Affairs (Elio)68
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, December 14, 1928.
I have the honor to transmit to your Excellency the following report of the
Special Commission of the Conference together with a resolution, both
adopted unanimously by the International Conference of American States
on Conciliation and Arbitration, except Paraguay, which abstained from
voting and Bolivia, which was not present.
The report says:
The Committee charged with reporting to the Conference on the
conciliatory action that may be appropriate with respect to the
incident between the Republics of Bolivia and Paraguay, after
being informed of the replies received from both nations to the
cable message sent by the Chairman of this Conference on
Conciliation and Arbitration, considers that the Conference in
plenary session is called upon to decide upon the course which
should be followed.
Nevertheless, the Committee deems it to be its duty to suggest to
the Conference a concrete proposal to the end that the principles
of conciliation and arbitration in support of which it was
convened may find their most sincere and their friendliest
application in this case.
In accordance with American tradition, in general, as shown by
the antecedents, expressions of hope and Pan American

resolutions, and also in conformity with the measures adopted
during the last years for the maintenance of world peace, the
Conference may take a prudent and effective course with the
assurance of general approval for its endeavor.
The friendly proceedings of an Assembly of Sister Republics
must find favorable echo and most sympathetic reception,
especially in the spirit of the nations directly interested in the
incident. Those proceedings show the degree of solidarity and
affection by which the other countries of the hemisphere feel
bound to them.
Animated by these sentiments, and without assuming any political
attitude beyond the appropriate purposes of this Conference, the
Committee proposes to this Assembly the Conference proffer its
good offices to the interested parties for the purpose of promoting
suitable conciliatory measures with the aim of preserving the
principle of conciliation and arbitration as a solid foundation of
international life.
The Resolution says
The Conference, therefore, resolves:
To offer to the interested parties its good offices with the object of
promoting adequate conciliatory measures to maintain the
principle of conciliation and arbitration as the solid foundation of
international life.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
68 The same, on the same date, to the Paraguayan Minister for Foreign
Affairs.

[Document 474]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
34. Paraguayan Foreign Office has advised me of Bolivian attack, airplane
made yesterday afternoon, December 15th, upon Bahia Negra. Bombs were
dropped but failed to explode; later opened rapid fire but no casualties
reported.
At the same time Bolivian troops attacked three Paraguayan positions in
Central Chaco, located Fort Lopez and outposts Rivarola and General
Genes. Paraguayan troops withdrew before Bolivians in obligation not to
provoke hostilities. In view of attacks made, the President of Paraguay has
called all citizens 18 to 28 years of age report for duty. Important
confidential message follows.
KREECK

[Document 475]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
35. Good offices of the Conference are being considered by the Paraguayan
Cabinet in session this morning. The delay in accepting is due to a report
from Buenos Aires that Bolivia has accepted mediation of Argentina, and
also to a report that Argentina has not withdrawn in favor of the
Conference. Paraguay has telegraphed to Doctor Ayala in Buenos Aires to
ascertain definitely from President Irigoyen action of Argentina, whether
Argentina has or has not withdrawn, and to report immediately so that a
reply can be sent to the Conference. I was requested to confer again with
the Foreign Minister at 5 o’clock.
Certain strong measures must be taken immediately toward Bolivia, for
Paraguay cannot stand idle in the face of an invasion. Present situation is
very grave.
KREECK

[Document 476]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
36. Paraguay accepts offer of Conference; Minister of Foreign Affairs now
drafting acceptance which will be telegraphed to Secretary Kellogg tonight.
Up to 8 o’clock p.m., Argentina had not answered Paraguay’s question as to
its attitude (see my telegram 35); situation desperate; Paraguay could not
wait longer and acceptance given.
Blow against American peace has been struck; energetic and forceful
measures must be employed against aggression and attacks of Bolivia, or
Paraguay will be invaded. Minister of War permitted me to read intercepted
Bolivian radiogram directing 10,000 troops be immediately mobilized on
Pilcomayo. Another attack reported this afternoon, announcing resistance
by Paraguayans and their retaking of fort lost yesterday. This locality is not
far from American enterprise at Pinasco and Mennonite colonization. …
Only prompt and extreme pressure upon Bolivia will achieve peace.
Paraguayans, heretofore calm, now excited and exceedingly nervous and
fearful.
KREECK

[Document 477]
The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:40 a.m.]
62. Following instructions from the Department and pursuant to an
interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, including Mr. Palacios and
other members of Cabinet, I have the following to report:
That Bolivia will accept the good offices of the Pan American Conference
within 48 hours. This delay is owing to the fact that certain prominent
Bolivians are on the way to La Paz and, secondly, Bolivian Government has
made inquiries of certain South American Republics asking advice whether
to accept the League or the good offices of the Pan American Conference.
Bolivian Government has furnished me the plan in advance upon which
they would be willing to submit the present differences between both
countries to the Pan American Conference.
Plan:
1st. The good offices of the Washington Conference would be
accepted;
2nd. The Conference would nominate a commission composed of
the representatives of the United States, Brazil, Argentina,
Uruguay, Ecuador and Cuba;
3rd. The commission of good offices would proceed as follows:
(a) To paralyze immediately the war actions in the
Chaco;
(b) Investigation of facts that have occurred so as to fix
the resultant responsibilities;

(c) Fixation of an arbitral zone in accordance with the
Gutierrez-Diaz Leon pact pointing out concrete points
of the arbitration juris;
(d) Fixation of a modus vivendi guarantee by the
Conference in order to avoid new clashes during the
arbitration;
(e) To put before The Hague or some other tribunal the
arbitration matter.
4th. This plan has not as yet received Government approval. The
Bolivian Government unofficially has requested me to ask
Department to do all possible to have Brazil, Ecuador and the
United States represented on the conciliation commission. They
state that this request is made not because Bolivia asks any
favoritism but because they desire the assurance of an unbiased
judgment of her case.
KAUFMAN

[Document 478]
The Paraguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs (Zubizarreta) to
the Chairman of the International Conference of American
States on Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg)
[Translation]
ASUNCIÓN, December 17, 1928.
I reply to the despatch with which your Excellency has honored me to
transmit to me the offer of the good offices of the Pan-American
Conference on Arbitration. At the moment when this Government was
considering your Excellency’s message and giving to it the weight of its
high significance Bolivia invades our territory with numerous troops,
attacks our vigilance posts and outposts by surprise and without previous
notice of war, and bombards with airplanes our military positions. That is
how Bolivia responds to the recommendation made to both countries that
they do not commit acts which might aggravate the situation and obstruct
the peace measures. All this, your Excellency, under the excuse that my
country owes it reparations. Paraguay hastened to offer that a trial be
opened before an impartial tribunal; it asked the facts of the conflict be
investigated as an indispensable step for rendering a decision. Then it
would have been in order to ascertain responsibilities and fix punishment.
This measure of good sense Bolivia attempts to replace with a prior
condemnation of the conduct of my country. Bolivia asks that Paraguay be
condemned before being tried and this absurdity stirs the honest conscience
of my people. Peace is well worth another effort which might be added to
those already made by my country to preserve same. This is how my
Government understands it and although the previous and present attitude
of Bolivia does not warrant any hopes it has instructed me to transmit its
acceptance of the good offices offered by the Conference declaring loyally
that it has ordered the mobilization of the army although as a simple
defensive measure because the grave circumstances created by the conduct

of Bolivia so demand it. I believe I fulfill a duty in informing that
Conference that the illustrious Executive of the Argentine nation being
deeply concerned about the situation created, offered his mediation which
my Government hastened to accept and to which Bolivia has not assented
until now.
GERONIMO ZUBIZARRETA

[Document 479]
The Bolivian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Elio) to the Chairman
of the International Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration (Kellogg)
[Translation]
LA PAZ, December 18, 1928.
[Received December 18—7 p.m.]
I have the honor of informing Your Excellency that the Government of
Bolivia accepts the good offices of the Conference on Conciliation and
Arbitration presided over by Your Excellency. In this regrettable conflict
created by the unjustified aggression of Paraguay, the Government of
Bolivia has confined itself to maintaining the attitude imposed upon it by
the inescapable need of safeguarding its dignity and sovereignty which is
adjusted to the strictest international principles and practices.
I must record the fact that Bolivia has not mobilized her Army, having
confined herself to entrusting to her military guards in El Chaco the care
and defense of the outposts threatened by Paraguay. The Conference knows
that Paraguay after attacking Bolivia and with the purpose of dissimulating
the gravity of her offense immediately had recourse to requesting the
application of the Pan American Treaty of May 3, 1923, which had not been
ratified by Bolivia, and which it was not possible for her to accept in view
of the serious crisis of public opinion provoked in my country by that act of
violence that denies the assurances of correction and of respect for
international duties on the part of Paraguay.
On entering upon the good offices Bolivia requires that the attack to the
Vanguardia outpost be investigated in the first term without involving in
this preliminary issue the basic questions of the dispute which are being
submitted to arbitration in accordance with the procedure established by the
Argentine suggestion of December, 1927, accepted by both countries.

I wish to inform Your Excellency that my Government has conveyed to the
eminent President of Argentina, Señor Irigoyen, its acquiescence to his
good offices in order to return to the procedure agreed upon in Buenos
Aires for the settlement of the dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay.
Upon accepting the good offices of the Conference on Conciliation and
Arbitration, Bolivia renders homage to the spirit of America and reiterates
her adherence to the principles of justice with which her political conduct is
inspired.
I salute [etc.]
TOMAS M. ELIO

[Document 480]
The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State
419. Minister for Foreign Affairs summoned me to the Foreign Office this
afternoon and informed me that as President of the Council of the League of
Nations he wished our Government to be thoroughly conversant of
everything that had been done up to the present by the Council of the
League in endeavoring to settle the differences between Paraguay and
Bolivia.
For this purpose he handed to me the correspondence exchanged between
the President of the Council and the Paraguayan and Bolivian Ministers.
These documents consist of the following:
[Here follows a list of 14 documents. For the texts, see League of Nations,
Documentation Concerning the Dispute Between Bolivia and Paraguay (C.
As I am forwarding the only copies I have of these documents by the pouch
which is just closing I have only been able to glance hastily at them. I
imagine however that the Department is aware of their content if not their
full text with perhaps the exception of documents numbers 13 and 14 which
are of the most immediate interest.70 Number 13 is Bolivia’s reply to M.
Briand informing him that the Bolivian Government has given orders to the
chiefs of military posts to abstain from any advance or attack and to confine
themselves to defensive measures. Document number 14 is the Paraguayan
reply and reiterates Paraguay’s acceptance of the good offices of the Pan
American Conference of Arbitration.
With these documents M. Briand handed me an unsigned memorandum
headed “League of Nations” and dated Paris, December 18, 1928, a

translation of which follows:
“If, in the very next days, the two Governments do not accept,
under one form or another, a mediation which will allow of
foregoing the regulation by specific means71 of the demand for
reparations presented by the Bolivian Government and
consequently excluding the possibility of new acts of hostility, the
Council will find it difficult to avoid holding an extraordinary
session, in fact it will be obliged to study the measures which it
will be necessary to take either because war will have begun—or
because it will be on the point of breaking out—between two
Members of the League of Nations each of which seems to
recognize no other mutual contractual obligation not to resort to
war than the one resulting from the Covenant of the League of
Nations by which they are equally bound.
The Council believes it to be true that in two directions, with high
authority, efforts are now being put forth with a view to avoiding
war and to solving by specific means existing difficulties. It is in
this sense that the Argentine Government and the Pan American
Arbitration Conference, now meeting at Washington under the
Presidency of the Secretary of State of the United States, are
acting. However, the Council has not received any official
information from either.
The Argentine Government and the Governments represented at
the Pan-American Conference are at the present moment
completely informed as to the steps taken by the Council and the
answers of the Governments of the two countries. In the interests
of peace it seems essential in the eyes of the Council to
coordinate perfectly the efforts of all those who are endeavoring
to obtain a settlement of the controversy by specific [pacific]
means.
For these reasons the President of the Council of the League of
Nations, charged by the Council with following the development
of the controversy, would consider it of the highest importance for
the preservation of peace—the supreme goal which all must

pursue—that the Government of the United States should be good
enough to inform him as to its views with respect to the best
measures to be taken by all those who are endeavoring to insure a
specific [pacific] settlement of the controversy.”
It was explained to me that the last paragraph asking for the views of “the
Government of the United States” means our Government in its capacity as
furnishing the President of the Pan-American Conference.
I was told that the Argentine Ambassador was handed an identical
communication and also that the Paraguayan and Bolivian representatives
had been respectively furnished with a copy of documents 13 and 14, supra.
[Paraphrase.] The press has not been informed regarding the unsigned
covering memorandum. The Foreign Office feared that it might be
construed as a diplomatic note; whereas it was stressed that the
communication of Briand had merely been recorded in this form because it
afforded the surest means of avoiding any crossing of wires and at the same
time elicited the fullest exchange of views in order to arrive at the end
which was sought in common by all of the mediating agencies. [End
paraphrase.]
ARMOUR
69 Telegram in two sections.
Concerning the Dispute Between Bolivia and Paraguay.
71 Phrase garbled in transmission. The League of Nations text reads: “such
mediation as will afford a likelihood of settling by pacific means.”

[Document 481]
The Chargé in France (Armour) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:02 p.m.]
summoned to the Foreign Office by Briand. He informed me that now that
the affair had been settled he could not let the occasion pass without
congratulating you on the successful outcome.
I have interpreted his message as indicating a desire that you should know
that the Council of the League considers that with the cessation of
hostilities and the acceptance by both Governments of the good offices
tendered by the Pan-American Conference such part as it has played in the
matter has come to an end.
I told Briand that I had not failed to communicate to you his previous
message which seemed to call for a reply (see the last paragraph of
memorandum quoted in my telegram No. 419), but he indicated quite
plainly that in the light of subsequent events this was no longer necessary.
I presume, however, that you will want to have some message conveyed to
him in acknowledgment of this gesture on his part.
I presume that the Embassy may give any such message to the local press
unless instructed to the contrary.
ARMOUR.

[Document 482]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Armour)
having been accepted no further observations would appear to be required.
KELLOGG

Colombia and Nicaragua72
[483] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[484] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)
Washington, March 23, 1928.
[485] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[486] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[487] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)

[488] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
[489] The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
[490] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[491] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[492] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)

[Document 483]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[Received 12:55 p.m.]
67. The following telegram was sent Havana:
Colombian Minister I called upon the President with him
yesterday and repeated what I had already told the President
about the Department’s viewing with favor a settlement along the
lines which Colombia had proposed. The President said that he
would be very glad to have the matter settled in this way and the
negotiations can be taken up immediately upon Cuadra Pasos’74
return. He pointed out, however, that it will probably be
impossible to conclude a treaty before the end of the present
session of Congress which will mean that the matter will go over
to the new administration unless a special session should be held.
EBERHARDT
73 Francis White, Assistant Secretary of State, then attending the Sixth
International Conference of American States.
74 Nicaraguan Minister for Foreign Affairs, then in Habana as chairman of
the Nicaraguan delegation to the Sixth International Conference of
American States.

[Document 484]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)
WASHINGTON, March 23, 1928.
No. 333
SIR: Referring to previous correspondence on the subject of a treaty between
Nicaragua and Colombia to settle the dispute between those countries
regarding sovereignty over the Mosquito Coast, Great and Little Corn
Islands, and the San Andres Archipelago, there is enclosed herewith a draft
of a treaty which the Colombian Minister has left with the Department,75
saying that it will be proposed by the Colombian Minister in Nicaragua to
the Nicaraguan Government to provide for a settlement of these
controversies.
You may, if consulted by the Nicaraguan Government, state that this
Government feels that the proposed treaty offers a very satisfactory and
equitable solution of this controversy and it therefore hopes that it will
receive the approval of the Nicaraguan Government.
There are likewise enclosed copies of a proposed exchange of notes
between the Colombian Minister and the Secretary of State,76 to be signed
at the same time that the treaty between Nicaragua and Colombia are [is]
signed. These notes provide for the maintenance of the status quo with
respect to Serrana and Quita Sueno Banks and Roncador Cay and provides
that the Government of Colombia will refrain from objecting to the
maintenance by the United States of the services which it has established or
may establish for aids to navigation, and the Government of the United
States will refrain from objecting to the utilization, by Colombian nationals,
of the waters appurtenant to the Islands for the purpose of fishing.
As this treaty recognizes Colombian [Nicaraguan]77 sovereignty over Great
and Little Corn Islands, which were leased to the United States for a term of

ninety-nine years by Nicaragua in the Convention signed at Washington on
August 5, 1914,78 the Department feels that it would be a distinct advantage
to have this proposed treaty concluded.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
[Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 485].
76 Vol.  II, pp. 637 ff.

[Document 485]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
MANAGUA, March 27, 1928.
[Received April 18.]
No. 634
SIR: With reference to my telegram No. 153 of today,79 I have the honor to
transmit herewith a copy and translation of the treaty signed on March 24
between the Governments of Nicaragua and Colombia. This treaty was
approved by President Diaz this morning.
The Department will note that the treaty was signed not by the Nicaraguan
Minister for Foreign Affairs but by the Subsecretary for Foreign Affairs. An
effort had been made to negotiate the treaty before the return from Havana
of Doctor Cuadra Pasos, in order that he might avoid responsibility for
relinquishing Nicaragua’s claims to the San Andres Archipelago, should his
political enemies be disposed to make use of the treaty for partisan
purposes. As it was found impossible to complete negotiations before
Doctor Cuadra Pasos’ return, it was apparently believed that he would
avoid attack if he did not sign the treaty personally, although he is of course
entirely responsible for the arrangement effected.
The Nicaraguan Government has desired that the signature of this treaty be
kept absolutely secret, because it has feared that the Liberals would use the
treaty as a political weapon if its contents should be divulged before the
presidential elections.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES C. EBERHARDT
[Enclosure—Translation]

Treaty Between Colombia and Nicaragua, Signed March 24, 192880
The Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Nicaragua, desiring to bring
to an end the territorial dispute pending between them and to strengthen the
bonds of traditional friendship which unites them, have decided to celebrate
the present treaty for this purpose, and have named their respective
plenipotentiaries, i. e.:
By His Excellency the President of the Republic of Colombia, Doctor
Manuel Esguerra, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary in
Nicaragua, and
By His Excellency the President of the Republic of Nicaragua, Doctor José
Barcenas Meneses, Subsecretary for Foreign Relations, who, after
exchanging their full powers which they found in due form, have agreed to
the following provisions:
ARTICLE I
The Republic of Colombia recognizes the sovereignty and full dominion of
the Republic of Nicaragua over the Mosquito Coast, extending from Cape
Gracias a Dios to the River San Juan, and over the islands of Mangle
Grande and Mangle Chico (Great Corn Island and Little Corn Island) in the
Atlantic Ocean; and the Republic of Nicaragua recognizes the sovereignty
and full dominion of the Republic of Colombia over the Islands San
Andres, Providencia, Santa Catalina and all the other islands, islets and
keys which form part of said San Andres Archipelago.
The Keys Roncador, Quitasueño and Serrana, the dominion over which is in
dispute between Colombia and the United States of America, are not
considered to be included in this treaty.
ARTICLE II
The present treaty, in order to become valid, shall be submitted to the
congresses of both states, and after approval by these the exchange of
ratifications shall take place in Managua or Bogotá within the shortest
possible time.

In witness whereof, we, the respective plenipotentiaries, have signed and
affixed our seals.
Done in duplicate in Managua the 24th of March, 1928.
[SEAL] MANUEL ESGUERRA
[SEAL] J. BARCENAS MENESES
79 Not printed.

[Document 486]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:42 p.m.]
signature of the treaty with Colombia and are beginning to attack the
administration for its action. The President, therefore, desires to have a
public statement about the treaty made now. He would be very glad if the
Department would inform the press in Washington that this boundary
dispute has been settled through the good offices of the United States and as
a result of suggestions made by the Department to the Nicaraguan
Government. It would seem only fair to comply with his request as such
action will save him, to some extent, from the bitter political attacks to
which he will be subjected to [sic] for acceding to the Department’s
suggestion that Colombia’s proposal be accepted. Furthermore, it is
probable that the treaty will never be ratified by Nicaragua if it is permitted
to become a party issue now.
The Legation has discussed this matter informally with Moncada who has
promised to use his influence to moderate the criticism of the Liberal press.
EBERHARDT

[Document 487]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)
Managua? If so the issuance of a statement by the Department would be
greatly facilitated. It will be difficult for the Department to make a
statement on this subject to the press without giving the general terms of the
treaty.
KELLOGG

[Document 488]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
55. Has text of treaty between Colombia and Nicaragua of March 24 last
been made public in Colombia?
KELLOGG

[Document 489]
The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
made public but the President has publicly stated the general provisions of
the treaty in his recent annual message to Congress. To date there has been
no press comment.
PILES

[Document 490]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:54 p.m.]
Colombian treaty on September 22 and he would very much appreciate it if
the Department could at the same time make a public announcement
regarding the negotiations which led up to its signature. Please inform me
what action will be taken.
EBERHARDT

[Document 491]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:25 p.m.]
stating that the United States desired an adjustment of the San Andres
question because we wished to acquire the island[s] from Colombia and it is
even being intimated that a portion of the purchase price will be paid
secretly to Conservative officials here, I recommend that I be authorized not
only to furnish the press with a copy of the Department’s statement about
the negotiations but also to state orally at the same time that the United
States has no intention of acquiring the islands for itself.
EBERHARDT

[Document 492]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)
the Secretary said:
“The Department of State was consulted by both parties to the
treaty and expressed the opinion to both that the proposed treaty
appeared to offer a very satisfactory and equitable solution of this
controversy and the Department therefore hoped that the treaty
would receive the approval of the respective Governments.”
Copies of the treaty and the notes exchanged with the Colombian Minister
on April 10 were given to the correspondents following the conference. You
may give out the same statement in Managua if you desire to do so, and you
are authorized to say orally in addition that the United States has no
intention of acquiring the islands for itself.
KELLOGG

Dominican Republic and Haiti81
[493] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[494] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[495] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[496] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State

[497] The Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Frost) to the Secretary of
State
[498] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
(Frost)
[499] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State

[Document 493]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTO DOMINGO, January 14, 1928—noon.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]
8. Informal conversations looking to the settlement of the boundary
question have been instituted here. It now seems likely that an exchange of
notes will be effected soon agreeing to settle the question on the basis of the
status quo line, with minor adjustments involving the mutual cession of
territory to be worked out after the exchange of notes. The subsequent steps
will involve agreement as to territory to be ceded, the amendment of article
3 of the Constitution of the Dominican Republic, and the formal ratification
of the final agreement. Both sides are optimistic.
YOUNG

[Document 494]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, February 20, 1928.
[Received February 28.]
No. 790
have the honor to forward herewith translations of the notes exchanged by
Minister of Foreign Affairs Sanchez and the Haitian Minister expressing the
desire of both Governments to undertake a settlement of the boundary
question. The notes are dated January 20 and 21, respectively, but they were
in fact exchanged on February 13th.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
[Enclosure 1—Translation]
The Dommican Minister for Foreign Affairs (Sanchez) to the Haitian Minister in the Dominican Republic (Dejean)
[SANTO DOMINGO,] January 20, 1928.
MR. MINISTER: The Government of the Dominican Republic, convinced of the
necessity, under which the Haitian people and the Dominican people are, of
harmonizing their conflicting interests and of comprehending how a
common destiny holds them linked in the same future of progress and of
improvement, has, obedient to the feeling of friendship and of sincere
sympathy which presides over the relations of our two Governments,
deemed it opportune to invite Your Excellency’s Government to recognize,
as my Government recognizes, the expedience of reaching a definitive
accord, frank and open, which shall put a happy end to the difficulties

which, in connection with the pending frontier question, have frequently
been present in the relations of these peoples with evident diminution of
their tranquility and welfare.
In making this declaration, the Dominican Government entertains the hope
that neither of the parties will spare its efforts to arrive at a final
understanding which will permit definitively resolving the pending frontier
question between both countries, in order that thus, with old motives of
suspicion and distrust removed from their relations, they may unite with
firmness their necessities and their aspirations on the road of civilization.
The Dominican Government is certain that no other moment will be more
propitious than is this for accomplishing its purpose of rapprochement
between the two States, now that the evidences of cordiality and sympathy
which both peoples have just offered on the occasion of the visits of their
respective Chiefs of State, demonstrate with certainty that the differences
which separated them in the past were the consequence of the little
acquaintance which the two nations had of each other.
This disposition, Mr. Minister, is indicative of the sincere desire, in which
my Government persists, of furnishing a solution of the frontier difference
and of arriving, in accordance with the provisions of our Public Law,
contained in Article 3 of the Constitution of the State, at a conclusion of the
difficulties which, in connection with that conflict, have separated our two
peoples. The Dominican Government through me declares to the Haitian
Government that it will make every effort it can to facilitate the
understanding which it mentions, for the felicity of these peoples called, for
many reasons, to live a similar future and to face a similar destiny.
I approve the opportunity [etc.]
RAFAEL AUGUSTO SANCHEZ
[Enclosure 2—Translation]
The Haitian Minister in the Dominican Republic (Dejean) to the Dominican Minister for Foreign Affairs (Sanchez)
[SANTO DOMINGO,] January 21, 1928.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have transmitted to my Government the important
communication which Your Excellency addressed to me [on the 20th of
January instant], relative to the question of the frontiers, and I have received
instructions to transmit to you the following:
The Government of Haiti, equally convinced of the necessity, more
imperious than ever, of consolidating, to perpetuate them through time, the
relations of friendship and of good neighborhood which exist between the
two countries, is happy to affirm again its conviction, in conformity with
that of the Dominican Government, that it is expedient to put an end so
soon as possible to the existing difficulties on the subject of the frontiers.
It believes that the present time is particularly favorable to the realization of
this accord, in view of the excellent disposition which animates the two
Governments and which has just been so brilliantly manifested by the visits
of the two Chiefs of State, a disposition which harmonizes completely with
the sentiments of mutual sympathy so spontaneously expressed by the two
peoples in the course of these visits.
The Haitian Government in consequence declares itself ready to conclude,
by direct negotiations with the Dominican Government and without
recourse to arbitration, a treaty which definitely assures the drawing of the
frontier on the basis of the possessions which the two States at present
occupy and by means of reciprocal sacrifices in conformity with equity and
with their common interest.
The Haitian Government has the firm hope that the Dominican Government
will spare no effort with a view to obtaining this frank, open solution, more
in conformity with the permanent interest of the two nations.
LÉON DEJEAN
82 Not printed; it informed the Department that an exchange of notes had
been effected.

[Document 495]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, March 9, 1928.
[Received March 20.]
No. 811
the honor to report that an informal agreement has been reached between
the Haitian Minister and the special representative of the Dominican
Government, Mr. Troncoso de la Concha, as to the line which should serve
as the boundaries between the following points:—In the North, from the
outlet of the river Massacre to Banica, and in the South, from the outlet of
the river Pedernales to Jimani.
NORTHERN SECTOR
The line agreed upon starts from the outlet of the Massacre river and
follows the 1912 line (American line) to the junction point of the Massacre
and Capotille rivers, near Acul Parisien, thence along the Capotille river to
Lamine, thence in a southerly direction to Bois Pins, thence from Bois Pins
to La Miel—La Guardia Vieja—Banica.
SOUTHERN SECTOR
From the outlet of the Pedernales river to Cabeza del Agua, thence to
Boisdon—Bois Tombe—La Guasuma—Minguet—Jimani.
The remaining section of the line (Jimani to Banica) will probably present
no serious difficulties. In the somewhat lengthy conferences which I have
had with Minister of Foreign Affairs Sanchez and with the Haitian Minister,

both were very optimistic as to the possibility of reaching a final and
complete agreement.
While the conversations between the Haitian Minister and Mr. Troncoso de
la Concha are from a technical standpoint to be regarded as informal, both
parties have of course frequently consulted their respective Governments,
and the agreement reported above has the approval of the Chief Executives
of the two countries.
The Legation is in close touch with the matter, and in a quiet and discreet
manner is doing everything possible and appropriate to assist in the
effecting of a final settlement of this long-standing and troublesome
question. The Department will be promptly apprised, by cable and despatch,
of all further developments.
inadvertence reference was made to Lake Enriquillo instead of Lake
Saumatre.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
83 Not printed.
83 Not printed.

[Document 496]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, May 26, 1928.
[Received June 5.]
No. 908
SIR: Supplementing previous reports in regard to the informal negotiations
now in progress concerning the Haitian-Dominican boundary question, I
have the honor to submit the following brief report respecting the present
status of the negotiations.
Beginning at the North, an informal agreement has been reached with
respect to the line from the mouth of the Dajabón river down to Toussaint, a
small town about fifteen miles northeast of Lake del Fondo. Under the
agreement the Dominican Government will receive from Haiti sufficient
territory so that the road which now connects Banica and Restauración will
lie entirely within Dominican territory.
As compensation for the territory referred to above, the Dominican
Government has agreed to give Haiti all of Lake del Fondo, through which
the status quo line now runs, and sufficient territory between Tierra Nueva
and the edge of the lake so that the Haitians may travel around the lake, on
the east and northern sides, without having to cross over into Dominican
territory.
An agreement in principle has been reached with respect to the major
portion of the line between Jimani and the mouth of the Pedernales river.
One troublesome question, however, remains to be adjusted. A Haitian road
leading north from the port of Anses-á-Pitre crosses the Pedernales river
some eleven times near Banane. The Haitian Government is asking for the
cession to it of a small strip of land, about four kilometers in length and one

kilometer in width, at this point in order that this road may lie entirely
within Haitian territory. The Dominican Government is reluctant to accede
to this request and desires that the river shall serve as the boundary. As a
compromise, the Dominican Government has informally suggested that that
portion of the road which would traverse Dominican territory be
internationalized. This suggestion appears to be unacceptable to the Haitian
Minister.
Minister of Foreign Affairs Sanchez, with whom I informally conferred at
length yesterday, informs me that he is entirely willing personally to accede
to the Haitian request for the cession of the small strip of territory involved.
He is arranging for a reconsideration of the matter by the Dominican
commission and is hopeful that the matter can be adjusted. With the
settlement of this remaining point an informal agreement will again have
been reached with regard to the entire boundary.
The present session of Congress terminates tomorrow, but it is the intention
of President Vasquez to convene the Congress in special session, so soon as
an agreement shall have been reached, for the purpose of enacting the
necessary legislation preparatory to the convoking of a constituent assembly
for the purpose of amending Article 3 of the Constitution.
The Department will be kept promptly and fully informed of all
developments.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG

[Document 497]
The Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Frost) to the Secretary
of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:55 p.m.]
45. Informal agreement on the Haitian boundary question was signed today.
FROST

[Document 498]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
(Frost)
express to the President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs personally my
hearty congratulations on this peaceful settlement of the long-standing
dispute, an act which redounds greatly to the credit of both countries and
sets a splendid example for others to follow.85
KELLOGG
85 An identical message to be communicated to the respective Haitian
officials was sent to the Legation in Haiti as telegram No. 41 of the same
date (not printed).

[Document 499]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, November 13, 1928.
[Received November 24.]
No. 1091
SIR: Supplementing the Legation’s despatch No. 1090, of November 10,
1928,86 I have the honor to forward for the Department’s confidential
information a translation of the projected Dominican-Haitian boundary
treaty.87 The text of the treaty has been informally agreed upon, but it has
not yet been made public.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
86 Not printed.
87 Not printed. For text of the treaty as signed at Santo Domingo, Jan. 21,
1929, see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. CV, p. 193. Ratifications
were exchanged at Santo Domingo, Apr. 29, 1929.

Guatemala and Honduras88
ff.
[500] The Guatemalan Legation to the Department of State
Washington , February 10, 1928.
[501] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[502] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[503] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[504] The Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Coello) to the
Secretary of State

[505] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[506] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[507] The Secretary of State to the Honduran Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs (Coello)
Washington, February 16, 1928.
[508] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[509] The Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Coello) to the
Secretary of State

[510] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[511] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[512] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[513] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Morgan) of a Conversation With the Guatemalan Minister
(Recinos), March 15, 1928
March 15, 1928
[514] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[515] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)

[516] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[517] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[518] The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
Washington, March 20, 1928.
[519] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[520] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[521] The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)

[522] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[523] The Honduran Minister for Foreign Affairs (Davila) to the
Secretary of State
[524] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[525] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[526] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[527] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State

[528] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[529] The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
[530] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[531] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala
(Geissler)
[532] The Acting Secretary of State to the Representative of the United
States on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)

[533] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[534] The Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission to the
Secretary of State
[535] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran, Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[536] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
[537] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
[538] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State

[539] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
[540] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[541] The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
[542] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[543] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State

[544] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[545] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[546] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[547] The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
[548] The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[549] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)

[550] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[551] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[552] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[553] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[554] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[555] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State

[556] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[557] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[558] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[559] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[560] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[561] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State

[562] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
Washington, June 15, 1928—noon.
[563] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[564] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[565] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[566] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[567] The Minister in Duatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State

[568] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[569] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[570] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[571] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[572] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
Washington, July 27, 1928—noon.
[573] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)

[574] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[575] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[576] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[577] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[578] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[579] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)

[580] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[581] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[582] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[583] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[584] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[585] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras
(Summerlin)

Washington, August 30, 1928] p.m,

[Document 500]
The Guatemalan Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
With a view to reaching an agreement relative to the existing boundary
dispute between the two Republics, the Government of Guatemala, early in
the year 1927, invited the Government of Honduras to discuss with it an
amicable settlement of this question.
The Government of Honduras apparently accepted the invitation to a
friendly discussion of the matter, and it was understood as a basis for a
satisfactory settlement, that both Governments should agree to refrain from
any kind of activity in the territory claimed by both.
However, during the last few months of 1927, the Government of
Honduras, contrary to its declarations of friendship and to its announced
intention of respecting the status quo in the disputed territory, permitted its
military authorities to make repeated incursions into Guatemalan territory,
interfering with the industry of the inhabitants and spreading disorder and
alarm throughout the region.
At this time there is under construction a railway line between two places
known respectively as Cacao and Chachagualillo, in Guatemalan territory,
on the right bank of the Motagua River, which the Government of
Guatemala considers contrary to the declarations of friendship of the high
authorities of Honduras.
The Government of “Guatemala, desirous of maintaining harmonious
relations with the neighboring Republic of Honduras and of continuing the
policy of conciliation and of prudence which it has always employed in its
relations with the latter and with other Central American countries, has to
date contented itself with reiterating protests against such predatory acts;
but succeeded thereby only in securing a temporary suspension of the

armed invasions, which have promptly been renewed against its territory
without consideration of the rights of Guatemala.
The Government of Guatemala has already demanded that the Government
of Honduras suspend these invasions and stop the construction of the above
mentioned railway; but if, as the previous conduct of the latter Government
leads it to fear, these demands are not acceded to, the Government of
Guatemala will be under the obligation of making its rights respected by
such means as are necessary, in order to preserve the sacred interests of the
Nation, and responsibility will rest upon the Government of Honduras for
the consequences of its unjustifiable acts.
The Minister of Guatemala in Washington, in accordance with instructions
from his Government, has the honor to place the above facts before the
Department of State of the United States, for its consideration.
WASHINGTON , February 10, 1928.

[Document 501]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
13. The Guatemalan Minister informs the Department that his Government
is again protesting to the Government of Honduras against violations of the
status quo in the disputed territory, and particularly against the construction
of a railway line between Cacao and Chachagualillo.
Please investigate and report, ascertaining especially whether any railway
construction is being carried on in the disputed territory.
KELLOGG

[Document 502]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:53 p.m.]
states that the Cuyamel Fruit Company has constructed beyond Cacao and
without authority 400 meters of tram line for transportation of fruit to the
railway head and that despite the fact that his Government considers this as
Honduranean territory and not in dispute, on the 11th instant he called
Turnbull, senior official of Cuyamel Company in Honduras, to Tegucigalpa
by plane and personally gave peremptory orders for the suspension of all
construction work in that region. Turnbull returned to the north coast by
plane yesterday morning. Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 503]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:11 p.m.]
Affairs has just shown me copies of telegrams from Honduranean
authorities at Omoa and Cortes reporting that a Guatemalan force of 1 chief
and 50 men has invaded Honduranean territory at Chachagualilla, captured
the chief of the small guard there, and are now occupying that outpost.
Coello stated that his Government has protested vigorously against this
invasion and outrage and has requested immediate restoration of
Honduranean force at Chachagualilla and withdrawal of Guatemalan force.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 504]
The Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Coello) to
the Secretary of State
[Translation]
TEGUCIGALPA, February 14, 1928.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
Guatemalan military forces have unexpectedly invaded Honduran territory
and taken prisoner the commander of the Chachahualia post that was
established as far back as 1917 and put in its place a Guatemalan guard. In
answer to a protest of Honduran Government Guatemala alleges works
started by the Cuyamel Fruit Company but the Honduran Government
forbade in good time the work that had been started without authority and
gave assurances to Guatemala that it would not be resumed. So my
Government regards as unwarranted and unnecessary the act of violence of
the Government of Guatemala which it has asked immediately to withdraw
the Chachahualia forces. As the American Government has been acting as
mediator between the two countries in the boundary dispute and as the
present attitude of Guatemala may leave room for a serious encroachment
on that peace in which your government has taken so noble an interest, I
venture to urge the influence and mediation of the Department towards
restoring the status quo ante between Honduras and Guatemala by vacating
the invaded places and withdrawing the forces that menace the border.
Honduras would be glad later to accept a well defined neutral line to be
surveyed and fixed by the American Government pending the final
settlement of the boundary dispute. The Honduran Government will be very
thankful if the American Government will take action that will be decisive
to avert graver consequences. I beg Your Excellency to accept my high
consideration.
AUGUSTO C. COELLO

[Document 505]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
Affairs has informed me that he has received a telegram dated yesterday
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala stating that orders have
been given to release the commander of Chachahualia and to return the
arms taken over at that place and adding “that the Government of
Guatemala is disposed to order the evacuation of Chachahualia provided the
Government of Honduras will reciprocate by agreeing not to reoccupy it
and to respect the status quo in all the disputed zone until some amicable
agreement as to what is the boundary line between the two countries shall
have been reached.”
I understand that the proposal regarding the non-reoccupation of
Chachahualia is not acceptable to Honduras.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs has furnished me with a copy of a
telegram which he said has been forwarded to you directly.89 Repeated to
Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN
89 Supra.

[Document 506]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, February 15, 1928—noon.
[Received 4:10 p.m.]
morning that after the withdrawal of the Guatemalan forces from
Chachahualia he would send Coello, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
investigate the alleged railway construction work reported to have been
done by the Cuyamel Company and asked if Major Cruse90 might
accompany Coello. He added that the Guatemalan Minister here has been
invited to accompany him. Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN
90 Maj. Frederick T. Cruse, military attaché.

[Document 507]
The Secretary of State to the Honduran Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs (Coello)
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1928.
I have received Your Excellency’s telegram of February 14 concerning
conditions in the territory which is in dispute between Honduras and
Guatemala. Further information which I have received leads me to hope
that the difficulties which you describe are now in a way to be satisfactorily
adjusted. It is my understanding that the railway construction which gave
ground for protests by the Government of Guatemala has been abandoned
and that the Honduran official who is said to have been arrested at
Chachahualia has been released.
It is my opinion, and one which I feel sure that Your Excellency shares, that
the status quo in the disputed territory should be maintained, and that
neither of the disputants should alter the existing situation in any way
pending a final settlement of the boundary question. This I believe is also
the opinion of the Government of Guatemala. The chief difficulty, however,
and the cause for such incidents as appear to have occurred during the past
few days, would seem to arise from the lack of a definite understanding as
to the exact nature of the status quo and the extent of the territory in
dispute. I have noted Your Excellency’s statement that Honduras would be
glad to accept a well defined neutral line pending the final settlement of the
boundary dispute. You may be sure that the Department of State will be
glad to lend its good offices in any way which may be acceptable to both
parties to the dispute in an effort to bring about a satisfactory arrangement.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 508]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras
(Summerlin)91
15. The Honduran Legation has requested the Department’s opinion of an
arrangement which it is stated the Government of Honduras contemplates
proposing to Guatemala that
1. An inspection of the disputed territory be made to determine
for the time being a better defined neutral line;
2. An agreement to proceed without delay to a final settlement of
the boundary dispute, including if possible the definition of the
final boundary line;
3. An obligation on the part of both Governments to submit the
matter to the United States for arbitration if no agreement reached
under 2.
The Department stated that it would be glad to see any arrangement by
which a friendly settlement of the dispute might be reached and although it
would be glad to assist in any friendly way towards such a settlement, it had
no suggestions to make regarding the proposed Honduran offer.
KELLOGG
91 Repeated to the Minister in Guatemala as No. 11.

[Document 509]
The Honduran Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Coello) to
the Secretary of State
[Translation]
TEGUCIGALPA [, undated],
The Government and people of Honduras have always appreciated with an
intense feeling of gratitude the good will and the friendly spirit in which for
some years past the Government of the United States has interceded to
bring about a satisfactory and pacific settlement of the boundary dispute
with Guatemala. Honduras has endeavored to respond to those very lofty
and generous purposes with its most deferent attitude. Since 1917 when
mediation began my Government never cast off any means whatsoever of
achieving a final settlement of the matter and accepted from the very
beginning of the mediation arbitration by His Excellency the President of
the United States but, unfortunately, without getting at that time a concrete
answer from Guatemala about its accepting the arbitration. Guatemala later
accepted that arrangement in the course of the Central American
Conferences at Washington in 1923, according to the official declaration of
Secretary of State Hughes which is recorded in the journal of the Second
Plenary Session of 1923 which I deposited in your Department.92
Notwithstanding that agreement and the various steps taken by Honduras to
secure the signing of the convention of arbitration, Guatemala constantly
refused on some pretext or other to redeem the word it had pledged and
finally went so far as to deny its promise. In the meanwhile Guatemala on
more than one occasion took advantage of the anomalous situation of our
country to take gradual possession of our territory and invaded its integrity
now by clandestine works in the zone of the status quo that had been agreed
to and then by granting concessions like that which was given to the United
Fruit Company on November 7, 1924, to foreign companies in territory that
is clearly Honduran, in violation of our sovereignty. The arbitrary

instructions of Guatemala over Honduran territory culminated in the recent
attack on the Chachahualia guard house which I had occasion to bring to
Your Excellency’s knowledge in my previous radiogram of the 14th instant.
The Chachahualia guard house stands on territory that is plainly Honduran
outside of the status quo of which the American Government had official
knowledge through the note of November 15, 1917 from this Department to
the Legation of the United States at this capital.93 Notwithstanding the
gravity of the offence perpetrated on the territorial sovereignty of Honduras
by that last outrage my Government has, in its desire to avoid a conflict
fraught with disastrous consequences to the peace of Central America,
carried its prudence to an extreme and in that spirit has again suggested to
Guatemala the imperative necessity of arriving at the earliest possible final
conclusion of the boundary dispute to which end it proposed that the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Guatemala to that Republic and
a representative of the American government conduct a personal inspection
to the end of stipulating a new provisional line which will set up a clearer
more definite status quo intended to ward off further difficulties, and
immediately take up subsequent negotiations for the final settlement of the
matter either by direct agreement on a boundary line under the mediation of
Your Excellency’s enlightened government or by bringing into play the
arbitration that had been agreed on and previously accepted by Guatemala.
Guatemala appears on new pretexts again indefinitely to defer the question
so that the difficulties would stand and at the risk of giving birth to some
other conflict with worse consequences. On those antecedents and with an
appeal to the good friendship of the Government of the United States I take
the liberty of again beseeching Your Excellency’s potent mediation to the
end that you kindly interpose your good offices and influence so that the
dispute may this time be brought to a final end. Expressing in advance my
due thanks to Your Excellency for the great benefit bestowed on my country
by your timely mediation, it affords me pleasure to renew to you the
sentiment of my best and most distinguished esteem.
AUGUSTO C. COELLO
92 See Conference on Central American Affairs, Washington, December 4,
p. 56.

[Document 510]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[Paraphrase]
just been received by the Department from the Honduran Foreign
Minister95 with reference to the Honduran proposal described in
Department’s telegram under reference. The telegram states that Guatemala
appears on new pretexts again indefinitely to defer the question so that the
difficulties would stand and at the risk of giving birth to some other conflict
with worse consequences. In the telegram the good offices of the United
States are requested in order that the dispute may finally be settled.
Please discuss informally and discreetly with the appropriate authorities the
present differences between Guatemala and Honduras, and while not
offering at this time formal mediation or good offices, try to ascertain why
no reply has been made as yet to the Honduran proposal, and what reply the
Government of Guatemala intends to make. You may add that it is the
sincere desire of the Department that the Government of Guatemala will
accept unqualifiedly the proposal for an inspection of the disputed territory
and an agreement to proceed without delay to a final settlement of the
boundary dispute.
KELLOGG
95 Supra.

[Document 511]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[Paraphrase]
informed by the Honduran Chargé that the Government of Guatemala has
not yet replied to the proposal of Honduras referred to in Department’s
concerned, and fears that the delay may result in further acts of aggression
by Guatemala in the territory in dispute.
The Department has not yet been informed by the Guatemalan Minister that
his Government would accept mediation. Until I have further information
regarding the attitude of Guatemala and the willingness of that Government
sincerely to seek an immediate settlement of the boundary dispute through
negotiation, I cannot reply to the telegram from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Honduras.
Report present situation by telegraph.
KELLOGG
96 Not printed.

[Document 512]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
conferred with the President and the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The President instructed the latter to send the following telegram to the
Minister of Guatemala in Washington:
“The instructions of the President have already been sent by mail. Pending
receipt of the same, inform the Secretary of State that Guatemala desires
mediation and is agreeable to sending Commission to inspect territory and
fix provisional line. It is desired that Commission be composed of both
countries and representation United States. This Government is disposed to
discuss final settlement as soon [as] provisional line is established.”
The President told me that Honduras should dismiss all apprehension of
further aggressive steps since Guatemala meant only to stop encroachments.
He also said that Guatemala will name its representative on the Commission
as soon as informed that details concerning its composition have been
agreed upon in Washington and that his Government desires a speedy
adjustment of the matter.
With despatch 1833, mailed March 7,97 I forwarded a copy furnished me by
the President of a map he sent to Recinos,98 according to which Guatemala
will contend for a line following Merendon to Ildef onso, thence to a point
east of Motagua.
Repeated to the Legation in Honduras.

Gaissirp
= Not printed,

™ Adrian Recinos, Guatemalan Minister at Washinotar

[Document 513]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Morgan) of a Conversation With the Guatemalan
Minister (Recinos), March 15, 1928
March 15, 1928
The Minister told me that he was authorized by his Government to say that
Guatemala was very anxious to settle the question of the boundary dispute
between Guatemala and Honduras and felt that this could be done only
through the assistance of the United States. The Guatemalan Government
was prepared to accept the invitation of the Government of Honduras to
appoint a Commission to inspect the disputed territory and endeavor to fix a
provisional line defining the status quo. This Commission to be presided
over by an American, designated by the Secretary of State.
I replied that this was very gratifying to the Department and that I sincerely
hoped something could be accomplished towards settling this long-pending
dispute. That if the Department could assist in any way it would be very
glad to have the opportunity to do so.
I told the Minister that the Secretary was very anxious to answer the
telegram which he had received from the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Honduras on February 28 (which was read to the Guatemalan
Minister when he called the following day) but that the Secretary had been
unable to answer this telegram until he had some definite information as to
the attitude of the Guatemalan Government, so that he would know what
the two Governments were desirous of having him do towards helping
them. That is, he did not want to reply to Dr. Coello by saying what had
already been said—that the Department would be glad to do anything which
would be acceptable to both Governments. Dr. Recinos said he fully
understood that and for that reason he was glad that he was now able to
explain the views of his Government.

In discussing the composition of the proposed Commission I asked the
Minister whether in his opinion it would not be a good idea to take this
matter up in accordance with the Central American Convention of 1923,
establishing Commissions of Inquiry.99 I pointed out that this Convention
was drawn up to deal with just such questions as that which now exists
between Honduras and Guatemala. Guatemala had ratified the Convention.
The United States had prepared a list of American citizens who could serve
on such a Commission. It would, in my opinion, greatly simplify the
procedure if Guatemala and Honduras, having agreed to the formation of a
Commission, would act in accordance with this Convention, which laid
down specific rules of procedure. Furthermore, I felt sure that the Minister
agreed with me that as this Convention was most beneficial to the Central
American nations it would be an excellent thing to have it invoked in this
case and thus maintained and strengthened. If it were ignored, and such an
important question as this were settled by a Commission similar in form to
that provided by the Convention, and yet without any reference to the
Convention, this would serve to some extent to discredit the Convention
and make it less useful in future.
The Minister entirely agreed with me on this point and said he thought it a
most happy suggestion. He said he would study the Convention again and
communicate at once with his Government and find out whether it approved
of the suggestion, and let me know. I said that we would take no further
action or make any further suggestions until we had heard from him again.
In conclusion I emphasized the fact that I was making this purely as a
personal suggestion for his consideration and was not expressing the views
of the Department of State.
MORGAN
American Affairs, p. 392.

[Document 514]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:23 p.m.]
40. President Paz has requested me to confirm the willingness of his
Government towards sending a Commission of Inspection to the
Guatemalan border. He suggested that the Commission might be composed
of the Subsecretaries of Foreign Affairs of both countries, an engineer from
each one, and a representative of the mediator government (Major Cruse);
finally he suggested that the Commission might be increased by adding the
Minister of Honduras to Guatemala and the Minister of Guatemala to
Honduras. He stated that his idea is that this Mixed Commission should
mark the provisional line of the status quo while “we proceed to negotiate
the final settlement.”
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 515]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
23. Honduras and Guatemala both having agreed to send a commission to
inspect the border and to fix a provisional line, this Government feels that
the best interests of both Governments would be served by promptly
appointing such a commission and undertaking the work of fixing a
provisional line as soon as possible to avoid any further incidents while the
two Governments actively undertake the permanent adjustment of the
boundary difficulty. This Government will appoint a representative to
accompany the commissioners appointed by Honduras and Guatemala and
will advise his name as soon as possible. Please take up with the
Government to which you are accredited the question of appointing
promptly its commissioners and ask for its suggestion as to where the
commission should first meet to undertake this work. A similar telegram is
being sent to Guatemala.1
KELLOGG
1 Sent as telegram No. 23.

[Document 516]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:54 p.m.]
Commission has been designated by the Government of Honduras: Augusto
C. Coello, Subsecretary of Foreign Affairs; Silverio Lainez, Minister of
Honduras in Guatemala; and Engineer Medardo Zuniga; and suggests that
the Commission meet first at Cuyamel because of its central location or any
other place with equal facilities on the frontier.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 517]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
President is out of town but is expected to return tonight.
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs says that Carlos Salazar, delegate
to the recent Pan American Conference,3 and two engineers will be
appointed Commissioners but that no decision has been reached as to when
and where it is desirable for the Commission to meet. I shall talk with the
President tomorrow.
Repeated to Tegucigalpa.
GEISSLER

[Document 518]
The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)4
WASHINGTON, March 20, 1928.
No. 1
are hereby informed that you have been appointed as the American member
of the Commission to investigate the border between Guatemala and
Honduras and to endeavor to fix a provisional frontier line. It is understood
that the Governments of Guatemala and Honduras will be represented on
this Commission by special representatives, assisted by technical experts.
The Department sincerely hopes that the labors of the Commission may
result in putting an end to the friction which has existed of recent years
between Guatemala and Honduras growing out of the existence of territory
in dispute between these two nations and by misunderstanding as to the
rights and obligations of both nations in this disputed territory. It will be the
work of the Commission of which you are a member to investigate
conditions in the disputed territory and to suggest means for preventing
further difficulties and frontier disputes and incidents of the kind which
have recently strained the relations between the two Governments.
It will also be the duty of the Commission to endeavor to fix upon a
provisional line which shall be considered as the boundary between
Guatemala and Honduras pending a final settlement of the boundary
problem and agreement upon a permanent frontier. You will understand that
the Commission is not empowered to definitely determine either a
provisional or a permanent frontier, but it is hoped that the Commission can
agree upon a provisional line which will be acceptable to both
Governments. If you should find it impossible to bring your colleagues on
the Commission into agreement on any one line you should devote your

efforts to ascertaining the maximum concessions which each will make to
the other, in order that a disputed region of minimum extent may be agreed
upon in which both parties will agree to maintain the status quo. The rights
and obligations of both parties within this disputed region should, if
possible, be definitely determined and agreed upon. It is also hoped that the
Commission will be able to make some constructive suggestions looking
toward a definite settlement of the boundary question and the establishment
of a permanent frontier.
The Department transmits herewith for your confidential information copies
1927, prepared in the Department, which give a succinct history of the
boundary dispute and the mediation of the State Department up to the
present time.6
The Department is also transmitting under separate cover the “Report on the
Economic Survey in parts of Guatemala and Honduras, conducted in May
and June, 1919, under the supervision of the American Geographical
Society for the Department of State”, together with the maps which
accompanied this report,7 and the “Mediation of the Honduran-Guatemalan
Boundary Question Held Under the Good Offices of the Department of
considered as confidential and are for the use of the entire Commission.
The Department also encloses for your strictly confidential information a
biographical sketch of Doctor Salazar,9 who, it is understood, will be the
Guatemalan representative on the Mixed Commission. All the documents
accompanying this instruction should be returned to the Department of
State when they have served their present purpose.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
4 Roy T. Davis, American Minister in Costa Rica.
5 Not printed.
6 Not printed.

9 Not printed.

[Document 519]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
possible whether Cuyamel is agreeable to the Guatemalan Government as
the place of meeting and the date on which it is suggested the first meeting
take place.
You may inform the Honduran Government that the Department of State
has taken pleasure in naming the Honorable Roy T. Davis, American
Minister to Costa Rica, as its representative on the Commission. Mr. Davis
will be accompanied by a private secretary, and will meet with the
Commission at the time and place agreed upon.
KELLOGG

[Document 520]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
Please inform the Guatemalan Foreign Office that the Government of
Honduras has appointed Augusto C. Coello, Sub-Secretary of Foreign
Affairs; Silverio Lainez, Minister of Honduras in Guatemala, and Engineer
Medardo Zuniga as its representatives on the Commission, and suggests
that the Commission first meet at Cuyamel. Please inform the Department
as soon as possible whether Cuyamel is acceptable to the Guatemalan
Government as a place of meeting, and the date on which it is suggested
that the Commission shall first meet.
Also inform the Guatemalan Government that the Department of State has
taken pleasure in naming the Honorable Roy T. Davis, American Minister
to Costa Rica, as its representative on the Commission. Mr. Davis will be
accompanied by a private secretary, and will meet with the Commission at
the time and place agreed upon.
KELLOGG

[Document 521]
The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
7. The Department has notified the Governments of Guatemala and
Honduras that you have been named as the American representative on the
Mixed Commission, the time and place of the first meeting will be
communicated to you later. You should be prepared to leave on short notice.
You are authorized to take with you one private secretary, whom you may
select, and you may draw on the Department for the necessary
transportation and subsistence expenses for yourself and private secretary,
but not at a fixed rate per diem, rendering a separate account. The
Department doubts the necessity of your being accompanied by a civil
engineer, but if it should be advisable at a later date to send an American
engineer to join the Commission the Department will give further
consideration to the question.
KELLOGG

[Document 522]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:50 p.m.]
24. The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs tells me that Guatemala has
named the following Boundary Commissioners: Carlos Salazar, Fernando
Cruz, Colonel Lisandro Sandoval and General Juan B. Padilla, the last two
being engineers; and that Mr. Recinos was instructed to suggest as first
meeting place Puerto Barrios or Puerto Cortes or any other point with
suitable facilities, and that the Commissioners are ready to proceed.
Repeated to Honduras.
GEISSLER

[Document 523]
The Honduran Minister for Foreign Affairs (Davila) to the
Secretary of State
[Translation]
TEGUCIGALPA, March 20, 1928.
[Received 10:45 p.m.]
The Government of Honduras is highly thankful for the efficacious good
offices of the American Government and Your Excellency in particular
connection with the settlement of the boundary dispute pending between
Honduras and Guatemala. My Government has already appointed for its
part Messrs. Augusto C. Coello, under secretary of Foreign Relations,
Silverio Lainez, Minister of Honduras to Guatemala, and Engineer Don
Medardo Zuniga to be members of the commission that is to try to fix a
provisional line so as to prevent further incidents while progress is made
toward a final settlement of the question, the potent mediation of the
American Government always being counted on to bring it about. My
Government also waits for the appointment of the representative of Your
Excellency’s Government as offered for the better success of the
transaction. The Government’s intention is that the commission shall agree
upon a provisional line and if unable to agree, that the line shall be
indicated by the representative or representatives of the mediator
government while negotiations for the final settlement proceed
immediately.
I renew [etc.]
F. DAVILA

[Document 524]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
25. The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs says that Cuyamel would be
acceptable and that the Guatemalan Commissioners will meet with the
others at such time and place as the Department may suggest.
Repeated to Tegucigalpa and Costa Rica.
GEISSLER

[Document 525]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
26. A telegram just received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Honduras, thanking the American Government for its good offices in
connection with the boundary dispute, states that the Honduran
Government’s intention is
“that the Commission shall agree upon a provisional line, and if
unable to agree, that the line shall be indicated by the
representative or representatives of the mediator government
while negotiations for the final settlement proceed immediately.”
Please inquire whether the Guatemalan Government agrees to the
suggestion that in case the Commission is unable to agree upon a
provisional line such a line shall be indicated by the American
representative on the Commission. Report by telegraph.
KELLOGG

[Document 526]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:57 p.m.]
p.m., to President Chacon orally and to the Foreign Office by
memorandum.
The President says that the matter will be considered this afternoon at
special meeting of the Cabinet and that the decision will be communicated
to me immediately.
GEISSLER

[Document 527]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received March 23—6 p.m.]
hours of discussion of the matter by the Cabinet, Mr. Aguilar informed me
as follows:
“The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs has the honor to inform
His Excellency the Minister of the United States that the
Government of Guatemala accepts the suggestion of the
Government
of
Honduras
contained
in
his
courteous
memorandum of this date, to the effect that in case the
commissioners of Guatemala and of Honduras do not arrive at an
agreement regarding the provisional line which is to be
designated, the representative of the mediator government shall
indicate that line. The Government of Guatemala adds that it
accepts the proposal, always provided that provisional line does
not compromise the security of the national territory nor the
security of the railway line between the capital of Guatemala and
Puerto Barrios nor the security of the commerce of Guatemala.
Furthermore, it must be understood that this acceptance would not
imply abandonment of the rights of Guatemala nor recognition of
any right claimed by Honduras in virtue of its advances and
incursions into Guatemalan territory.”
GEISSLER

[Document 528]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
27. Please inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the following
telegram has been received from the American Legation at Guatemala:
p.m., from the Minister in Guatemala, printed supra.]
KELLOGG

[Document 529]
The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
8. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Honduras, in a telegram to me dated
March 20, after thanking the American Government for its good offices in
connection with the boundary dispute, stated that the Honduran
Government’s intention is
“that the Commission shall agree upon a provisional line, and if
unable to agree, that the line shall be indicated by the
representative or representatives of the mediator government
while negotiations for the final settlement proceed immediately.”
The above was communicated to the Guatemalan Government through Mr.
Geissler, and the following telegram has now been received from the latter:
p.m., from the Minister in Guatemala, printed on page 728 [Pg. 728 includes
In view of the authority now given you by both Governments to indicate a
line in case of disagreement Department is taking up with Canal Zone
Government matter of detailing an engineer to assist you.
KELLOGG

[Document 530]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
March 26th has been received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“The Government of Honduras takes note of the acceptance of its
proposal by the Government of Guatemala; but as the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guatemala formulates in his message certain
qualifications and reservations with respect to the future line
which the representative of the mediator government may lay
down, my Government abstains from making any declaration in
the matter, reserving whatever it may have to say for the
discussions which will take place in the Commission for the
information of and decision of the representative referred to.
I must however refer to the reservation made by the Guatemalan
Foreign Minister in regard to alleged advances and incursions of
Honduras into Guatemala, my Government rejecting the
accusation of course as unwarranted, for it has in fact been
Honduranean territory which for many years Guatemala has
invaded little by little.”
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 531]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala
(Geissler)
28. Please communicate reply of Honduran Government, as transmitted in
telegram of March 27, 10 a.m. from Tegucigalpa, to the Guatemalan
Government.
OLDS

[Document 532]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Representative of the United
States on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission
(Davis)
11. The Department is informing Governments of Guatemala and Honduras
that you plan to arrive at Puerto Cortes on April 4, and is suggesting that the
first meeting of the Commission take place at Cuyamel on April 6.
OLDS

[Document 533]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
1. I arrived Puerto Cortes this morning and was met by Honduran and
Guatemalan members Mixed Commission. We will proceed to Cuyamel
tomorrow.
Department’s undated instruction No. 110 and maps transmitted through the
American Legation at Guatemala City delivered to me.
While the first two sentences in third paragraph of Department’s instruction
No. 1 appear conflicting, upon cursory reading I understand in the light of
that the Commission is empowered to indicate a provisional line which both
Governments agree to accept.
It is rumored that Guatemala may attempt to avoid accepting provisional
line indicated by neutral representative if unsatisfactory to Guatemala by
maintaining that mediator’s line falls within limitation set forth in
memorandum of the Guatemalan Foreign Office as “compromising the
security of the national territory.”
Does the Department consider essential permanent arbitration by a North
American or would arbitration by International Central American Tribunal
set up by 1923 treaties be acceptable?
U. S. S. Denver departing Saturday; send cables care of American Consul at
Puerto Cortes.

DAVIS

[Document 534]
The Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission to the
Secretary of State
[Translation]
CUYAMEL, April 7, 1928.
[Received April 9.]
We have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the Mixed Boundary
Commission of Honduras and Guatemala was installed on this day for the
purpose of fixing a provisional line by means of an agreement between the
respective Commissions or the decision of the representative of the
mediating Government. The Guatemalan and Honduran Commissions take
pleasure in expressing once more their sentiments of cordial gratitude to the
American Government and to Your Excellency for your cooperation in the
matter under discussion, which, we hope, will be decided on grounds of
concord and justice. We renew to Your Excellency the assurances of our
highest consideration.
CARLOS SALAZAR
President of the Commission of Guatemala
AUGUSTO C. COELLO
President of the Commission of Honduras

[Document 535]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran, Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 9:50 p.m.]
2. Mixed Commission arrived at Cuyamel day before yesterday. On account
of Good Friday, which is observed with religious fervor in these countries,
both delegations approved my suggestion to postpone until yesterday.
Commission met and organized yesterday morning, electing undersigned
president and clerk Cohen secretary general.
Honduran letter of credence empowers Commissioner to fix provisional
line. Guatemalan letter of credence empowers Commissioner to agree upon
a provisional line and to sign documents which are in accordance with the
sovereignty of Guatemala and the instructions given to the Commissioner.
The presidents of both Commissions met with me in informal conference
yesterday afternoon. Honduran representative indicated willingness to
abstain from pressing [claim?] to territory along the Motagua River from
the mouth of Managua River to the mouth of Chachahualia River but
insisted upon Motagua River as boundary from this point to the sea.
Guatemalan representative insisted upon establishing line on mountain
range south of Motagua River.
Conciliatory spirit lacking.
Informal conferences will continue daily.
DAVIS

[Document 536]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
1. For Minister Davis. The Department has received a cordial telegram
signed by the Chairmen of the Commissions of Guatemala and Honduras
expressing appreciation of the Department’s cooperation in bringing about
the present conference. Please inform your colleagues on the Commission
that this telegram has been received and is greatly appreciated.
KELLOGG

[Document 537]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
dispatched before the receipt of the authorization by the two Governments
for you to fix the provisional line in the event the commissioners are unable
to agree.
The Department would view with favor the definitive arbitration of the
dispute by the International Central American Tribunal.
KELLOGG

[Document 538]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
3. After series of conferences with Guatemalan and Honduran Commissions
and after visiting part of territory in dispute, it appears improbable that they
will establish a pacific [provisional?] boundary by mutual accord.
Guatemalan Commission insists that exclusive control of Motagua Valley is
essential to its commercial life and to safety of national defense. Honduran
Commission apparently willing to raise no question as to status quo
condition under which Guatemala controls Motagua River and territory
south of it from the Managua River to the Chachahualia River but insists
upon Motagua River as provisional boundary from the Chachahualia to the
sea.
The complicated situation between interests in the disputed territory makes
the fixing of a provisional line most difficult. While I am prepared to
proceed in fixing provisional line, I am convinced after studying the
situation here that the only means of avoiding future conflicts is through
permanent arbitration. I am therefore planning to propose formally at a
session of the Commission on the 18th that the two Governments through
their respective Commissions agree to nominate special plenipotentiaries to
meet immediately in Washington or other neutral country to consider
proposals for arbitration or mutual agreement.
I should be pleased if the Department could instruct the Legations at
Guatemala City and Tegucigalpa to be prepared to make strong
representations to the Government to which they are accredited on behalf of
the Department in favor of this proposal. I shall advise both Legations as

soon as I present the proposal. Should either Government refuse to enter
into negotiations that Government would be placed in a difficult position
should it protest against the provisional line.
Should both parties agree to open negotiations the establishing of a
provisional line prior to these negotiations might disturb the situation and I
am of the opinion that the decision of the mediator on present line should be
postponed for a reasonable time—say three months for negotiations; and if
agreement is reached, an additional three months for legislative action. In
the meantime the Mixed Commission now in [session?] should provide
simple regulations for maintaining status quo.
The Guatemalan Commission has avoided any commitment on permanent
arbitration and apparently fears that arbitration will place its railway and
commercial interests in jeopardy.
The Honduran Commission has orally informed me that in negotiations for
final settlement its Government is willing to consider direct agreement
between both countries on basis of mutual concessions or in case of an
arbitration convention is willing to include a clause which will reopen the
arbitration to take into consideration the vital commercial interests of the
two republics.
Should it be necessary for me to fix a provisional boundary, I consider it
inadvisable [advisable?] to complete and forward final decision from point
outside the countries party to controversy. The situation is complicated and
delicate and I would prefer to prepare decision in Washington where
Department files and maps of 1917 mediation are available. It would not be
necessary to bring clerk or engineer.
I shall appreciate Department’s instructions on suggestions outlined in this
report. Please reply by cable direct to Cuyamel, Honduras.
DAVIS
12 Telegram in three sections

[Document 539]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Puerto Cortes (Fox)
3. For Minister Davis. The Department understands from your telegrams
that the Honduran Government is willing to permit the provisional line to
run along the crest of the Merendon Ridge from La Brea to the source of the
Chachahualia River, and thence down that river to its junction with the
Motagua, and along the Motagua to the sea, and would also, through not
pressing its claim to territory on the Guatemalan side of this line, be
prepared to accept this as a permanent boundary. Thus it would appear that
Honduras is prepared to yield its claim to some five-sixths of the territory
actually in dispute between the Motagua River and the Merendon Ridge,
whereas the Guatemalan Government is insisting upon full compliance with
its original demand that the line extend along the Merendon Ridge from La
Brea to a point between Omoa and the mouth of the Motagua river. If the
Department’s understanding is correct it would seem as though if some
compromise is made by Guatemala to meet the compromise already offered
by Honduras, it should be possible, if a real desire to settle this controversy
exists between these two countries, to bring the two delegations into accord.
In any event the Department believes that the Commission should not fail to
agree upon a final definition of the territory actually in dispute in which the
status quo is to be maintained, and upon regulations for maintaining that
status quo.
The Department would be reluctant to see the labors of the present
Commission result in no more than a mere suggestion that the two
governments nominate plenipotentiaries to meet in Washington or other
neutral place to “consider proposals for arbitration or mutual agreement.”
The Department fears that this would simply result in going over the old
ground covered by the negotiations of 1918 and subsequent years which led
to no satisfactory result. Now that the Commission is in session at Cuyamel
there would seem to be no good reason for postponing further discussion. If

both countries are prepared to submit the question for final arbitration by
the International Central American Tribunal, or any other arbitral board, it
would seem that the Commission now in session might well be empowered
by the Governments concerned to draw up the necessary agreement, and the
Department will gladly instruct the Legations at Guatemala City and
Tegucigalpa to make representations to the governments to which they are
accredited along these lines. In brief, the Department fears that the
adjournment
of
the
present
Commission
without
any
definite
accomplishment will not pave the way towards more satisfactory
negotiations at another time or place, and feels very strongly that since both
Honduras and Guatemala have sent representatives to Cuyamel, and the
United States has at considerable sacrifice and inconvenience appointed a
chairman of this commission and an assistant engineer, the present is the
best time to work out and put into effect some constructive agreement.
KELLOGG

[Document 540]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
5. Honduran proposal apparently not made clear to the Department.
Honduras claims Motagua River as boundary from the Managua River to
the sea; however, south of the Motagua from the Managua to the
Chachahualia, Guatemala is in possession of a strip of territory
approximately ten miles in width. Guatemala insists control south of
Motagua in this region is necessary to protect its railroad which parallels
Motagua. Honduras, reserving its claims under permanent arbitration,
apparently willing to raise no question as to indefinite status quo in this
region under which Guatemala controls considerable territory claimed by
Honduras but insists upon the Motagua River as provisional boundary from
the Chachahualia to the sea.
Both Commissions apparently consider that the duty of the present Mixed
Commission is to fix a provisional line from Chachahualia to the sea for the
purpose of avoiding repetition of the recent difficulties in this section. After
a series of conferences they cannot agree upon this provisional line in this
section and both have filed signed statements presenting their respective
claims and arguments and calling upon the mediator to fix a provisional line
under the conditions stipulated in their telegrams accepting the mediation of
a representative of the Department.
My suggestions relative to negotiations for permanent arbitration
contemplated not a mere recommendation on the part of the Commissions
but a joint declaration under special instruction from their respective
Governments that plenipotentiaries will be appointed to begin negotiations
at a designated place within a designated time. While I would be pleased if

present Commission could draw up arbitration convention, the relations
between the two Commissions are so strained that negotiations will be
difficult. The Guatemalan Commission is dissatisfied with local conditions
and feels that advantage is given Honduras by meeting here. I am also
under the impression that Dr. Salazar will do everything possible to avoid
assuming responsibility in signing an arbitration convention. I shall be
pleased if the Department will immediately instruct the Legations at
Guatemala City and Tegucigalpa to make representations to the
Governments to which they are accredited urging them to empower their
respective Commissions to draw up a treaty submitting the controversy to
final arbitration. I shall submit this proposal to the conference on April 23rd
and would like for representations to be made at Guatemala City and
Tegucigalpa concurrently. Please reply by cable direct to Cuyamel.
DAVIS
13 Telegram in two sections.

[Document 541]
The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
same to Honduras except for last paragraph.14
“Mr. Davis cables from Cuyamel that after series of conferences
the two Commissions can not agree upon provisional line and
have filed signed statements presenting their respective claims
and arguments and calling upon mediator to fix a provisional line
under the conditions stipulated in their telegrams accepting
mediation of representative of Department. Mr. Davis states that
complicated situation between, conflicting interests in disputed
territory makes fixing of provisional line most difficult and that
he is convinced after studying the situation that the only means of
avoiding future conflicts is through permanent arbitration. He
states that should both parties agree to open negotiations, the
establishing of a provisional line prior to these negotiations might
disturb the situation and that in his opinion the decision of the
mediator on the line should be postponed for a reasonable time.
At the conference on Monday, April 23, Mr. Davis will propose to
both Commissions that they obtain powers from their respective
Governments to draw up a treaty submitting the controversy to
final arbitration. As soon as this proposal is made Mr. Davis will
cable you whereupon you will please immediately make
representations to the Government to which you are accredited
urging it to empower its Commission to draw up this treaty. You
will point out the very great commercial and economic benefits as
well as political advantage to both countries in having this
troublesome boundary question definitely settled for all time so

that political controversies between the two will be removed and
that the region now in dispute may be adequately developed to
meet the commercial and economic needs of the countries in
question. You may point out that the present occasion would seem
to offer a most satisfactory opportunity for settling this question
and that you feel confident that the responsible officers of the two
Governments would not wish to take a position which would
cause the failure of this serious attempt to bring stability in
relations between the two countries and deprive the inhabitants of
both countries of the benefits of stable conditions both in the
frontier territory and in their international relations. Cable results
immediately to Department and Legation at Tegucigalpa and to
Mr. Davis at Cuyamel.
You will realize that the terms of agreement on part of Guatemala
unsatisfactory as they open the door of Guatemala to refuse any
provisional line which does not give it its maximum claim. The
Department may have to consider later instructing you to try to
have these terms changed.”
When you have made your proposal to the two Commissions please
immediately telegraph Guatemala and Tegucigalpa so that they may take
the action authorized. Please repeat future cables to Tegucigalpa and
Guatemala.
KELLOGG
14 Sent, on the same date, to the Minister in Guatemala as No. 37; to the
Minister in Honduras as No. 33.

[Document 542]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 7:30 p.m.]
6. Doctor Salazar in an informal and confidential conference with me made
following suggestion for settling boundary controversy.
1. Guatemala will renounce claims for boundary along the
Merendon Range from Cerro Brujo to Mount Elencia and will
accept line of actual possession to Cerro Mirador from which
point line is to run to Mount Elencia thence eastward on
Merendon Range to Mount Ildefonso thence to the sea through
Cuyamel River.
2. Guatemala to pay Honduras indemnity possibility [sic] one
million dollars.
3. Guatemala to indemnify Cuyamel Fruit Company.
4. Guatemala will agree to recognize legitimate titles granted by
Honduras and in case of Guatemala’s claims relative to titles will
submit same to arbitration.
5. He also intimated that Guatemala might cede small section near
La Brea, now in possession of Guatemala.
Engineer Malsbury estimates about 850 square miles in dispute would be
acquired by Guatemala. However the most productive portion of this
territory has been in the possession of Guatemala for many years, including
the village of Quebradas.

See “Map of the Honduran-Guatemalan Frontier, scale one in 200,000, by
Medar Dozunfen, dated June 1922,” latest report War Department.
I have inquired discreetly of the Honduran Commission if they would be
interested in a settlement of this nature without informing them of Dr.
Salazar’s suggestion and they refuse to consider the matter.
DAVIS

[Document 543]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
8. Referring to the last paragraph of the Department’s cablegram to Minister
mediation by Guatemala.
Dr. Coello, in presenting Honduran case, proposed middle of Motagua
River as provisional boundary between Chachahualia and the sea. Dr.
Salazar prepared reply to the Honduran case which contained the objection
relative to Honduran proposal.
“Never at any time has Honduras pretended to possess the
Motagua River: it had concreted its desires for territorial
expansion to the right bank of the river”——“I will not discuss it
because there are things which do not admit of their being
considered when, as in this case, they are prejudicial to the
dignity and honor of the Republic. [In] Guatemala accepting the
friendly mediation of the Government of the United States of
America it precisely made the reserve that the provisional frontier
should not compromise the integrity of the territory, the liberty of
commerce and the security of the railroad to the Atlantic; and
these three conditions would not be complied with in case of the
insinuation of the Honduran commission being accepted because
it is evident that the Motagua River never has been in dispute.”
When I remarked that the inclusion of this statement would appear to deny
the mediator the right to consider the Honduran proposal, Salazar withdrew
the statement from his reply.

However the general tone of the Guatemalan representations indicates they
will use conditional acceptance of mediation as a basis for refusing to
accept a provisional line which is not in accord with Guatemalan
aspirations.
Repeated to Guatemala City.
DAVIS

[Document 544]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
9. Dr. Salazar has been ill for several days. His physician has informed me
that he considers climatic conditions here and lack of medical facilities
dangerous for his patient.
In view of the fact that investigation here has been completed and taking
into consideration state of Dr. Salazar’s health which causes me great
concern, the Mixed Commission voted to recess subject to my call at a
place and date to be indicated by me in case further meetings are necessary.
Should it be necessary for me to establish a provisional line, my decision is
to be communicated when completed to the two Governments.
Under the circumstances I consider the recess of the conference was
necessary. I could not insist upon Dr. Salazar remaining here and to have
adjourned to Guatemala City would have promoted difficulties.
I presented the proposal that the Mixed Commission negotiate an arbitration
convention and both Commissions agreed to consult with their respective
Governments and transmit their replies to me.
Above repeated to Guatemala City and Tegucigalpa.
I most urgently request that I be permitted to return to my post via
Washington so that I may report personally relative to the situation and
consult the Department archives. I believe the problem is sufficiently
delicate and complicated to warrant this request.

Davis

[Document 545]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, April 24, 1928—noon.
[Received 4:55 p.m.]
Affairs has just informed me that instructions were telegraphed this
morning to Coello to accept the proposal of Mr. Davis.
Repeated to Mr. Davis and Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 546]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
p.m., saying that he had yesterday submitted to the Commission the
proposal outlined in the Department’s telegram of April 19, 9 p.m.
A telegram received by the Foreign Office from Commissioner Salazar
states that yesterday afternoon the Commission recessed at the suggestion
of the mediator and that therefore the Guatemalan Commissioners are
returning here April 25.
President Chacon said to me that under the circumstances he feels the
Government should do nothing until the Guatemalan Commissioners have
arrived and reported. He added that, however, he believes that it is desirable
for both countries that the pending negotiations continue with a view to an
early settlement and that he has the impression without knowing why that
Mr. Davis will trace a provisional line which will be just and therefore
acceptable to Guatemala.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs gave me the distinct impression today that
he is disposed to negotiate very extensively before entering into a final
treaty of arbitration.
Repeated to Mr. Davis and Tegucigalpa.
GEISSLER

[Document 547]
The Secretary of State to the Representative of the United States
on the Guatemalan-Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis)
1. The Department desires you not to commit yourself formally to
drawing a provisional line, since the Department feels that, on
account of the Guatemalan reservations, your powers are not
sufficiently clearly defined. It may be necessary to take up this
matter further with the Guatemalan Government. You should not,
however, give any intimation that you will not draw a provisional
line, but should endeavor to leave this question in abeyance until
you have had an opportunity to consult with the Department.
2. You are authorized to return to your post via Washington as
soon as you desire, but in view of the approaching inauguration in
Costa Rica the Department wishes you to consider the
advisability of returning to your post to attend the inauguration,
proceeding
to
Washington
immediately
thereafter
for
consultation. If you find it impossible to be in San José for the
inauguration the Department will endeavor to appoint somebody
else as special representative for that occasion.
3. Report what transportation is available for Malsbury and your
secretary.
KELLOGG

[Document 548]
The Representative of the United States on the Guatemalan-
Honduran Boundary Commission (Davis) to the Secretary of
State
[Received 9:48 p.m.]
31. I have just received the following communication from the Honduran
Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“I have the honor to inform Your Excellency Guatemalans
continue activities in Honduran boundary zone violating
agreements while fixing line. Honduran Government protested
formally to the Guatemalan Government and informs Your
Excellency as mediating representative in order that you may act
in exercising your high and authorized mission. Government of
Honduras confident you will take steps to avoid constant
aggressions while deciding question. Expressing thanks, I renew
to Your Excellency my highest appreciation. (Signed) F. Davila.”
I have sent the following telegram to the American Legation, Tegucigalpa:
“I shall be pleased if you should advise the Minister for Foreign
Affairs that I have received his communication protesting against
reported activities of Guatemalans in the disputed territory.
I consider it advisable to refer this communication to the
Department since I doubt the advisability of entering into direct
communication with the interested Governments.”
I respectfully suggest for consideration that the Department communicate
with both Governments, calling attention to the importance of avoiding

disturbing incidents while the matter is under consideration and urging their
cooperation in discouraging new activities in the disputed territory.
I am planning to leave San Jose tomorrow morning en route to the United
States, sailing on the steamship Ulua, arriving New York, May [20th?]. …
DAVIS

[Document 549]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras
(Summerlin)17
38. The Department is deeply concerned by press reports which emphasize
strained relations between Guatemala and Honduras and the possibility of
further serious incidents growing out of the boundary dispute. The
Department has also noted with some concern the telegram addressed by
Minister for Foreign Affairs Davila to Mr. Davis on May 11.18
Please inform President Paz that Mr. Davis is now en route to Washington
to report on the result of his mission, and say to the President that the
Department feels sure that the Honduran Government appreciates the
importance of avoiding disturbing incidents and discouraging new activities
in the disputed territory, and preventing any hostile demonstrations against
the neighboring government while the determination of what further steps it
may be possible to take looking to a settlement of the boundary dispute is
under consideration.
The Minister at Guatemala is being instructed to make similar
representations to the Guatemalan Government.
KELLOGG
17 The same, mutatis mutandis, and omitting the second sentence, to the
Minister in Guatemala as No. 41.

[Document 550]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:55 p.m.]
following memorandum from the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“President Paz has complete confidence in Mr. Davis and hopes
that he will be able to lay down a provisional boundary line
between Guatemala and Honduras; and his policy since the
incident at Chachahualia up to the present has been to give no
cause for disturbances or activities in the disputed zone
notwithstanding that Guatemalan activities continue which were
the occasion for the protest of May 11th of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. No hostile demonstration against Guatemala has
taken place in Honduras.”
Although there have been patriotic demonstrations in which irresponsible
individuals have uttered anti-Guatemalan cries, there has not been
anywhere in the country, according to the information of the Legation, an
organized hostile demonstration against Guatemala.
Repeated to Guatemala and Salvador.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 551]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
Government should do nothing with regard to Mr. Davis’ proposal outlined
the Mixed Commission on April 23, until the Guatemalan Commissioners
had arrived and reported. As ample time would seem to have elapsed to
enable the Guatemalan Government to give careful and thorough
consideration to this proposal the Department desires you to inquire of
President Chacon what the answer of the Guatemalan Government to Mr.
Davis’ proposal is. You may say that Mr. Davis arrives in Washington on
May 21 to report and consult with the Department, and it is important that
the Department should know definitely the attitude of the Guatemalan
Government, in order that it may discuss with Mr. Davis what further action
it may be possible and desirable to take.
As you were informed in a telegram from Mr. Davis dated April 2420 the
Honduran Government has accepted Mr. Davis’ proposal.
KELLOGG
20 Not printed.

[Document 552]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10 p.m.]
63. I made to President Chacon the observations outlined in the
Department’s May 14, 7 p.m. He replied that there is no reason to
apprehend that there will be any serious incident; details are reported in
The Minister for Foreign Affairs has furnished me a copy of a telegram
dated today in which in view of a complaint by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Honduras that five persons are continuing the work of clearing
between Cacao and Cinchado, he stated in substance that an investigation
shows that there has been no new work undertaken in that region but only
the clearing of banana plantations already in bearing.
Repeated to Tegucigalpa.
GEISSLER
20 Not printed.

[Document 553]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:55 p.m.]
65. The Minister for Foreign Affairs has told me that on the basis of
discussions at yesterday’s Cabinet he has drafted a reply to the proposal of
Mr. Davis, which draft is to be submitted to the Cabinet this evening for
formal approval. He has sent me a copy to facilitate coding it pending
formal action by the Cabinet. The document is very lengthy. The position
taken [is] in effect that authorization would have to be obtained from the
Assembly before a boundary arbitration treaty can be negotiated; then
follows a lengthy argument of Guatemala’s case. I do not concur in that
proposed interpretation of the Constitution. I have just requested by
telephone an immediate conference with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and may also talk again with the President. In consequence there may be no
definite action before the 21st.
GEISSLER

[Document 554]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received May 24—1 p.m.]
memorandum received this evening by instruction of the President from the
Minister of Foreign Affairs omits statements to the effect that the Assembly
would first have to grant authorization.
The memorandum, containing about 1200 words, says that Guatemala
desires that the frontier be definitely established and that this [was]
demonstrated by the attitude of its delegation at Cuyamel; that when “His
Excellency, Mr. Davis, proposed an acceptable frontier, although with great
sacrifices for Guatemala, that frontier was accepted by the Guatemalan
Commission and without doubt the boundary question would have been
definitely concluded if the Honduranean Commission, placing itself upon
the same plane as that of Guatemala, had accepted the conciliatory
mediation of Mr. Davis;” that inspections made by Mr. Davis and the
Commissioners showed that Honduras, properly speaking, does not possess
“in the disputed zone” an inch of ground cultivated or held by
Honduraneans; that Honduras has not a banana tree nor a permanent
settlement apart from camps of the Cuyamel Fruit Company; that the
inspections showed that there are 71 banana plantations on the right bank of
the Motagua cultivated by Guatemalans or persons subject to the
jurisdiction of Guatemala; that the territory never belonged to Honduras and
is of no use to Honduras; that Guatemala by placing in jeopardy its vital
interests in the region of the Motagua would expose the integrity of its
territory, its commerce and its railroads and that its peace might become
constantly menaced by a river frontier; that “in the supposed case of an
arbitral award fixing the Motagua or another nearby line as the
frontier”—“It
would
encourage
resentments
which
would
be
inextinguishable.”

The memorandum concludes as follows: “Notwithstanding the foregoing
the Government of Guatemala will authorize its Boundary Commission to
enter into conversations upon a project of a treaty of arbitration which
contemplates a frontier protecting the rights and the economic, commercial
and political necessities of the country.”
The concluding paragraph did not appear in the unofficial draft referred to
in Legation’s cablegram May 19, 5 p.m.
GEISSLER
22 Not printed.

[Document 555]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
70. The President has remarked to me that he believes that Washington
would be a suitable place for the next boundary conference but that San
José de Costa Rica would also be acceptable.
GEISSLER

[Document 556]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
that he discussed various possible boundary lines with the Guatemalan and
Honduran Commissioners in the hope of finding a basis upon which they
might establish a boundary by mutual accord but that he never formally
proposed as mediator any of the lines that were discussed.
The Department hopes that this will be made perfectly clear in any
statements which the Guatemalan Government may make with regard to the
boundary conference.
KELLOGG

[Document 557]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
51. Please transmit immediately the following communication textually to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, cabling the Department at once day and
hour of delivery. The communication will then be made public by the
Department.
An identical communication and similar instruction is being forwarded to
the Legation at Tegucigalpa.23
“Since 1918 the Department of State at the request of the
Governments of Guatemala and Honduras has been serving as a
friendly mediator in the matter of the adjustment of the boundary
between the two countries. Through this friendly and disinterested
cooperation useful exchanges of views have taken place.
Animated by a sincere desire to be helpful to both parties, so far
as lies in my power, and after a careful review of the situation, I
now feel that I would be acting in the best interests of both
nations by submitting the following proposal, which I earnestly
commend to their favorable consideration:
1. That the Governments of Guatemala and Honduras
immediately submit the question of the boundary
between their territories unreservedly to arbitration by
the International Central American Tribunal established
by the Convention of February 7, 1923, signed at
Washington by the representatives of Guatemala and
Honduras24 and duly ratified by those Governments,
Article 1 of which provides as follows: ‘The
Contracting Parties agree to submit to the International
Tribunal established by the present Convention all

controversies or questions which now exist between
them or which may hereafter arise, whatever their
nature or origin, in the event that they have failed to
reach an understanding through diplomatic channels, or
have not accepted some other form of arbitration, or
have not agreed to submit said questions or
controversies to the decision of another tribunal.’
2. That the said Tribunal be fully empowered to fix a
common boundary between Guatemala and Honduras,
taking into consideration the political, economic and
commercial interests of both states and also to
determine the amount of any compensation which it
may find necessary or desirable for either party to make
to the other; the decisions of the Tribunal to be, of
course, conclusive and binding upon both parties.
3. That the existing Mixed Commission now in recess
be convened at a time and place to be designated by its
Chairman for the purpose of drawing up and signing the
protocol contemplated in Article VII of the aforesaid
Convention.
I am encouraged to make this proposal because I have become
firmly convinced of the sincere desire of the governments and
peoples of Guatemala and Honduras to eliminate this long-
pending dispute and thus consolidate and put on a permanent
footing friendly relations between them; and because I am
inclined to feel that this method offers a more hopeful opportunity
to arrive at a settlement than negotiations through diplomatic
channels. In this connection I also venture to recall that at the
Central American Conference of 1923 the Governments of
Guatemala and Honduras through their duly authorized
plenipotentiaries publicly announced their decision to submit this
boundary question to arbitration.25
I trust that both Governments may find it possible to welcome the
opportunity of adjusting their differences in this manner, at the

same time making to the cause of international arbitration an
impressive contribution which can not fail to call forth the
unanimous approval of civilized nations throughout the world.
(Signed) Frank B. Kellogg.”
KELLOGG
23 Sent as telegram No. 44.
24 Conference on Central American Affairs, p. 296.

[Document 558]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:40 p.m.]
this afternoon that he has instructed the Minister for Foreign Affairs to
accept your proposal.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 559]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
78. A note just received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs says, after
reciting the substance of the proposal of Mr. Kellogg,27 that:
“The Government of Guatemala, which is most desirous of
arranging definitely its boundary question with Honduras as well
as in order to demonstrate to the friendly Government of the
United States appreciation of its valuable and disinterested
mediation, accepts with pleasure the suggestion of His Excellency
the Secretary of State regarding submission of the matter to the
decision of the International Central American Tribunal
established by the Convention of February 7, 1923. By virtue
thereof it will today convoke the Legislative Assembly that it may
meet in extraordinary session for the exclusive purpose of asking
of it authorization for the Executive to enter into the treaty of
arbitration suggested in the courteous note which I am answering.
I request Your Excellency to be pleased to reiterate to His
Excellency, Secretary of State Kellogg, the gratitude of the
Government of Guatemala for the friendly good offices of the
Government of the United States.”
Repeated to Tegucigalpa.
GEISSLER
includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557].

[Document 560]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
GUATEMALA, June 11, 1928—noon.
[Received 8:55 p.m.]
81. The Minister for Foreign Affairs has orally indicated that he desires to
know the names of the 15 jurists submitted by the United States for the
permanent list from which members of the Central American Tribunal are
to be chosen. I have a copy of an announcement given by the Department to
Beck.28 Is that list still intact?
Mr. Salazar says that he would also appreciate it if the American Legation
in Tegucigalpa would let me know for his unofficial information the names
of such persons as have been communicated under the convention to the
Honduran Foreign Office by the other signatories including Honduras.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs told me confidentially that Guatemala
intends to request Cuba to submit a list of five names under article 3 of the
convention.
Repeated to Honduras.
GEISSLER
28 The persons designated were: James M. Beck; Edwin M. Borchard; J.
Reuben Clark, Jr.; William C. Dennis; David Jayne Hill; Manley O.
Hudson; Charles Cheney Hyde; Nathan L. Miller; John Bassett Moore;
Edwin B. Parker; Jackson H. Ralston; Jesse S. Reeves; James Brown Scott;
George W. Wickersham; and George Grafton Wilson.

[Document 561]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:40 p.m.]
12 received. After detailed resume of your note, the text is as follows:
“The Government of Honduras has always appreciated with
cordial sentiments of gratitude the friendly efforts toward which
the distinguished American Government has dedicated and
dedicates to the peaceful and equitable settlement of the boundary
question between Honduras and Guatemala: efforts to which
Honduras has always responded to loyally and even with ardor,
receiving with entire good will the many suggestions which have
been made to it with a view to accomplishing this high purpose.
To this end the Government of Honduras participated in the
mediation of 1918–1920 and it was not to blame that a
satisfactory solution was not reached at that time. In the same
spirit Honduras received in 1923 the suggestion of an arbitration
agreement with the President of the United States of America as
final Arbiter. His Excellency the former Secretary of State Mr.
Hughes took occasion to make this a matter of official record at
the second plenary session on February 7, 1923, of the
Washington Conference on Central American Affairs.30 Later,
following the lamentable death of His Excellency, Mr. Warren G.
Harding, the President of the United States of America, the
Government of Honduras reiterated its obligation for arbitration
to the American Legation on August 23, 1923, asking that the
Arbitrator might be the new President of the United States, His
Excellency Mr. Calvin Coolidge.31 The latter having indicated his
acceptance, according to a note of September 17, 1923, from the

Minister of the United States in Tegucigalpa, Honduras has only
waited for a similar action on the part of Guatemala to make
formal her obligation to arbitrate.
From that date to the present the distinguished American
Government on various occasions both officially and in other
ways has expressed its understanding that there exists between
Honduras and Guatemala a definite obligation for arbitration.
This understanding was especially to be inferred from the
declaration made by the Honorable Roy T. Davis, mediator and
representative of the American Government at the Cuyamel
conference, during the session of April 23rd, 1928. It was also
expressed in the communication from the Department of State
which Your Excellency was so good as to transmit to me and to
which I now have the honor to refer.
In view of these considerations which my Government submits
respectfully to the attention of Your Excellency and of your
Government, permit me to point out that in the light of the
stipulation in article 1, paragraph 1, of the convention for the
establishment of an International Central American Tribunal that
the contracting parties agree to submit to the said Tribunal
questions for which ‘they have not accepted some other form of
arbitration,’ the Government of Honduras would desire to know
first the judgment of the Department of State in regard to the
earlier existing obligation with Guatemala; that is to say, if the
Department does not consider, as it considered in the past, that
there is still existing a solemn promise of arbitration agreed upon
between Honduras and that Republic, then I am of the opinion
that my Government would be relieved of the obligation which
has bound it for more than five years and would be in a position
to consider itself free to assume another obligation without failing
in its pledged word before the American Government.
While asking Your Excellency to transmit to your Government
the respectful statement which I now have the honor to submit to
its high and just consideration, I await the reply, in order that I

may make due and careful answer to the note of Your Excellency
to which I have had the honor to refer.”
Repeated to Guatemala and Salvador.
SUMMERLIN
30 See Conference on Central American Affairs, p. 56.
Guatemala, Foreign Relations, 1923, vol.  I, p. 355.

[Document 562]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1928—noon.
Honduran Government makes inquiry as to the obligations resting upon it to
submit the boundary dispute to the President of the United States. However,
inasmuch as no final protocol has ever been executed making effective the
agreement to submit this dispute to the arbitration of the President, as
announced at the Central American Conference in 1923, it is the opinion of
the Government of the United States that the obligations implied by that
agreement may not be considered as precluding arbitration by the
International Central American Tribunal, as provided for by the Treaty of
1923.
Please communicate the foregoing to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
state that the Department hopes that the Government of Honduras may now
find it convenient to take the course of action suggested in the Department’s
KELLOGG

[Document 563]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
88. Legislative Assembly convened today. President’s message which refers
only to the boundary matter says in part that “the Executive receives
favorably the high-minded suggestion of the Department of State;” that it
has not been possible to solve the controversy directly between the parties
nor through the friendly mediations of the United States; that at the
conferences at Cuyamel presided over by Mr. Davis it was possible
[impossible?] to come to a friendly agreement; that the present situation is
intolerable and calls for an efficacious remedy; that in advising arbitration
the Department of State “incorporated in its proposition the reservations
consistently put forth by Guatemala” so that the economic, commercial and
political interests of the country “must not be affected by the frontier
adopted;” that nevertheless under the Constitution it is for the Assembly “to
determine the bases and explain the subject matter of the arbitral
proceeding” and that he makes his own the words of the last paragraph of
the note of Secretary of State Kellogg, which paragraph he then quotes.
It is generally believed that the Assembly may consider the subject for from
two to four weeks.
The Foreign Office expresses confidence that the Assembly will grant
authorization without reservation but there is much talk among the deputies
of a reservation providing that Guatemala’s boundary shall at least go to the
crest of the Merendon.
Referring to the last paragraph of the Legation’s telegram of June 15, 11
a.m.34 It is no longer probable that such answer as the Department may
deem opportune in response to the note of Honduras would complicate the
situation in Guatemala. Repeated to Honduras.

Gaissuer

34 Not printed.

[Document 564]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
has been received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“The Government of Honduras has considered with the most
profound attention the friendly reply of His Excellency the
Secretary of State, fully appreciating the sentiments of cordiality
which dictated it and which also motivated the proposals he made
for the satisfactory and definite solution of the existing
controversy. In full response to these sentiments my Government
desires that there shall not exist the slightest misunderstanding
with respect to the interpretation of the reply of the Department of
State to the question which I ventured to ask in my note of June
12th to the American Legation.35
My Government is of the understanding that in the opinion of His
Excellency the Secretary of State there is no existing signed
protocol of arbitration between Honduras and Guatemala; but the
Department of State does not pronounce [sic] itself in regard to
the existence of an obligation to sign such a protocol, to be
inferred from the declaration made in 1923 by His Excellency ex-
Secretary of State Hughes.
In fact at the close of the Washington Conference of 1923 there
existed in full vigor the boundary convention between Honduras
and Guatemala signed August 1, 1914,36 which became effective
of the convention providing that it should have a duration of 10
years.

Article 9 of the convention stipulated that ‘if the Governments
should not be able to agree on any one or more of the disputed
points, they agree to refer the decision to an arbitrator who shall
be the President of the United States of America.’ The naming of
the Arbitrator was to have been made at the latest within 60 days
of the publication in the official journal of the notice conjointly
one of the contracting Governments suggested the nomination to
the other; and in the event that this requisite should not have been
fulfilled within the stipulated time the efficacy and force of the
convention was in no sense invalidated, for article 15 declared
conclusively that none of the time limits fixed in the convention
should be final nor should they give rise to provisos of any kind.
The same article provided that the boundary question should not
be settled by any other means.
With such unquestionable antecedents it is evident from every
point of view that the obligation contracted by Honduras and
Guatemala at Washington during the Conference of 1923 under
the auspices of the Department of State was that of proceeding to
the execution of the arbitration agreement and subscribed to in the
boundary convention of 1914, an obligation which Honduras has
been ready to satisfy in the terms agreed upon.
If Guatemala has not responded on more than one occasion to the
suggestion of the Government of Honduras for the proper
formalization of the arbitration, nevertheless, the Department of
State considered always that there was pending an obligation, an
opinion expressed on more than one occasion both orally and in
writing. This obligation could not be other than that of 1914
ratified in 1923, and it could have been realized at any time by
merely giving it form effective for execution, in view of the fact
that the procedure and terms of the arbitration were laid down in
article 11 of the convention referred to.
In the light of the above considerations, if, as my Government
understands, the Department of State is of the opinion that there is
lacking only a signed protocol, and given the sentiments of

cordiality which it extends to the Central American countries
together with its proposal that the existing question be settled by
means of arbitration, I believe firmly that its efforts directed
toward suggesting to both Governments the formalization of the
protocol discussed above would meet with a ready acceptance
from both, if there exists the desire for a sincere understanding.
Thus would be avoided delays and difficulties perhaps
unsurmountable which would arise in other procedures recently
suggested.
While offering respectfully this suggestion in a spirit of true
cordiality and with strong confidence in the high justice and strict
judgment of His Excellency the Secretary of State, my
Government awaits in any case the later decision of the
Department before considering, always with the same breadth of
view and with the same disposition for the equitable and friendly
settlement of its differences, its definite reply to the proposal of
His Excellency the Secretary of State contained in the American
Repeated to Guatemala and Salvador.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 565]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of
State38
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
264. The Nicaraguan Government yesterday sent a note to the Government
of Honduras informing it of the appointment of Alfonso Ayon, Alfonso
Solorzano, Maximo Zepeda and Joaquin Vigil as national judges on the
Central American Court and of George Grafton Wilson and Doctor Antonio
Uribe of Colombia as nonnational judges.
EBERHARDT
Guatemala (No. 58) and Honduras (No. 53).

[Document 566]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
58. The Department has given careful and sympathetic consideration to the
views expressed in the note from the Honduran Minister for Foreign Affairs
dated June 25,39 and appreciates the desire of Honduras fully to comply
with its international obligations with respect to the arbitration of its
boundary dispute with Guatemala. It is feared, however, that the reply of
this Government to the inquiry of the Honduran Government as to the
present effectiveness of the Arbitration Agreement of 1923, announced at
the Conference on Central American Affairs, has not been fully understood.
In the reply of this Government just mentioned the opinion was expressed
that the obligations implied by the 1923 Agreement may not be considered
as precluding arbitration by the International Central American Tribunal
provided for by the Treaty of 1923. This opinion was arrived at after
reviewing the events of the past ten years during which, notwithstanding the
existence of the Boundary Convention of August 1, 1914, and the
Agreement of 1923, and the efforts at mediation during the years 1918 to
1920, no definitive settlement of the dispute had been achieved. It is to be
noted in this connection that, although the 1914 Treaty was in effect in 1918
and still in 1923, mediation was resorted to in 1918 and a new agreement
was concluded in 1923; thus demonstrating that the existence of other
agreements with respect to the boundary has not been in the past and should
not now be considered an obstacle to another course of action which
promises a solution of the difficulty.
Please convey the foregoing to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and express
the earnest hope of this Government that the Government of Honduras may
soon signify its agreement to the proposal to submit the boundary dispute to
arbitration by the International Central American Tribunal.

You may add informally that this Government has observed with surprise a
reference in the note from the Honduran Minister for Foreign Affairs to
“delays and difficulties perhaps unsurmountable which would arise in other
procedures recently suggested.” It is confidently believed that the
procedures established under the provisions of the Convention for the
Establishment of an International Central American Tribunal are fully
adequate to the present problem and offer a means for its speedy and
equitable settlement.
KELLOGG

[Document 567]
The Minister in Duatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
95. The Legislative Assembly has passed the bill authorizing the Executive
to submit the boundary question to the International Central American
Tribunal without discussion and by unanimous vote. Repeated to Honduras.
GEISSLER

[Document 568]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
65. …
Minister Bogran called on me on July 18 [17] and in the course of the
conversation it appeared that the proposal contained in my cable of June 4
was misunderstood in Honduras. It appears that the inclusion of the
provision by which the Arbitrator would take into consideration the
political, economic and commercial interests of both States has been
interpreted in Honduras as meaning that the boundary question will be
decided purely on political, economic and commercial considerations. I
explained to Señor Bogran that this of course is not the intent of my note,
nor is it the proper interpretation thereof. I told him that of course both
countries may present arguments, proof and evidence of an historical and/or
legal nature and that the decision will be made on the basis usual in such
international arbitrations with the exception that the Arbitrator will be
authorized in addition to take into consideration the political, economic and
commercial interests of both nations. The Minister stated that he now
understood the matter, which he had not before, and that he would telegraph
an explanation to his Government. You will please also make this
explanation. Please cable the Department fully regarding this matter,
informing it of any other misunderstanding that may exist regarding the
arbitration.
According to Bogran there is also a feeling in Honduras regarding the
Nicaraguan panel of judges. They feel that this panel having been selected
now, when there is a definite controversy to come before the Tribunal,
Nicaragua may have appointed politicians rather than jurists and that the
national members appointed by Nicaragua might very likely side with

Guatemala in order to get Guatemalan support for Nicaragua in the latter’s
boundary controversy with Honduras. I pointed out to the Minister that it
would be possible to select three judges from the Costa Rican-Nicaraguan
panels who would not be Nicaraguans or even Central Americans at all. I
feel that the suggestion made by me on June 4 offers the best means for a
settlement and I trust that you will avail yourself of every opportunity to
explain the matter in its true light to the President, members of the
Government and Congress and other public men of Honduras. I feel
confident that if they correctly understand the proposal that it will meet
with their approval and acceptance. Copy sent to Guatemala.
KELLOGG

[Document 569]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, July 25, 1928—noon.
[Received 10:45 p.m.]
89. I have received a note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs transcribing
without comment a copy of an Executive decree dated July 24 dissolving
the Commission headed by Mr. Coello for the Guatemalan boundary
dispute on the grievance [grounds?] that in view of the new proposals of the
United States Government now being considered there is no longer reason
for the existence of the Commission under the decree of March 27th by
which it was constituted. Refer to Legation’s despatch number 578 of
Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs explained orally that his Government
will name the necessary plenipotentiaries without delay if it should be
decided to accept proposal.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN
40 Not printed.

[Document 570]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
91. President Paz called for me today and, after stating most earnestly that
he believed Guatemala was preparing to occupy with armed forces
Honduran territory to the east of the Motagua River, insisted that I inquire
by telegraph whether the Department would use its good offices in an effort
to prevent such action on the part of Guatemala. I have no way of knowing
whether there is any foundation in fact for the fears of President Paz but I
believe he is entirely sincere.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 571]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:23 p.m.]
98. Referring to Mr. Summerlin’s July 25, noon. A remark made to me by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs indicates that upon learning formally of the
action of Honduras in dissolving its Boundary Commission the Government
of Guatemala may take the position that this constitutes a premature
termination of the agreement that the mediating Government may propose a
provisional line. Repeated to Honduras.
GEISSLER

[Document 572]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
WASHINGTON, July 27, 1928—noon.
the Governments of Guatemala and Honduras that the boundary dispute be
submitted to the International Central American Tribunal contemplated that
the existing Mixed Commission now in recess should reconvene for the
purpose of drawing up and signing the necessary arbitral protocol.
The Department is therefore at a loss to understand the action of the
Government of Honduras in completely dissolving its boundary
commission and will appreciate a report from you as to the motives which
impelled it to take such action.
KELLOGG

[Document 573]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
been informed that the Nicaraguan jurists whose names were communicated
to the Government of Honduras on June 27 last were appointed in 1923.
This fact should dispel the apprehension understood to be entertained by
Honduras that the Nicaraguan members may have been selected now with a
view to service in connection with the adjustment of the Guatemala-
Honduras boundary dispute. Inform Honduran Government.
Please report by telegraph the status of the proposal for the submission of
the boundary matter to the International Central American Tribunal.
KELLOGG

[Document 574]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)41
62. Please inform the Guatemalan Government of the apprehensions of the
President of Honduras as reported in Minister Summerlin’s telegram of July
26, 4 p.m., and say that although this Government assumes that some
misunderstanding must exist and has entire confidence in the purpose of
Guatemala to maintain the status quo, you are directed to point out the
importance of avoiding the appearance of any aggressive action.
KELLOGG
41 Repeated to the Minister in Honduras as No. 69.

[Document 575]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, July 30, 1928.
[Received August 9.]
No. 666
68 of July 27 and to previous correspondence, all relative to the Honduran-
Guatemalan boundary controversy.
Mr. Bogran has not, I think, represented altogether accurately the opinion in
this country of your proposal to submit the dispute to the International
Central American Tribunal. Certainly the inclusion of the provision by
which the arbitrator would take into consideration the political, economic
and commercial interests of both states has not been interpreted by the
Government as meaning that the boundary will be decided purely on those
considerations, although great objection has been taken by the press to their
inclusion at all. There have, however, been certain misunderstandings on
the part of the Minister for Foreign Affairs which I believe I have
succeeded in clearing up. At first he raised the objection that a panel of
thirty judges could not be obtained because Salvador had failed to ratify the
convention. I explained, of course, that the convention was fully in effect
among the four states which have ratified it and that there would be a panel
of twenty-four judges from which to make a selection of three. He then
raised the objection that the Costa Rican panel having been nominated in
1923, the terms of the judges have expired or are about to expire. In reply to
this objection, I showed him a copy from the files of the Legation of a note
of 1925, from Mr. Aguirre, then Minister for Foreign Affairs, from which it
appeared that the Costa Rican panel was named in that year, there being
thus two years more before the terms of its individuals expire. This same
objection might be made to the Nicaraguan panel, which was nominated in
1923, but Dr. Dávila has not raised the question. The misunderstanding in

regard to the date of appointment of the Nicaraguan panel was cleared up
the visit to Tegucigalpa last week of Mr. Munro, Secretary of the Legation
at Managua, who had informed me of the actual date of the appointment.
From these objections of Dr. Dávila it would appear that he is not entirely
familiar with the Treaty of 1923, or is deliberately playing for time.
I have not failed on every proper occasion to explain the situation to the
President, to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to other prominent
persons, emphasizing its importance and the great opportunity that is now
being offered to Honduras to settle for good and for all, this long standing
and vexatious dispute. However, the proposal for arbitration of the question
by the International Central American Tribunal is unpopular with all classes
and all political parties. Great hopes had been entertained that the matter
would be arbitrated by the President of the United States, and when the
proposal came to submit it to the Central American Tribunal it was a
disappointment. The real reason for the delay of the Government of
Honduras in accepting this arbitration, is due, in my opinion, to reluctance
to bind the country to a decision, which it does not believe will be a just
one. The mistrust of the International Central American Tribunal, or for that
matter, any tribunal connected with Central America, is too profound to be
uprooted by arguments that the prejudice has no basis in fact. I think even
President Paz has doubts whether Honduras would receive justice from the
Central American Tribunal. It may be that in time, this feeling can be
overcome, and that the country can be brought to see that its legitimate
interests will suffer nothing in the hands of the International Central
American Tribunal, but the change cannot be effected speedily.
It is unfortunate too, from the viewpoint of conditions in Honduras, that this
question should have come to the front during a presidential election year.
The politicians naturally seize upon such a fertile subject for propaganda
and inflaming appeals to patriotism. The Government will probably be
bitterly attacked if the arbitration of the International Central American
Tribunal is accepted. This situation tends to make official action timid and
added to the fact that the officials themselves feel no enthusiasm for the
proposal, offers a reasonable explanation for the fabian tactics of the
Foreign Office since the proposal was first received.

Dr. Dávila has taken the stand that, inasmuch as the Foreign Office of
Honduras is the central chancellery of the International Central American
Tribunal, his Government will not nominate its panel of judges until
Guatemala has done so. In any event the Honduran panel cannot become
effective until confirmed by the Congress which does not meet until next
January.
I have [etc.]
GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN

[Document 576]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, July 30, 1928.
[Received August 9.]
No. 668
instructing me to inform the Department of the motives which prompted the
Government of Honduras to dissolve its Boundary Commission, appointed
last March.
The following explanation for this action was given me by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, in a memorandum, dated July 25:
“The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Honduras
declares that the reasons for the emission of Decree No. 211, by
which the Boundary Commission is dissolved, were solely the
following:
The Boundary Commission, according to the Decree of March 27,
1928, by which it was constituted, was empowered only to make
an inspection of the frontier zone and to treat of the establishment
of a provisional line, pending the definitive solution of the
boundary question between Honduras and Guatemala.
At the session of April 23 of the Cuyamel Conference, the
Honorable Mediator proposed that the commissions obtain
powers from their respective Governments for the negotiation of a
definite treaty of arbitration.
The commissions not having succeeded in attaining any of the
ends for which they were created and a new proposal having been
made relative to the boundary question pending between the two

countries, the Government of Honduras considers the mission of
the Boundary Commission to have terminated. However, if in the
course of the negotiations a new agreement should be arrived at,
the Government will determine the selection of its representatives
in accordance with terms of the agreement which might be
decided upon.
Therefore the Minister for Foreign Affairs is pleased to make
declaration that the decree dissolving the Boundary Commission
had no other design than that already indicated, the Government
of Honduras being always ready with the greatest good will to
continue the negotiations begun under the mediation of the
American Government.
Tegucigalpa, July 25, 1928.”
The issuance of the decree dissolving the Boundary Commission appears to
me to have been quite unnecessary and I have stated this opinion to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I have [etc.]
GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN

[Document 577]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
5 p.m. I have received today a note dated July 27th from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs which after preliminary references to previous
correspondence reads as follows:
“I must first of all express the satisfaction of my Government
with the kind reception which His Excellency the Secretary of
to; with so much the greater reason in view of the fact that
according to the opinions in his communication the Department
of State shares with the Government of Honduras its point of
view relative to the effectiveness in 1923 of the Convention of
1914 and relative to the promise of arbitration solemnly agreed
upon in 1923 during the Conference on Central American Affairs.
The weighty opinion of the Department of State comes to
reinforce the conviction always held by the Government of
Honduras in regard to the effectiveness of those mutual
obligations.
His Excellency the Secretary of State makes the observation that
although the Convention of 1914 was then in vigor the
Government of Honduras in 1918 had recourse to mediation and
in 1923 to the negotiation of a new agreement. Permit me to
remark with all respect to Your Excellency that it is precisely
around the Convention of 1914 that revolve all the diplomatic
entanglements which obtained from the frontier difficulties
between Honduras and Guatemala. When the first incidents arose
in the middle of 1917 the Government of Guatemala sent to this

Republic an extraordinary legation under Mr. Victor Sanchez
Ocano for the purpose of effecting a direct agreement between the
two countries. Mr. Sanchez Ocano as plenipotentiary of
Guatemala and Dr. Marino Vasquez, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Honduras, signed on September 20, 1917, a “preliminary
agreement,” Article 5 of which reads as follows: ‘It is understood
that if the treaty here projected does not become effective for any
reason and if it should not be ratified by the respective
legislatures of Honduras and Guatemala, the boundary convention
signed between the two republics on August 1, 1914, will remain
in force.’
No definite agreement then having been reached the boundary
convention of 1914 remained naturally in full effect.
Neither in the opinion of my Government does the mediation of
the Government of the United States formally offered, according
to a note from the American Legation in Tegucigalpa, dated
posterior to the mediation, as no definite agreement was reached
through the mediation.
It is in consideration of such prior obligations that the
Government of Honduras has maintained its thesis of arbitration
by His Excellency the President of the United States of America,
taking into account likewise the high equity and moral authority
of the arbitrator and also the facilities which arbitration in this
manner would offer, avoiding delays and difficulties which might
prove to be unsurmountable in other methods recently suggested,
as I ventured to indicate to Your Excellency in the previous note
of June 25.
And I pass now to explain with the spirit of frankness and
sincerity which animates my Government in its cordial relations
with that of Your Excellency, the opinion just mentioned which
was the subject of observation by His Excellency the Secretary of
State, according to the courteous communication addressed to me

by Your Excellency on July 11th, accompanying your note of the
same date above referred to.
As Your Excellency is aware the members for the formation of
the International Central American Tribunal, according to article
jurisconsults constituted as indicated in the same article. The
names of the persons designated by the contracting parties should
be communicated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Honduras
by the Government which names them. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Honduras should transmit the complete list to each one
of the signatory republics.
Honduras as Your Excellency can see having been assigned the
mission of communicating the complete lists for the formation of
the Tribunal in conjunction with chancellery is in a position to
appreciate better than any other bureau in the other countries the
lack of the lists made at the proper time for the formation of the
International Central American Tribunal.
In fact with the exception of the Government of the United States
of America which presented its due list in accordance with article
3 of the convention, of the Central American Governments which
ratified it only the Government of Costa Rica sent in its list dated
October 30, 1925. The Government of Nicaragua has just sent in
a list drawn up by decree of His Excellency the President of the
Republic dated June 27th of the present year 1928. The
Government of Honduras has not made its corresponding
appointments and as according to article 2 of the convention the
appointments made by the President of the Republic must have
the approval of the National Congress, the list to be furnished by
Honduras can only be valid after the next meeting of the
Congress.
As result of such antecedents of undebatable authenticity, the
calmed judgment of His Excellency the Secretary of State will
appreciate that judicially, even when in a difficult and artificial
manner we may have achieved the getting together of the present

lists for the formation of the Central American Tribunal, such lists
will be makeshift or temporary, gotten up for the handling of a
concrete case in which event the Tribunal could not be such a one
as would result from permanent lists made with complete
isolation from the pending problems of Central America. In that
sense the Tribunal itself would suffer from the effects of its
artificial creation against the spirit and hopes which undoubtedly
governed its establishment by the convention of 1923 because it
would carry the taint of nullity to any of its findings as claimed
and explicitly apprehended by subsection (a), paragraph 2 of
article 1 of the convention itself. Naturally the foregoing
considerations have no reference whatever to the reputation or
high moral worth of the distinguished jurists who have been or
may be appointed for the formation of the proposed Central
American Tribunal.
In any event, even the remote contingency which would be
considered by my Government, of success in establishing the
Central American Tribunal in proper manner, I wish to give
immediately some idea of the attitude taken by the Government
of Honduras as to the question of the nature of arbitration, in
answer to the proposal made by His Excellency the Secretary of
State and transmitted by Your Excellency in your note of June 5
last.
In the recently published work (1927) by the eminent American
publicist, James Brown Scott, “The Hague Peace Conferences,”
the consideration is brought forward on page 200 that the United
States has not only favored arbitration as a policy but has made it
a juridical proceeding.
Earlier on page 195 he cited the following concepts of Renault in
support of his idea: ‘International arbitration will never develop
soundly until it frees itself in the most positive manner from the
domination of politics and diplomacy by which it has been so
long confined and limits itself solely to the judicial field into
which it has barely entered. It is only under such conditions that it

can inspire confidence in governments and peoples and can offer
guarantees to the smaller states often liable to [be] victims of
political considerations.’
In the proposal of the Department of State contained in the
before-mentioned note of June 5 there is laid down as one of the
points presented for the consideration of my Government that the
Tribunal of Arbitration be fully empowered to fix a definite
boundary between Honduras and Guatemala “taking into
consideration the political economic and commercial interests of
both States” and also to determine the amount of whatever
compensation might be found necessary or desirable to be made
by one party to the other. His Excellency the Secretary of State
with noble breadth of vision has later explained his idea
indicating that his judgment does not exclude from the arbitration
the judicial or documentary proof on which may rest the rights of
the two parties; but as the legislative decree of Guatemala
authorizing the Executive Power of that republic to accept
arbitration establishes the above concept to which Honduras takes
exception without other review, I must refer to him in that matter
for the appropriate considerations.
My Government shares [with] the American author mentioned
and with the United States of America, according to his opinion,
the idea that arbitration is of an essentially judicial nature. Its
judicial character is accentuated in territorial questions. In the
boundary agreements made between Honduras and Guatemala in
1895 and 1914 it was established that to settle the question there
would have to be considered the observations and studies of
technical commissions; lines laid down in public documents and
not contradicted by others of equal force, giving to each the value
due its antiquity or judicial force; the extent of the territory
comprised in the ancient provinces of Guatemala at the date of its
independence, the contents of the royal ordinance of intendants
which was then in force; and in general all the documents, maps,
plan[s] et cetera which lead to the uncovering of the truth, giving
preference to those which through their nature might carry most

weight by reason of clearness, exactness and impartiality or for
any other sound reason according to the principles of justice, all
being conditions as Your Excellency will duly appreciate of a
particularly juridical and scientific nature. Possession was given
only the weight due to what was justly legitimately and
fundamentally held according to the general principles of right
and the rules of justice which in the premises had the sanction of
the law of nations.
A proposal of arbitration which does not rest on a foundation
essentially judicial, aside from any other conditions not based on
right and justice, and the result being already interwoven with
circumstantial conditions, is, in the opinion of my Government,
an undertaking to which Honduras could not agree to entrust the
vital interests of her territorial integrity without provoking the just
censure of the public conscience.
Now animated by the highest sentiments of fraternity and
conciliation and attentive to the friendly observations of the
mediator government, Honduras would be able once a decision
had been dictated based solely on juridical considerations, to
consider then the question of reciprocal compensations on
grounds of equity and mutual convenience. But such
compensations, already contemplated in article 7 of the
convention of 1914, must be the result of juridical arbitration and
not of prior stipulation and agreements which would prejudice the
final decision.
In view therefore of the following fundamental considerations:
the nonexistence of the arbitrating tribunal; the impossibility of
organizing it in the form required; and the restriction of the
territorial rights of Honduras contained in the stipulations in the
legislative decree of Guatemala which subjects the provisional
arbitration to antecedent conditions dangerous for the integrity of
the country, considerations which my Government hopes will be
received with a generous and benevolent spirit by the
Government of Your Excellency, in view of the rectitude and

loyalty which has motivated them, my Government regrets that it
is not able to accept the arbitration in the form proposed by His
Excellency the Secretary of State in the note of Your Excellency
of June 5, 1928, at the same time protesting its firm intention to
accept any other arbitration under His Excellency the President of
the United States of America, the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States or any other tribunal established in
regular and permanent form, the arbitration being made in
conformity with proved rights and documents of the parties and
without other considerations than the ones which are derived from
those rights.
I am happy to take this occasion to renew to Your Excellency the
assurance of my distinguished consideration and high esteem.
Signed, F. Davila.”
2 p.m., were published in the local press this afternoon.
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 578]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:40 p.m.]
Affairs has sent me with covering note a copy of a note he was sending on
August 4th to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Honduras and which
stated in substance that the mediation came about through an agreement
participated in by Honduras and Guatemala with the participation of the
United States as mediator; that the Mixed Boundary Commission had
adjourned subject to call by the chairman, United States Minister Davis, to
enable him to study the facts and to fix a provisional boundary in
compliance with the charge entrusted to him; that, as a proceeding within
the mediation, the Secretary of State of the United States had suggested an
arbitration and that the Mixed Commission draw up the protocol of
arbitration; that the unilateral action of one of the parties would signify the
exclusion of the mediator prior to rendition of the decision with which he
was charged; that the note of Secretary of State Kellogg did not render the
existence of the Commission useless; that, therefore, Guatemala considers
the Honduran Executive order as being purely for the purpose of changing
the personnel of its Boundary Commission, but that if the Honduran
Government were to give to that order “the far-reaching international
importance of putting an end to the functions of the Mixed Commission,”
the Government of Guatemala “regrets to record its due and formal
protest.”
In compliance with a request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs the press
appears to have been uniformly temperate in comments on the reply of
Honduras to the arbitration proposal of Mr. Kellogg.
Repeated to Honduras.

Gaisster

[Document 579]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
70. Please deliver following note textually to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, informing Department by telegraph of day and hour of delivery.
The note will then be made public here:
“I have received Your Excellency’s note of July 27, a copy of
which I have duly transmitted to my Government,44 and in reply I
am instructed to inform Your Excellency of the deep
disappointment with which my Government has received the
decision of the Government of Honduras not to accept the
proposal made by the Secretary of State as a friendly mediator in
the matter of the boundary dispute between Honduras and
Guatemala, for a settlement of this long-standing controversy
through its submission unreservedly to arbitration by the
International Central American Tribunal. This disappointment is
all the more keen in view of the fact that the Government of
Guatemala, as Your Excellency’s Government is aware, has
already signified its unqualified acceptance of this proposal.
While at first glance it would not seem that the communication
from the Honduran Government above referred to requires any
further reply, nevertheless my Government feels constrained to
comment upon certain of the statements made in Your
Excellency’s note as forming grounds for the refusal by the
Government of Honduras to submit this question unreservedly to
arbitration.
My Government has duly noted Your Excellency’s statements
concerning previous agreements and efforts to adjust this
controversy but is convinced that no useful purpose will be served

by recapitulation of past difficulties and efforts which have
proved unfruitful. It was precisely because experience has shown
the difficulty of bringing about a solution of this controversy
based on previous agreements or on a continuation of the methods
then employed, that my Government felt the best prospect of
success lay in a new agreement to submit this question to
arbitration by an impartial tribunal.
Your Excellency states that the panel of the International Central
American Tribunal is incomplete and points out that only the
Governments of Costa Rica and Nicaragua have sent in their lists
of members, and further remarks that the latter list was drawn up
by a decree dated June 27 of the present year. My Government
has been informed that the list submitted by the Nicaraguan
Government was prepared in 1923 and there would therefore
seem to be no basis for any supposition that either the Costa
Rican or Nicaraguan lists were drawn up with the present
controversy in mind. With regard to the failure of the Government
of Honduras to make its appointments I have no comment to
make, but inasmuch as the Government of Honduras would not
have been able to select any jurists chosen from its own list the
absence of this list would seem to be of no importance so far as
Your Excellency’s Government is concerned and does not limit
the competency or the availability of the Tribunal in this case.
The Government of Salvador not having ratified the Convention
establishing the International Central American Tribunal could
not name a list of jurists; but nevertheless this Convention is in
effect, with two lists of jurists nominated by countries not parties
to the existing controversy.
As Your Excellency is doubtless aware, Article 26 of this
Convention provides that the Convention shall take effect with
respect to the parties that have ratified it from the date of its
ratification by at least three of the signatory states. It was
therefore foreseen that a case might arise in which resort would
be had to this Tribunal when only the list of one state not a party

to the controversy would be available for the selection of a
tribunal.
There are now available for nomination as members of the
Tribunal twelve distinguished jurists, the reputation and high
moral worth of whom Your Excellency does not question, and of
whom two are South Americans, eight are Central Americans and
two are North Americans. Since the Tribunal would be made up
of only three jurists one of whom could be selected by mutual
agreement outside of the list of twelve mentioned above, it
appears that it should not be difficult to select from this list the
jurists necessary to form the Tribunal. My Government is fully
satisfied therefore that if there is genuine desire to submit this
question to settlement by the International Central American
Tribunal no obstacle to the creation of an impartial tribunal exists.
To Your Excellency’s observations that the idea of arbitration is
essentially of a judicial nature, my Government takes no
exception. Nevertheless, though arbitrations are judicial in their
nature, it has never been understood, nor has it been the practice,
unless limited by the Protocol of Submission, that arbitrations of
boundary disputes should not take into consideration the elements
set forth in the proposal of the United States. After a careful study
of the present controversy, with the details of which my
Government is thoroughly familiar, it was felt that it would be to
the best interests of both countries that a decision should not be
based solely upon historical evidence purporting to set forth
boundaries between Honduras and Guatemala before either of
those nations existed as an independent republic. It was not
intended that the Tribunal should ignore the judicial or
documentary or historic proof on which the rights of the parties
might rest but, on the contrary, all such documents and historic
proof would be available to the arbitrators in this case. This could
easily be provided for by the Protocol of Submission. It was to
meet the practical considerations involved that my Government
suggested that the arbitral tribunal should be authorized to take
into consideration the existing political, economic and

commercial interests of both states, thus permitting the tribunal to
draw a boundary line which would be felt to be suitable under
existing circumstances.
In suggesting that the tribunal be empowered to take into
consideration the political, economic and commercial interests of
both states in fixing a common boundary between them my
Government did not doubt that this suggestion would be
acceptable, in view of the fact that both Honduras and Guatemala,
as a result of the mediation proceedings of 1917 and 1918, agreed
to the appointment of a commission to make an economic survey
of the territory in dispute. This survey was completed in 1919 and
the report, which covered political, economic and commercial
conditions, was communicated to both Governments, who,
through their duly appointed representatives, presented arguments
to the mediator based upon this report, thus making these
elements a part of the controversy.
My Government has noted Your Excellency’s expressed
willingness to accept arbitration under the President of the United
States of America or the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
the United States, or any other tribunal established in regular and
permanent form. It was the opinion of my Government that this
question, involving a boundary between two Central American
republics, could and should be arbitrated by the Tribunal which
had been created by the Central American republics for the
express purpose of arbitrating just such questions as this one. For
this reason the Secretary of State made the proposal in the form
that he did, feeling sure that both countries, if they could agree to
submit the question to arbitration, would welcome the opportunity
to submit it to arbitration by a tribunal which they themselves
established rather than by any foreign tribunal.
In conclusion I am instructed to say that my Government feels
that the suggestion which the Secretary of State made on June 545
is still open to acceptance by the Government of Honduras and

hopes that Government will give careful reconsideration to the
matter.”
KELLOGG

[Document 580]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[Paraphrase]
Legation in Guatemala, it is the sincere hope of the Department that nothing
in the reply of Honduras to Guatemala’s note may tend to precipitate a
break between the two countries. Although no report from you has been
received by the Department in reply to the last paragraph of its telegram
No. 67, July 27, noon, it hopes that the Executive order of Honduras was
not issued for the purpose of withdrawing permanently from the existing
Mixed Commission and that the Government of Honduras is prepared to
appoint a representative on the Commission should there be further
business for the Commission to transact. Please convey the above
informally to the Foreign Minister.
The Department has by no means decided that it would be best under any
circumstances for Mr. Davis to lay down a provisional line. It prefers that
the situation as regards Honduras should remain such that it would be
possible for Mr. Davis to do so should it ultimately appear that this would
be the best course.
KELLOGG

[Document 581]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[Paraphrase]
interpreted the note of August 4 from Guatemala to Honduras as indicating
that Guatemala is anxious to have Mr. Davis lay down a provisional line.
The Department has by no means reached a decision as to whether or not it
would be best under any circumstances for Mr. Davis to lay down a
provisional line. Consequently the Department does not desire you to make
any suggestions to the Government of Guatemala at this time. For your
information, however, the Department desires you to know that it does not
feel that Mr. Davis should under any circumstances undertake to lay down a
provisional line unless he is free to fix the line unhampered by reservations
on the part of either of the two countries, and unless both countries have
committed themselves unreservedly to accept such a line as he may lay
While the Department does not know the reason why Honduras canceled
the nomination of its Boundary Commissioner, it is the hope of the
Department that Guatemala will not make an issue of this action which
might further strain the relations between Guatemala and Honduras.
KELLOGG

[Document 582]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:40 p.m.]
Guatemalan note received by mail was despatched yesterday by mail and is
unprovocative and mild in tone. I do not believe this Government has any
intention or desire to effect a diplomatic break with Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN

[Document 583]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
Foreign Affairs which after lengthy resume of my note of August 8th reads
as follows:
“Maintaining in all its terms my prior note of July 27th last49 the
concepts of which I have had the satisfaction to have seen
unweakened in any of their essentials, my Government also
would believe a new reply unnecessary were it not for the frank
and close cordiality of the relations it has the honor to maintain
with that of Your Excellency, which motivates its desire not to
leave without satisfactory explanation a single one of the
observations that have been made and permits me to add new
reasons in support of the point of view my Government justifiably
maintains.
Without declaring, as indeed his just and exact discernment would
not permit, the nonexistence of prior undertakings still in full
force, which he implicitly recognizes, His Excellency the
Secretary of State appears to attach decisive importance to the
fact that these undertakings have not served efficiently to solve
the question. But the fact that one of the parties by its refusal to
give effective form to the existing agreements has rendered them
futile does not mean that the legal and moral force of those
agreements has been affected and it would only serve for the
consideration that future agreements might suffer a similar fate if
the other party does not fulfill its obligations or puts obstacles in
the way. In such a case it would be quite evident that new

agreements given these antecedents could only be effective if the
interests and rights of one of the parties were secured at the
expense of those of the other party.
Clearly, according to the text of the convention of 1923, the
intention of those who negotiated it was the formation of a
‘complete, permanent’ list of 30 jurisconsults for the organization
of the Central American Tribunal in each case which must arise.
The Government of San Salvador not having ratified the
convention the list is therefore reduced to 24. It is true that in
conformity with article 26 of the convention it would enter into
force by ratification of three at least of the signatory states. The
convention is therefore effective; but the lists for the formation of
the Tribunal were not drawn up in due time and these are even yet
‘incomplete’ according to the tenor of article 2 of the same
convention. The legal effectiveness of a treaty is one thing but an
entirely different question is that of the execution and fulfillment
of its provisions. Thus the Government of Honduras has not been
able to fulfill the obligation which is imposed upon it by the
article 2 above cited of transmitting ‘the complete list to each one
of the signatory republics’ because these lists have not yet been
‘complete’ as is explicitly required by the convention.
Now as concerns the date of the latter nominations my
Government has abided scrupulously by the official decrees
which have been communicated to it. Permit me to repeat,
because it has been already expressed in my previous notes, that
none of the considerations relative to the formation of the Central
American Tribunal has any reference to the high moral worth and
reputation of the jurisconsults already named or to be named.
The fact has been pointed out that there are actually 12
distinguished jurists eligible for nomination as members of the
Tribunal from whom may be chosen those necessary to form it,
and thereupon would be constituted of three only, one of whom
might be selected by mutual agreement aside from the list of 12
mentioned. My Government with great regret must differ

completely with this opinion in regard to the possibility of the
formation of the Tribunal in this manner, for it cannot reconcile
such an opinion with the clear and definite provisions of articles 2
and 3 of the Convention, which Your Excellency will be able to
appreciate upon the slightest examination. The spirit and letter of
the agreement clearly indicate that the intention of those who
negotiated it was that the tribunal, whenever it might be formed,
should be established with all the requisites of the convention
without departing from a single one of them. It is made clear in
article 1, section 2, paragraph a, that the decision of the
International Tribunal established by the convention would be
null and any one of the parties might refuse to fulfill it ‘when the
Tribunal had not been organized in strict accordance’ with the
convention. My Government maintains the position that in
whatever form it might be suggested the International Central
American Tribunal should be constituted, under present
conditions, it would not be ‘in strict accord’ with the convention
of 1923, from which are drawn the pertinent conclusions.
In the final session celebrated at Cuyamel on April 23rd of the
present year the honorable representative of the mediating
government declared the present existence of the arbitration
agreement of February 7th, 1923; and after certain considerations
of general character, he suggested to the Commissions of both
countries that they obtain powers from their respective
Governments with a view to negotiating a definitive treaty of
arbitration, in conformity naturally with the exigencies of the
obligation previously contracted and declared valid by
representative of the mediating government.
The Government of Honduras being ready for the request which
would be made of it for the purpose of formalizing the protocol of
arbitration once recognized at Cuyamel, received with great
surprise the unexpected proposal of His Excellency the Secretary
of State contained in Your Excellency’s note of June 5th last,50 in
which, disregarding or disavowing the resolution of his
representative at Cuyamel, he proposes to my Government a

negotiation entirely foreign to the nature of the arbitration agreed
upon and distinct from all the antecedents bearing on the
diplomatic procedure in this affair. Undoubtedly there is such a
marked and profound difference between the propositions
accepted at Cuyamel and the later proposal of His Excellency the
Secretary of State that they are necessarily mutually exclusive.
Without objecting to the considerations advanced by my
Government in regard to the juridical nature of the arbitration His
Excellency the Secretary of State insists upon the idea of
including in the protocol of arbitration elements opposed to the
juridical concept. In this connection His Excellency the Secretary
of State refers to the report of the Economic Commission
presented in September 1921 after an inspection of the disputed
zone.
In regard to this report which was refuted in certain of its
extremes by the Counsel of Honduras, my Government has never
considered it as anything more than a report of a technical
character, for demonstration of the nature and economic and
commercial value of the zone but never for giving any force to
the respective rights of the parties.
The Government of Honduras does not deny the existence of
political and economic interests or of those of any other nature in
the disputed territory; and it is precisely because of the existence
of such interests and because of the manner in which they were
acquired that my Government would never be able to accept them
as the basis of an arbitral decision, without diminishing the
proven and documented territorial rights of the Republic.
The authority given by the Legislative Assembly of Guatemala to
the Executive Power in decree number 1568 of the 18th of July
last to accept the proposal of arbitration, states that ‘the subject of
arbitration will be the fixing of the common boundary between
Guatemala and Honduras taking into consideration the political,
economic and commercial interests of both countries and likewise
the amount of whatever compensation may be thought due.’ The

legislative authorization makes no reference at all to judicial and
documentary proof of the premises; and naturally the
representatives of Guatemala will not in such case be able to get
away from the definite arrangement which is indicated by that
legislative resolution; thus the protocol of arbitration will be
negotiated on a basis of the interests indicated and not on a basis
of resolutions adopted and justice. I have already regretfully
informed Your Excellency that my Government cannot concur in
any case in the drawing up of such a protocol, prejudicial and
dangerous to the territorial rights of Honduras.
Concerning the idea expressed by Your Excellency that the
question of frontiers between two Central American Republics
ought to be arbitrated by the International Tribunal, created for
the express purpose of arbitrating questions precisely similar to
that under consideration, I must lay before Your Excellency the
fact that on the day of the much heralded and solemn ceremony of
the signing of the Convention of the Central American Tribunal, a
separate agreement to arbitrate was reached, under the decision of
His Excellency the President of the United States, indicating
clearly that from then on the boundary question was to be out of
the jurisdiction or field of action of the said Tribunal, in
accordance with and carrying out the Convention of 1914, in
force in 1923, as it is today with no later act having affected its
existence. This significant fact leaves no doubt that, it have
[having] already [been] agreed to submit the boundary question to
arbitration by His Excellency the President of the United States of
America, it was not contemplated that the question might be later
submitted to a different decision.
In conclusion I desire to express once more to Your Excellency
the profound appreciation with which the Government of
Honduras receives the generous efforts of the Government of the
United States of America toward the attainment of a satisfactory
solution in the pending question of the boundary between
Honduras and Guatemala; and for this reason, although I must
again regretfully decline to reconsider the proposal of His

Excellency the Secretary of State, and because of my duty to
defend the territorial rights of the Republic, I repeat to Your
Excellency our frank and firm disposition to accept whatever
proposal of arbitration the illustrious American Government may
put forward; under the control of whatever functionary,
corporation or tribunal it may see fit to designate, so organized
that there could not be later a motive for nullity and the arbitral
decision being based on the fundamentals of law established by
Article 6 of the Convention of 1914. I do not need to remind you
that the said Convention also takes into consideration the
existence of the interests established (article 6) so far as their
possession is by right, is legitimate, and is established according
to the general principles of law and the rules of justice which in
the particular case are sanctioned by the law of nations. It also
seems superfluous for me to add, considering the fraternal feeling
and responding to the elevated and conciliatory proposals of the
Government of the United States of America, that the
Government of Honduras will find it agreeable, after the judicial
arbitral award, to discuss with the Government of Guatemala any
agreements or formalities for the reciprocal and equitable benefit
of both countries. Under such conditions the Government of
Honduras would be prompt to appoint its commissioners or
representatives for arranging the arbitration, either under the
agreement of 1923 or under the new form the American
Government might suggest, in harmony with the frank and cordial
observations I have had the honor to present in detail, with due
respect and honor toward the honorable mediating government.
The Government of Guatemala, bound by a present constitutional
restriction, could not allege any impediment to the effectiveness
of the arbitration agreed upon in 1923, since at that time there did
not exist the mandate which now restrains her to such an extent as
to make impossible any settlement by means of arbitration under
the terms imposed. It would seem that the American Government
has ample perspective with which to reach a solution which will
satisfy all interests, harmonize all difficulties and guarantee all
rights.

Please accept, etcetera. (Signed) F. Davila.”
Repeated to Guatemala.
SUMMERLIN
47 Telegram in two sections.
48 Not printed; it stated that the note contained in telegram No. 70, printed

[Document 584]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:50 a.m.]
105. A memorandum was signed yesterday by the Foreign Minister and
myself which reads in translation as follows:
“General Chacón, President of Guatemala, and Señor Carlos
Salazar, Minister for Foreign Affairs, stated confidentially to Mr.
Geissler, the American Minister, for the orientation of the
Department of State in its negotiation with the Government of
Honduras in the matter of the boundary that, in case Honduras
should propose that the President of the United States or the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of that country preside over the
Central American Tribunal in conformity with the proposal made
by the Secretary of State, Mr. Kellogg, on June 5, 1928,
Guatemala would accept.”
The above has been paraphrased.51
GEISSLER
51 The paraphrased translation has been replaced by a translation supplied
by the editor from copy of the Spanish text transmitted in the Minister’s

[Document 585]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras
(Summerlin)
81. From the tenor and tone of the latest note from the Honduran
satisfied that no useful purpose will be served by pursuing this
correspondence further, at least until, as the result of your further
conversations with the Honduran authorities you report a change in their
present attitude, and the Department does not, therefore, contemplate
making any reply to this communication. For your personal information and
guidance in informal conversation however the Department desires to make
the following observations:
1. The Department of course gave more than the “slightest
examination” to the Convention which established the Central
American Tribunal before submitting the arbitration proposal to
Honduras and Guatemala. This proposal was made only after a
careful and conscientious study of the Convention as the result of
which the Department concluded that the Tribunal is competent to
function in this matter, and after considering the arguments
presented by Honduras the Department finds no reason to change
its conclusion.
2. With reference to that part of the note of the Honduran
Government which refers to the arbitration proposal made by Mr.
Davis at Cuyamel on April 23, Mr. Davis states that he did not
suggest either formally or informally that either the agreement to
arbitrate announced at Washington in 1923 by representatives of
both Governments at the Central American Conference, or the
1914 Treaty should form the basis of the proposed arbitration.
The fact that he proposed arbitration by an arbitrator or “arbitral

board” bears out this conclusion. A perusal of Mr. Davis’
proposal shows that while reference is made to the announcement
made in 1923 this reference was included merely to show that
both countries had shown a desire to arbitrate the controversy.
The Department’s proposal of June 4 is, therefore, simply an
amplification of Mr. Davis’ proposal and suggested that the
existing Mixed Commission should draw up a protocol of
arbitration, which this Commission had not hitherto had the
opportunity to do.
3. The suggestion that the Arbitral Tribunal should “take into
consideration political, economic and commercial interests of
both countries” cannot in the Department’s opinion be interpreted
as barring from consideration arguments based on historical
grounds. The Department has no reason to believe that Guatemala
has so interpreted it. In any case this point could and should be
made perfectly clear in drawing up the protocol of submission.
4. In making the suggestion mentioned the Department had no
reason to believe that the consideration by the Arbitral Tribunal of
the political, economic and commercial factors involved would in
any way weaken the case of Honduras since the Department
understands that that country has strongly established interests of
this nature in the disputed territory. Moreover, the Department
was confident that the submission of the question to arbitration on
these bases would be equally fair to both countries and offer the
best way to a practicable solution.
5. The Department is much concerned at the continued refusal by
Honduras to submit this question to arbitration on the bases
already accepted by Guatemala. Honduras has insistently claimed
that Guatemala has from time to time penetrated the disputed
territory and through gradual encroachment has established illegal
control in a considerable section of that territory. If this claim is
true it should be apparent to Honduras that leaving the situation in
its present unsatisfactory state would open the way to further
penetration by Guatemala in the disputed area. The proposed

arbitration offers Honduras an opportunity to end the situation to
which she objects, and to establish her claims in the disputed area.
It appears to the Department that Honduras in declining to accept
the proposal is assuming the responsibility for the continuance of
this situation.
6. The Department also desires you to submit your personal views
as to the reasons prompting the Honduran Government’s refusal
to accept the Department’s suggestion and the possibility that this
suggestion may ultimately be accepted either after the elections or
by another administration.
7. In your conversations with the Honduran authorities please also
bear in mind the considerations set forth in the Department’s
accompanying the Department’s instruction No. 272, dated July
CASTLE
52 Instruction No. 272 and accompanying memorandum not printed;
substance of the memorandum was transmitted to the Minister in Honduras
568].

Good offices of the Department of
State in behalf of American interests
desiring to establish air lines in Latin
America
Pan American Airways, Incorporated
[586] The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Department of State
[587] The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Washington, February 25, 1928.
[588] The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Washington, March 7, 1928.
[589]
The
Secretary
of
State
to
the
American
Diplomatic
Representatives in Costa Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and Salvador
[590] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)

[591] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt)
Washington, March 17, 1928.
[592] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[593] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
[594] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[595] The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[596] The Minister in Salvador (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

[597] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)
[598] The Chargé in Mexico (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State
[599] The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
[600] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
[601] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Young)
[602] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State

[603] The Chargé in Haiti (Gross) to the Secretary of State
[604] The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
[605] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[606] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[607] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
[608] The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Counselor of
Embassy in Cuba (Curtis)
Washington, July 12, 1928.

[609] The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Minister in
Guatemala (Geissler)
Washington, July 12, 1928.
[610] The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
New York [undated]. [Received July 26, 1928.]
[611] The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Washington, August 14, 1928.
[612] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Dominican
Republic (Young)
[613] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
Washington, September 14, 1928.

[614] The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Chargé in France
(Armour)
Washington, September 26, 1928.
[615] The Secretary of State to the Vice Consul at Nassau (Points)
[616] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[617] The High Commissioner in Haiti (Russell) to the Secretary of
State
[618] The High Commissioner in Haiti (Russell) to the Secretary of
State
[619] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State

[620] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[621] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[622] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
[623] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[624] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson)
[625] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)

Washington, December 12, 1928—noon.
[626] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
[627] The Chargé in Honduras (Johnson) to the Secretary of State
[628] The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[629] The Secretary of State to the High Commissioner in Haiti
(Russell)
[630] The Chargé in Honduras (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 586]
The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Department of State
NEW YORK, February 16, 1928.
[Received February 17.]
GENTLEMEN: This Company’s airplane “Pan-America” will leave Key West,
Florida, on or about February 28th, and will cover the following itinerary,
as nearly as practicable:
February 28
—San Miguel, Yucatan
—Belize, British Honduras
March
—Puerto Barrios, Guatemala
—Guatemala City, Guatemala
—San Salvador, Salvador
—La Union, Salvador
—Managua, Nicaragua
—San Jose, Costa Rica
—Colon, Canal Zone
—Limon, Costa Rica
20 —San Juan Del Norte, Nicaragua
—Managua, Nicaragua
—Puerto Barrios, Guatemala
—Belize, British Honduras
—San Miguel, Yucatan
—Cape San Antonio, Cuba
April
—Havana, Cuba
Of course, this itinerary is only tentative, and the schedule must vary with
weather conditions and delays encountered. However, it is requested that
permission be obtained from the Governments of Mexico, British
Honduras, Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and

Panama to land in these countries without having to undergo the customary
formalities and complications of clearance, etc. It is also requested that the
Consular Representatives of the United States at the places above
mentioned, and also at places hereinafter mentioned, be notified of this
flight, and instructed to render every assistance possible to the early
consummation of the Company’s survey work.
The purpose of this flight is to survey the most feasible airway between Key
West and Colon, in anticipation of the award of a mail contract for a service
over this route. It may be necessary to touch at certain additional places,
particularly Corinto, Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
Mr. J. E. Whitbeck will be in charge of this flight, and will be instructed to
communicate his departures and arrivals to the nearest American Consul, as
well as to advise both Consular and Diplomatic Representatives of the
United States more exactly as to his time of arrival, when it can Be
determined.
It will be impossible to maintain the above schedule unless requested
exemption from the customary red tape is obtained, and it is, of course, of
vital importance to the Company to have this survey completed before the
rainy season begins in the middle of April.
Very truly yours,
PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS, INC.
By JOHN A. HAMBLETON

[Document 587]
The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
WASHINGTON, February 25, 1928.
SIRS: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your letter of February 16,
1928, in connection with your plans for a flight from Key West to Colon,
and informs you that in compliance with the request contained therein
instructions have been sent to the American Embassies at Mexico City and
Habana, the Consulate at Belize, British Honduras, and the Legations at San
Salvador, Guatemala City, Tegucigalpa, Managua and San José,53 with a
view to obtaining permission for flight over the territory of the countries
concerned and also exemption from the usual formalities of clearance. The
American consular officers at the other places mentioned in your letter
under reference have been instructed to render all possible assistance. It is
noted from your letter of February 2354 that the flight will leave Key West
on March 7.
A statement of the expense incurred in this telegraphic correspondence on
your behalf will be sent you in due course.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
Assistant Secretary
53 None printed.
54 Not printed.

[Document 588]
The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
WASHINGTON, March 7, 1928.
SIRS: The Department refers to its letter of February 25 last in connection
with your plans for a flight from Key West to Colon, and informs you that it
is in receipt of telegrams from the American Legations at San Salvador,
Guatemala City, Tegucigalpa, Managua and San José, as well as from the
Embassies at Mexico City and Habana and the Consulate at Belize,53
according to which the desired arrangements have been made.
The Legation at Panama was instructed on February 2554 to notify the
Government of Panama of the proposed flight and also to request the
American Consul at Colon to render all possible assistance to Mr.
Whitbeck, who was expected to reach there about March 21. This
instruction does not call for a reply.
The American Minister at Guatemala suggests in his telegram that he be
notified a few days in advance of the arrival of Mr. Whitbeck, and points
out that there is no landing field at Puerto Barrios.
For the Secretary of State:
[STOKELEY W. MORGAN]
Chief, Division of Latin American Affairs
53 None printed.
54 Not printed.

[Document 589]
The
Secretary
of
State
to
the
American
Diplomatic
Representatives in Costa Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and
Salvador
Pan American Airways flight postponed approximately 30 days.
KELLOGG

[Document 590]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
21. John D. MacGregor, Vice President Pan American Airways, will arrive
by train March 20 for the purpose of obtaining a transport concession.
Please render him all possible and proper assistance.
KELLOGG

[Document 591]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Nicaragua
(Eberhardt)57
WASHINGTON, March 17, 1928.
No. 331
SIR: The Department has been informed that Mr. John D. MacGregor, Vice
President of Pan American Airways, Inc., 100 East 42nd Street, New York
City, is planning to make a trip through the countries of Central America for
the purpose of obtaining airplane transport concessions. Mr. MacGregor
expects to reach Guatemala on March 20 and shortly thereafter to visit the
country to which you are accredited.
Should Mr. MacGregor call upon you the Department will be pleased to
have you extend to him all possible and proper assistance toward the
accomplishment of his mission.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
57 The same, on the same date, to the Ministers in Costa Rica (No. 441),
Honduras (No. 238), and Salvador (No. 116).

[Document 592]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
GUATEMALA, March 26, 1928.
[Received April 4.]
No. 1861
5 p.m. instructing the Legation to render all possible and proper assistance
to Mr. John D. MacGregor, Vice President of the Pan American Airways
Incorporated, in his effort to obtain a transport concession, I have the honor
to report, that I arranged for the President of Guatemala to receive Mr.
MacGregor today, and that since then he has informed me, that he has had a
very pleasant preliminary talk with President Chacón concerning his
project, and that he will visit the Minister of the Interior (Fomento)
tomorrow, as suggested by the President, for the purpose of discussing
details.
I have [etc.]
ARTHUR H. GEISSLER

[Document 593]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Guatemala (Geissler)
MacGregor having difficulties in his negotiations. Report briefly by cable,
fully by mail present situation and render all possible assistance.
KELLOGG

[Document 594]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4 p.m.]
appears to have been making considerable progress but encountered delay
because of consideration given by Council of State to question whether
Gordon contract (see despatch No. 174158 ) interferes, and subsequently by
impending reorganization of Council of State.
April 20 in personal interview I requested the President to receive him
again. MacGregor says that the President and the Minister of Fomento have
assured him that they will sign the contract when returned by the Council.
He hopes to get contract signed within 10 days and requests that the
company be informed that because of Guatemalan censorship he is not
cabling but that he is writing fully.
Full details by mail.
GEISSLER
that under date of Dec. 19, 1927, an aviation contract had been awarded by
the Guatemalan authorities to Victor D. Gordon, an American citizen. (File

[Document 595]
The Minister in Guatemala (Geissler) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9 p.m.]
59. Upon instruction of the Pan American Airways, MacGregor left today
via San Salvador for Tegucigalpa to open negotiations for transport
concession.
The Government here is indisposed to take action on the company’s
application while the Cabinet resignations are pending. Repeated to
Tegucigalpa and San Salvador.
GEISSLER

[Document 596]
The Minister in Salvador (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
SAN SALVADOR, May 5, 1928.
[Received May 21.]
No. 1118
SIR: Referring to previous correspondence on the question of the efforts of
the Pan American Airways, Inc., to establish an air service between Key
West and points in Central America, and with special reference to Minister
of Pan American Airways, Inc., Mr. J. G. [D] MacGregor, had left
Guatemala for Honduras, via San Salvador, I have the honor to report that
Mr. MacGregor called to see me on Thursday last, stating that he was
remaining here only for the day and did not then desire to take up the matter
of interesting the Government of Salvador in the establishment of an air
service. He told me that, in view of the failure of the Government of
Guatemala to take any action on his Company’s offer (although he had
remained six weeks in the City of Guatemala), his principals had directed
him to proceed immediately to Tegucigalpa and endeavor to interest the
Government of Honduras in the project. He stated also that the plans had
been radically changed; the route, now under consideration, would come
neither to Guatemala nor San Salvador, but would pass via Belize, British
Honduras and Tela, to Tegucigalpa; that there was a possibility that later on
a shuttle route between Tegucigalpa and San Salvador might be established;
he would let me know how his negotiations in the capital of Honduras
proceeded.
I have [etc.]
JEFFERSON CAFFERY

supra.

[Document 597]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Mexico (Morrow)
125.
Pan
American
Airways
Incorporated,
which
contemplates
establishment of air mail and passenger service between the United States
and Panama Canal Zone via Cuba, is desirous of flying its planes in this
connection over the State of Yucatan and Territory of Quintana Roo.
Company understands that local authorities have no objection provided
permission of Federal Government is obtained and presumes that in view of
Article 4 of Pan American Commercial Aviation Convention signed at
Havana by three Mexican delegates60 the Mexican Government would raise
no objection to free passage of company’s planes.
At the instance of the company please request permission of Mexican
Government for company’s planes to fly over Yucatan and Quintana Roo on
their regular trips and to land at Merida when necessary. Company makes
no request for preferential permission of any kind nor for the right to
conduct any commercial undertakings on Mexican soil.
Please telegraph Mexican Government’s reply.
KELLOGG

[Document 598]
The Chargé in Mexico (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7:10 p.m.]
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs states that the authorities concerned
have granted permission of a provisional character for the airplanes of the
Pan American Airways, Incorporated, to fly over Yucatan and Quintana
Roo in their journey from the United States to Canal Zone with the
reservation that definite permission may be given on the basis subsequently
to be stipulated when the Pan American commercial aviation convention
recently signed at Havana is ratified.
Text of note by the pouch.
SCHOENFELD
61 Not printed.

[Document 599]
The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State
MANAGUA, June 23, 1928.
[Received July 11.]
No. 712
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 331 of March 17,
1928, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and translation of the
contract signed by the Nicaraguan Government and Mr. John D. MacGregor
as representative of the Pan American Airways, Incorporated, for the
establishment of an air mail and passenger service between the United
States, Nicaragua, and the Canal Zone.
Upon Mr. MacGregor’s arrival in Nicaragua I introduced him to the
President and explained briefly the interest of the United States in the
proposed air mail service. I subsequently extended to Mr. MacGregor such
additional assistance as seemed proper. He encountered no opposition in
connection with his contract and its signature was delayed only by the
necessity of waiting for the arrival of his power-of-attorney from his own
company and by the inevitable mechanical delays in the Department of
Fomento. I am transmitting herewith for the Department’s information a
copy of a letter from Mr. MacGregor in which he expresses his appreciation
of the Legation’s assistance.62
When Mr. MacGregor’s proposal was first presented to the President the
latter said that he had recently promised Mr. Goodell, the manager in
Honduras for the United Fruit Company, to give him preference for the
establishment of an air mail service from Honduras to Nicaragua if the fruit
company should decide to extend to this country the service already
operated between Tela and Tegucigalpa. The President was therefore
reluctant to conclude a new contract without being released from this
promise. Mr. MacGregor assured both the President and the Legation that

the United Fruit Company was favorably inclined to the establishment of
his own service and would cooperate in every way and he promised to
obtain immediately instructions from the United Fruit Company to Mr.
Goodell to cable to the President, releasing him from the promise referred
to. While no such cable arrived before Mr. MacGregor’s departure from
Managua, the President signed the concession on this assurance. I am
transmitting herewith for the Department’s further information a copy of a
further letter which Mr. MacGregor wrote to me in this connection.62
It will be noted that the concession provides for the establishment, without
subsidy from the Government, of a passenger and mail service for which
the company will be free to establish such tariffs as it sees fit. The
Government promises to deliver to the company all correspondence to be
delivered by air mail. Mr. MacGregor stated at the outset that this was the
only special or exclusive privilege which the company desired. Article 21
of the concession as signed however contains certain additional provisions
designed to safeguard the company against interference in the conduct of its
service, which could perhaps be interpreted in such a manner as to make it
impossible or very difficult for a rival company to engage in commercial
aviation in Nicaragua. This article, which underwent some changes after the
original draft of the contract had been submitted to the Legation, was not
brought to the Legation’s attention in its final form until the contract itself
had been signed.
Mr. MacGregor returned to Tegucigalpa on June 21 on the airplane which
was sent to bring an instruction transmitted by the Department through the
Legation there. He informed me that he expected to conclude his
negotiations in Tegucigalpa without difficulty and that the establishment of
the service would be assured when the concessions from Honduras and
Nicaragua were ratified by the congresses of these two countries. It cannot
however be actually inaugurated until about one year after such ratification,
because of the necessity for building planes and constructing airports in the
meantime. While the company desires to extend its service also to the other
Central American countries it will not be necessary to do so in order to
assure a through service between the United States and the Canal Zone.
I have [etc.]

CHARLES C. EBERHARDT
[Enclosure—Translation—Extract]
Contract Between the Government of Nicaragua and the Pan American Airways, Inc., Signed June 18, 1928
XXI. Due to the circumstance that the Company is the one which will
establish for the first time the service to which this contract refers, and in
consideration of the large expenditures which the said Company will have
to make in order to commence and operate this service, the Government
agrees not to concede to any other company, person or corporation rights
and privileges which might interfere with or injuriously affect in any way
those which by means of this contract are conceded to the said Company, or
which might disturb or interrupt the proper maintenance of this service, or
which might endanger the life or property of the officers or passengers of
the Company or of its clients in Nicaragua, such as authorizing that the
radio stations, telegraph stations, air ports, or other like equipment, whether
the property of the Company or of the Government, could be used in
common with other companies, firms, individuals, or organizations that
interest themselves or desire to interest themselves in the field of
commercial, experimental, or amateur aviation in the Republic of
Nicaragua.
62 Not printed.
62 Not printed.

[Document 600]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Atherton)
York, made application sometime ago to Government of British Honduras
for authorization for their aircraft to land and take off from British
Honduras and to use crown land for a landing field or to acquire and
develop airport. The company has informed the Department that although
the British Honduran Government is willing to grant this authorization the
Colonial Office has withheld its approval because of the absence of a
general aviation agreement between Great Britain and the United States.
Take up this matter immediately with appropriate authorities and endeavor
to bring about favorable decision. You may assure British authorities that
Federal Government of United States is prepared to grant on a reciprocal
basis to British nationals and British concerns the same privileges that are
desired in British Honduras by Pan American Airways, Incorporated, and to
endeavor to arrange for granting of like facilities by interested State
Governments. Experience in this latter regard convinces Department that
there would be no difficulty in effecting arrangements. Department is
informed that authorization of British authorities is necessary by July 1
next.
KELLOGG

[Document 601]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Young)64
12. Pan American Airways which is now operating a mail and passenger
service between Key West and Habana desires to inaugurate shortly, a bi-
weekly passenger service between San Antonio, Cuba, and San Juan, Porto
Rico, via Port au Prince and Santo Domingo. The Company is endeavoring
to make an initial flight beginning next Monday and to inaugurate thereafter
as promptly as possible a regular service. Please request permission of the
Dominican authorities for a ship of the Pan American Airways to make the
initial flight next Monday or as soon thereafter as possible and inquire
whether the Government would also be disposed to give permission for the
establishment of a regular service by this Company.
KELLOGG
64 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Chargé in Haiti as
telegram No. 33.

[Document 602]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
[Received 1:25 p.m.]
permission for initial flight and are favorably disposed towards
establishment regular service but suggest formal arrangements for latter
since landing facilities apparently necessary.
YOUNG

[Document 603]
The Chargé in Haiti (Gross) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:45 p.m.]
of the Pan American Airways to make contemplated flight. Permission also
granted to use local Marine Corps’ landing field for this flight. The question
of the Government granting permission for establishment of a regular
service by this company will be considered but anticipate no difficulty in
Commissioner’s Series.66 Please request pilot to telegraph ahead day and
hour of arrival here.
GROSS
66 Not printed.

[Document 604]
The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:02 p.m.]
99. For White. Pan American Airways tells me they must submit bid July
2nd to Postmaster General New covering United States-Porto Rican and the
United States-Mexican mail routes. As part of bid they must show they
have permission to pass through Cuba and use landing fields here. Their
petition for this privilege has been favorably acted upon by the Aviation
Commission and decree is being prepared for President’s signature. I talked
with the President this morning. He is satisfied with contract and says that
he will sign decree. President leaves tonight for the Isle of Pines and it will
take several days before the decree can be prepared and signed. Will you
inform Postmaster General New before July 2nd that I think from my
conversation with Machado there is no question about signing of decree and
that if he awards the contract to the Pan American Airways there will be no
difficulty in their crossing Cuba and using landing fields here.
JUDAH

[Document 605]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
56. Pan American Airways state their representative MacGregor
telegraphed up that newspaper opposition is being created to the granting of
contract to Pan American Airways because it is charged that the Company
is connected with United Fruit Company. Pan American Airways assures
Department that it has no connection whatsoever with United Fruit
Company and asks that you make this known.
KELLOGG

[Document 606]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
[Paraphrase]
60. Department has been informed by the Pan American Airways,
Incorporated, that Mr. MacGregor, their representative, is experiencing
difficulty in securing a contract for air mail service. The company says that
it would be very helpful if you would discuss the matter in its behalf with
the President of Honduras. It is the desire of the Department that you do so
as soon as possible.
The Post Office Department has just awarded a contract to the Pan
American Airways for air mail service from Key West to the Panama Canal
via Cuba, Mexico, British Honduras, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and
Panama. The Department is very anxious that this American concern should
be able to begin operations without delay.
It is the feeling of the Pan American Airways that the German aviation
interests in Colombia may have inspired some of the hostile press reports in
Honduras. This is not unlikely, as they have been hostile to American
interests. A report in this matter is requested. The Department, of course,
desires very much that the air mail service be in the hands of a reliable
American organization.
KELLOGG

[Document 607]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
awarded contract by Post Office Department for carrying mail from Key
West to Panama Canal Zone and has bid on line from Key West to Porto
Rico, informs Department it will send representative to Caracas within three
weeks. Please render all possible assistance.
KELLOGG

[Document 608]
The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Counselor of
Embassy in Cuba (Curtis)
WASHINGTON, July 12, 1928.
DEAR CURTIS: Mr. Juan Trippe, President of the Pan American Airways,
Incorporated, who were given last week the contract for ten years by the
Post Office Department to carry the mails from Key West to Panama and
also have a contract in Cuba for carrying international mails to Santiago,
and who have bid for the contract from our Post Office Department to carry
the mails from Key West to Porto Rico, advises me that certain German
interests are now endeavoring to obtain a concession in Cuba to carry the
Cuban domestic mails throughout the Island. Mr. Trippe states that his
company wants to undertake this work and feels that with their international
organization they will be able to render better and cheaper service than a
company that is carrying just the domestic mails. The matter is up with
Señor Sanchez Aballi, Secretary of Communications, and Mr. Trippe has
asked me to ask you to pass on the word to Señor Sanchez that they are
anxious to do the work and hope that the Cuban Government will not give
the Germans the contract until they have had a chance to make them a
proposition.
We are most anxious here to have American aviation as prominent as
possible in the Caribbean region and for that reason this Department did
everything possible to favor the bill that was enacted by Congress at its last
session authorizing the Post Office Department to give subventions for the
carrying of air mail in the Caribbean region. The Pan American Airways is
a hundred per cent American owned and managed company and for that
reason we would be glad to see it, rather than Germans, have the contract in
Cuba. The next time you see Sanchez or, if you do not see him shortly, if
you could arrange to see him soon and pass this word on to him, I think it
would be beneficial. I understand that Sanchez would rather give the

concession to the Pan American Airways in any event and if he knows that
they will undertake the work I think that he will keep it open for them.
Yours very sincerely,
FRANCIS WHITE

[Document 609]
The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Minister in
Guatemala (Geissler)
WASHINGTON, July 12, 1928.
DEAR MR. MINISTER: The Pan American Airways were not successful in obtaining
a contract in Guatemala for the carrying of air mail and for that reason have
dropped it and have taken up negotiations in Honduras and Nicaragua. They
have now obtained a contract in Nicaragua and will probably obtain a
contract in Honduras within the next few days. We also expect the matter of
their contract in British Honduras to be arranged this week. The Post Office
Department gave them the contract last week for ten years to carry the mails
from Key West to the Panama Canal and they will go via Cuba, Mérida in
Yucatan, Belize, Tela, Tegucigalpa, Managua, San José, and Panama. It is
not necessary for them to come into Guatemala but it occurs to me, now
that the Guatemalan Government sees that they are being left out, and it
was on account of their failure to give a contract to the Pan American
Airways that the Post Office Department excluded Guatemala in the call for
bids, that Guatemala may now think better of it and Avant to give a
satisfactory contract to this company. Will you please let me know what the
situation is and whether you think this is now a favorable moment for the
company to take the matter up again by sending a representative to
Guatemala. They can probably do so after their Honduran-Costa Rican
concessions have been completed.
With kindest regards [etc.]
FRANCIS WHITE

[Document 610]
The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
NEW YORK [undated].
[Received July 26, 1928.]
DEAR MR. WHITE: We are planning on a survey flight through Central America
to the Panama Canal Zone leaving Havana about August 18th.
The route will be as follows:
Havana, Cuba
Cozumel, Mexico
Belize, British Honduras
Tela, Honduras
La Union, Salvador
Punta Arenas, Costa Rica
San Jose, Costa Rica
David, Panama
Panama City, Panama
Canal Zone
In covering this route by air, we will need permission from the governments
of Honduras, El Salvador, Costa Rica and Panama. Will you kindly have the
American Ministers to those countries instructed to secure for us permission

to land and refuel our plane and to make incidental survey flights in the
vicinity of the cities named in those four countries. It will be satisfactory to
handle the entire correspondence by mail.
With many thanks for your help in this and other activities in Central
America, we remain [etc.]
PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS, INC.
By P. E. D. NAGLE

[Document 611]
The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
WASHINGTON, August 14, 1928.
SIRS: With reference to your undated letter to Mr. White, received July 26,
stating that you are planning a survey flight through Central America to the
Panama Canal Zone, and asking that the American Ministers in Honduras,
El Salvador, Costa Rica and Panama be instructed to procure certain
facilities in your behalf, the Department is pleased to inform you that the
desired instructions were promptly sent.
In this connection it should be said that the Department has ascertained
from the American Consul at Belize, British Honduras, that the facilities
obtained pursuant to the request contained in your letter of February 16 last
are still available. It is stated by the Consul that rain and squalls are more
frequent in August and that the prevailing wind is east-southeast with an
average velocity of fourteen miles per hour; also that the landing field is
used every Saturday and Sunday for sports but will be free if he is notified
of the elate of arrival of your plane.
For the Secretary of State:
S. W. MORGAN
Chief, Division of Latin American Affairs

[Document 612]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Dominican
Republic (Young)68
24. The Department is informed that Mr. P. E. D. Nagle, representing the
Pan American Airways, Incorporated, is proceeding to the Dominican
Republic in connection with the taking over by his firm of the West Indies
Aerial Express for the establishment of a commercial air service between
Miami, Florida and San Juan, Porto Rico. Mr. Nagle and the Pan American
Airways are well and favorably known to the Department and you are
instructed to accord him such assistance as may be possible and proper.
CLARK
68 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Chargé in Haiti as
telegram No. 60.

[Document 613]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
WASHINGTON, September 14, 1928.
No. 285
SIR: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 680 of
which you received from Mr. MacGregor containing a report of his efforts
to secure a contract for the Pan American Airways, Incorporated, from the
Honduran Government.
The Department has noted from this despatch and previous correspondence
on the subject the difficulties which Mr. MacGregor appears to have
encountered. The Department does not appear, however, to have received a
comprehensive report from you on the situation confronting Mr.
MacGregor, and on the efforts which it is presumed you are making on his
behalf.
Inasmuch as the Pan American Airways, Incorporated, has already received
a contract from the United States Post Office for the transportation of mail
between this country and Panama and as the obtaining of a satisfactory
contract from the Honduran Government is necessary for the fulfillment of
the contract with the United States Post Office, the Department considers it
of vital importance to American interests generally and for the development
of American commercial aviation in Central America especially that Mr.
MacGregor should be successful in his negotiations with the Honduran
Government.

For the Secretary Of State.

& Nei ther Printed.

RANCIS Wiarre

[Document 614]
The Assistant Secretary of State (White) to the Chargé in France
(Armour)
WASHINGTON, September 26, 1928.
DEAR NORMAN: Mr. Juan E. Trippe, President of the Pan American Airways,
Incorporated, 100 East 42d Street, New York City, is sailing early in
October for Paris where he may take up negotiations with the Latécoère
Company.
The Pan American Airways, Incorporated, is a one hundred per cent
American company; all its officers and all its capital are American and so
are its equipment and pilots. For nearly a year now it has been operating
between Key West and Habana carrying mails and passengers and is about
to open operations from Miami. Some two or three months ago the Post
Office Department awarded this company a ten year contract for the
carrying of mails to the Canal Zone via Cuba, Mexico and Central America,
and another ten year contract for the carrying of mails to Porto Rico via
Cuba, Haiti and the Dominican Republic. The company is now working out
in the countries it has to pass through the necessary formalities for the
establishment of the service. Eventually, the company desires to extend its
activities down the west coast of South America to Chile, thence across the
Andes to Buenos Aires and perhaps from Porto Rico via Trinidad to
Venezuela, and thence down the east coast of South America.
In any event, we consider of the utmost importance that American airlines
should be established in this hemisphere and especially in the Caribbean
region. The French are already very active, as you know, in running a
service from Paris to Dakar by airplane; thence to the Brazilian coast by
steamer, and thence to Rio and Buenos Aires by airplane, and the German
so-called Scadta Company70 is very active in Colombia and the Germans
are also active in Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador. Mr. Trippe will probably want
to discuss matters with the Latecoere Company and try to make some

arrangement with them and any assistance that the Embassy can render him
will be most highly appreciated I assure you.
With kindest regards [etc.]
FRANCIS WHITE
70 Sociedad Colombo-Alemana de Transportes Aereos.

[Document 615]
The Secretary of State to the Vice Consul at Nassau (Points)
Pan American Airways which has been awarded contract by Post Office
Department for carrying mail from Key West to Panama Canal Zone and
from Key West to Porto Rico is contemplating bidding for contract between
Miami and Nassau. Mr. John A. Hambleton, Vice President of the
Company, is in Nassau in connection with this matter. Please render him all
proper assistance.
KELLOGG

[Document 616]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, October 15, 1928.
[Received October 23.]
No. 1058
regarding the Pan American Airways, Incorporated, I have the honor to
report that representatives of this company, Messrs. Nagle and MacGregor,
were here recently for a few days in the interests of this company. They
were introduced by the Legation to President Vasquez and the Minister of
Finance to whom they outlined the company’s plans with respects to the
establishment of a commercial air service between Miami, Florida, and San
Juan, Porto Rico. The President and Minister de Moya stated that the
establishment of the proposed service would be cordially welcomed by the
Dominican Government which would gladly accord every possible facility
and assistance.
It is understood that Mr. Nagle will return to Santo Domingo in the near
future and will then endeavor to reach a formal agreement and undertaking
with the Government.
The Legation was happy to accord to these gentlemen during their stay here
every possible and proper assistance.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG

[Document 617]
The High Commissioner in Haiti (Russell) to the Secretary of
State
PORT AU PRINCE, November 26, 1928.
[Received December 6.]
No. 1324
SIR: I have the honor to report that the officials of the Pan-American
Airways, Inc., have recently been in Haiti and have taken up with me the
question of obtaining a concession or contract with the Haitian government.
There is attached hereto a copy of the contract first proposed by the Pan-
American Airways, Inc. There is also attached a memorandum giving the
views of the treaty officials on the proposed contract.75
The Pan-American Airways, Inc., is in agreement except as to article 8, and
it proposed a new article 8, copy attached.
A few days ago President Borno spoke to me on this subject and said that
he believed that the Haitian government should assist this new industry in
Haiti which he thought would be of material benefit to the country, and that,
as a consequence, he was prepared to heartily endorse article 8 submitted by
the company allowing exemption from taxes and payment of import duties
on gasoline, oils, special tools, and spare parts. The representative of the
Pan-American Airways, Inc., at Port au Prince informs me that other
governments have already agreed to a clause similar to the proposed article
8, and while from a financial point of view the question is one of small
moment, from a political point of view the rejection of this clause by Haiti
would be serious, in as much as other countries have readily agreed to it and
would be unable to understand how Haiti was to be excepted.
Dr. Millspaugh, the Financial Adviser-General Receiver is strongly opposed
to the inclusion of this clause in the contract. I feel that in view of the fact

that the work is pioneer work, that it will unquestionably be a decided
benefit to Haiti and form one of those ties that I am trying to develop which
will bind Haiti to the United States commercially in such manner as to
assure the future stability of this country, that it would be perfectly proper
to permit the desired exemption, particularly in view of the fact that
President Borno, representing Haiti, is strongly in favor of it.
The representative of the Pan-American Airways, Inc., has just presented a
new article, copy attached, which he desires incorporated in the proposed
contract as article 16. This article is now being studied. At first glance I am
not in particular sympathy with it, and do not believe that there would be
much difficulty in having it eliminated, particularly if article 8, as proposed
by the company was included in the contract.
It is requested that the Department inform me by telegraph its views
regarding article 8 proposed by the company, in order that the representative
of the Pan-American Airways, Inc., may take up this question with the
Haitian government to the end that the contract may be consummated at an
early date.
I have [etc.]
JOHN H. RUSSELL
[Enclosure 1—Extract]
Proposed Contract Between the Republic of Haiti and the Pan American Airways, Inc.
EIGHTH
In view of the fact that the Company asks no subsidy or subvention of any
kind from the Government, and because of the value of the services the
Company will render, the Government agrees that the Company shall be
free from all taxes, federal and municipal, and that the present import and
export duties on airships, gasoline, oils, and material and supplies of every
kind used in the establishment or operation of its business shall not be
increased. The Company shall have free use of the internal mails, telegraph,
telephone, and radio systems, but only for matters relating to the
Company’s own business.

[Enclosure 2]
Draft Article 8 Proposed by the Pan American Airways, Inc.
ARTICLE 8. In consideration of the value to the Haitian Government of the
services of the Company (Pan American Airways, Inc.,) will render, and to
assist the Company in initiating and maintaining the most efficient service,
the Haitian Government agrees that, for a period of Ten Years, the
Company shall be exempted from all taxes, federal and municipal, and from
the payment of all import duties on airplane Gasoline, Oils and Special
Tools and Spare Parts to be used exclusively in the establishment and
operation of its business.
[Enclosure 3]
Draft Article 16 Proposed by the Pan American Airways, Inc.
The Company agrees that it will carry under a scale of tariffs to be fixed by
agreement between the Government and the Company, all Haitian air mail
to Porto Rico, Santo Domingo, Cuba and the United States. The
Government agrees that it will not deliver to any other person or company
any Haitian air mail to the foregoing countries so long as the total amount
of air mail does not exceed twenty-five percent. (25%) of the total first-
class mail from Haiti to those countries. The Company shall have the right
to arrange a revision of the air mail tariffs when improvements in the
service or increase in the volume of the air mail make the revision of such
tariffs advisable.
75 Not printed.

[Document 618]
The High Commissioner in Haiti (Russell) to the Secretary of
State
PORT AU PRINCE, November 28, 1928.
[Received December 6.]
No. 1327
honor to inform the Department that this morning I had a conference with
representatives of the Pan-American Airways, Inc., and it appears that they
are very desirous of having Article 16 incorporated in the proposed
contract.
The Financial Adviser-General Receiver is of the opinion that the second
sentence of this Article would grant a monopoly of the most objectionable
sort. He further feels that the Haitian Government should not obligate itself
to send mails by the services of this Company before an agreement has been
reached as to rates. He also believes that the third sentence is objectionable
in that it might be construed as giving the Company the right to revise rates
upward as well as downward and without the consent of the other party. He
recommended that in place of this Article the following be substituted:—
“The Company agrees that it will carry, under tariffs to be fixed
from time to time by agreement with the Government, the air
mails delivered to the Company by the postal service of the
Republic, subject to the limitation as to total weight fixed
elsewhere in the present contract.”
The Pan-American Airways states that Article 16 is not in the nature of a
monopoly but is preferential treatment due to the fact that the Company is
performing pioneer work. It further states that it is very desirous of having
this Article as well as Article 8, incorporated in the contract with a view to

assisting the Company in obtaining similar provisions in contracts with
other countries. And that if these Articles were left out of the Haitian
contract it would be very difficult to incorporate them in other contracts,
also that they already exist, particularly in the contract with Nicaragua
which contract met with the approval of the Department of State.
It would appear that Article 16 gives to the Company an unqualified
monopoly and I am quite aware of the Department’s attitude Regarding
monopolies. But I feel that the benefits accruing to Haiti from the
contemplated services of this Company are such as to permit of the most
liberal action on the part of the Haitian Government.
I would therefore suggest that the Department, while not approving of the
monopolistic features of Article 16, not object to the giving of this Article
as well as Article 8 in the proposed contract, if the Haitian Government so
desires.
I have [etc.]
JOHN H. RUSSELL

[Document 619]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
LONDON, December 1, 1928—noon.
received states:
“All the necessary arrangements have been made in the
departments concerned at this end; we understand that the
position now is that the Government of British Honduras is
negotiating directly with the corporation and we hope accordingly
that no difficulty will arise.”
HOUGHTON
76 Not printed; it requested the Embassy to expedite reply to Department’s
Doc. 600, and Doc. 601].

[Document 620]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[Received 2:25 p.m.]
Limon cannot operate for at least six months.
I believe situation offers the opportunity for Pan American Airways to
establish itself in Costa Rica and Central America by arranging for service
of one amphibian plane between San José and Limon. I believe Costa Rican
Government would be receptive to such a proposal. Local representative of
above-named company is taking matter up with his principals.
I hope Pan American Airways or the other American company will
establish this service before the Scadta Corporation or other non-American
interests become active. Should the service be established it will be
necessary to act without delay.
DAVIS
77 Not printed; it informed the Department that because of floods extending
from San José to Limon, the railway between those points would probably

[Document 621]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:50 p.m.]
interests are active.
If Pan American Airways desires to take advantage of this opportunity it
must act immediately, instructing local representative by cable to negotiate
for provisional service and advising him when plane will be available.
Should plane be shipped it might be best to assemble it in the Canal Zone
where mechanics and equipment are available. Negotiations here should be
completed, however, before plane is shipped in order to avoid possible
complications.
DAVIS

[Document 622]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)
30. Pan American Airways, Incorporated, informs Department Mr. Harold
E. Harris, General Manager Peruvian Airways Corporation will assist Mr.
Otto Berg von Linde, representative of W. E. Grace and Company, to apply
for operating concession in Ecuador similar to concession recently granted
to Scadta.
Please render all possible and proper assistance. Department is much
interested in the development by American interests of commercial aviation
service between the United States and Latin America.
KELLOGG

[Document 623]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
American Airways is shipping a plane at once which will be assembled at
the Canal Zone and should reach Costa Rica by the 25th of this month. You
may in your discretion use this information to further the interests of the
American company.
KELLOGG

[Document 624]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson)
89. The Department is informed that Pan American Airways, Inc. and W. R.
Grace & Company are asking the Chilean Government for a concession for
commercial air mail service from Arica south in the name of the Chilean
Airways Corporation, an American company, and are submitting definite
written proposition.
KELLOGG

[Document 625]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
WASHINGTON, December 12, 1928—noon.
50. Lieutenant Donald Duke has been granted leave in order to fly a plane
from Colon to Port Limon for delivery there to the Pan American Airways.
Please request the appropriate authorities for permission for flight over
Costa Rican territory and landing at Port Limon.
KELLOGG

[Document 626]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)
to Mr. Frank Whiting, representing the Pan American Airways, Inc., in his
negotiations for the establishment of the San Jose–Limon air mail service.
KELLOGG

[Document 627]
The Chargé in Honduras (Johnson) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, December 14, 1928.
[Received December 27.]
No. 757
SIR: I have the honor to report that Mr. John D. MacGregor representing Pan
American Airways, Incorporated, returned early this week to Tegucigalpa
and resumed immediately his negotiations for a contract with the Honduran
Government. He has had interviews with President Paz, who appears to be
entirely favorable to the proposal, and with the Minister of Fomento, who
under direction of the President will celebrate any contract that may be
agreed upon. Mr. MacGregor has informed me that so far he sees no reason
to suppose he will encounter any serious difficulty in reaching an agreement
with the Government.
After Mr. MacGregor had seen President Paz, I talked with him myself and
referred to his previous conversations with Mr. Summerlin in regard to the
proposals of Pan American Airways. The President reiterated the favorable
opinions he had expressed to Mr. Summerlin and stated that he had
instructed the Minister of Fomento to proceed without delay in the
negotiations with Mr. MacGregor for a definite agreement.
The Legation will keep the Department informed promptly of any
developments in this matter.
I have [etc.]
HERSCHEL V. JOHNSON

[Document 628]
The Minister in Costa Rica (Davis) to the Secretary of State
DAVIS

[Document 629]
The Secretary of State to the High Commissioner in Haiti
(Russell)
88. The Department approves of the suggestion in the last paragraph of your
despatch 1327, November 28.
KELLOGG

[Document 630]
The Chargé in Honduras (Johnson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:45 p.m.]
147. MacGregor, representative Pan American Airways, informs me he
signed today with Honduranean Government a contract in terms
substantially as proposed by the company.
JOHNSON

Huff-Daland Dusters and Keystone
Airplane Corporation
[631] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[632] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[633] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[634] The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
[635] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State

[636] The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State

[Document 631]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)78
[Paraphrase]
4. Within a year certain American aeronautical interests are planning, with
the encouragement and approval of the Government of the United States, to
interest themselves in the transportation of passengers and mail along the
western coast of South America. For the success of their endeavors, it is
important that the Government of Peru grant no exclusive concessions to
foreign aeronautical interests to operate in Peru, and it is highly desirable
that the Government of Peru grant no concessions at all to foreign interests
for air transport in Peru until the American companies above mentioned
have had the opportunity to develop their projects, inasmuch as any
concessions to operate air lines in Peru might serve in effect to prevent
American companies from establishing a coastal air line. As you know, the
Government of the United States has always felt very strongly that the
policy of the “open door” in such matters is best calculated to benefit all
concerned.
If, in your opinion it is timely to do so, discuss this matter confidentially
and informally with the President of Peru, and intimate to him that the
Government of the United States would be pleased to see American
aeronautical interests and Peru eventually joined in the development of
aviation on the west coast of South America, and that the Government of
the United States would appreciate it if the field would be kept open
pending maturing and presentation of these projects. The American
interests contemplate some form of operation which as now planned would
associate the Naval Air Service of Peru in the work.
A bill to authorize the Government of the United States to give financial
assistance to air lines to Central and South America is now pending in

Congress.
KELLOGG
78 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Minister in Ecuador
as telegram No. 3.

[Document 632]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
advise if the phrase “foreign interests” is intended to cover all foreign
interests in Peru or only non-American interests. Also the phrase “American
companies above mentioned,” none appear to be mentioned in your cable. It
would be an aid in presenting the matter if the companies referred to were
known.
Some days ago I presented to President Leguia Mr. Woolman, representing
an American company, Huff-Daland Dusters. This company already has
large aviation contracts in Peru. Woolman also represents the Keystone
Aircraft Corporation. This last company made the planes now in use in the
recently established air line between Lima and Iquitos. Woolman proposed
to the President to establish air mail service between Lima and Panama. The
President agreed to entertain the proposition. Since then the President
agreed to place the matter in the hands of Grow, former American naval
officer, now in charge of Peruvian naval aviation. Grow established the
Lima-Iquitos service and now proposes to give the contract for Lima-
Panama service [to?] Woolman’s principals.
Please advise if your cable is intended to oppose the Woolman proposition.
German interests are on the ground and working in various disguises for
this concession.
POINDEXTER

[Document 633]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
1. The phrase “foreign interests” is intended to cover all interests
in Peru not American or Peruvian.
2. The American interests referred to in the Department’s 4,
January 19, 3 p.m., are the Keystone and Huff-Daland Dusters,
who are connected with Hayden Stone (Financial) and Pan
American Airways, and possibly eventually others.
3. Give all possible and proper support to Woolman.
KELLOGG

[Document 634]
The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, February 8, 1928.
[Received March 10.]
No. 1042
SIR: With reference to the Department’s cable No. 3 of January 19th, three
P.M.,79 in which the Legation was informed that “certain American
aeronautical interests are planning with the encouragement and approval of
the Government of the United States to interest themselves in the
transportation of passengers and mail along the western coast of South
America”, and in which the Minister was instructed to discuss this question
with Doctor Ayora, Provisional President of Ecuador, in a confidential
manner, intimating to him that the government of the United States would
be pleased to see Ecuador and the aeronautical interests of the United States
eventually joined in the development of aviation on the west coast of South
America, and for that reason the United States Government would be happy
to see the field kept open until these projects have been matured and
completed, I have the honor to report that I have discussed this question in
detail with Doctor Ayora, who informed me that he was exceedingly
interested in the matter and gave me the assurance that the Government of
Ecuador would cooperate to the fullest extent with plans to develop such air
service. He further informed the American Minister that up to the present
time no requests of any kind to grant concessions for air rights in Ecuador
had been presented by foreign concerns, and that he did not believe any
such requests would be presented in the near future. The Minister requested
that Doctor Ayora, in case any requests for air concessions were presented
to the Government of Ecuador, discuss them with the American Minister
prior to the Government’s taking any action, to which Doctor Ayora agreed.
I have [etc.]

GA Boone

[Pe. 800 includes Portions of Nan 437

[Document 635]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
LIMA, April 16, 1928.
[Received May 2.]
No. 932
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s telegraphic instructions
desire of the Huff Daland Dusters and the Keystone Airplane Corporation
to obtain concessions from Peru and other West Coast countries for the
operation of an airplane line along the West Coast to Panama.
Mr. Woolman, the representative of the companies above mentioned, has
been here since the first of the year submitting a draft of a concession to the
Peruvian Government and attempting to obtain its approval. As soon as Mr.
Woolman’s concession was submitted to the Government, German interests,
notably the Dornier Wal Company through its agent, Mr. Beeck, submitted
a proposal for the carrying of air mail and passengers from Mollendo to
Paita and asking in addition for authority for a line from Sechura or Paita to
Iquitos. This proposal originally contemplated an annual subsidy by the
Government amounting to Lp. 30,000 for two years, eventually to be
reimbursed from the earnings of the line. A local company was to be
organized, and some of the stock was to be subscribed by the Government.
A careful study of the prospects of this company was presented, showing a
prospect for yearly dividends of 8% or 9% on the basis of the carrying of
1,200 passengers a year along the coast and 512 to Iquitos. The latter figure,
at least, is optimistic for the time being. 6 Merkur-Wals are proposed as the
coastal equipment and 6 Dorniers as the equipment on the Iquitos line. The
terms of the project of Mr. Woolman were apparently communicated to the
Dornier agent by General Faupel, and the Dornier agent has since submitted

a project which is understood to be considerably more favorable to the
Government than his original project. The German proposal has the support
of General Faupel and the other officers of the Military Mission of Germans
at present directing the staff operations of the Peruvian Army.
As has been outlined in the Embassy’s despatch No. 854, dated November
1, 1927,80 the object of the German aeronautical interest obviously is to link
up with their present air lines operating in Bolivia and Colombia, possibly
as part eventually of a system dominated by the European Air companies
extending from Panama or Northern Colombia down the West Coast to
Ecuador, Peru and Chile and also across Northern Peru to Iquitos, Para and
Pernambuco, across from Valparaiso and Santiago, Chile to Buenos Aires,
north from Buenos Aires to Rio de Janeiro and Pernambuco and across the
South Atlantic to Dakar, Spain, France, Germany and England. It may be
noted that according to the press the French-controlled air mail line from
Santiago to Paris is already in operation as are the Bolivian and Colombian
German-controlled lines. It is reported that a company under French
influence is also applying for a concession in Chile to carry the mail and
passengers from Santiago to Arica.
Mr. Woolman’s activities in addition to being hampered by the opposition
of the German officers has met with the opposition of an American, Mr.
Fawcett, who has done very creditable flying in Peru for the past eight
years. Until recently Mr. Fawcett flew a Curtiss Oreole plane, but that was
put out of commission a short time ago by an accident and he is now
contemplating the possibility of buying several planes and operating a local
line in Peru from Lima to Paita. He feels that Mr. Woolman’s project would
prejudice his interests and accordingly went to the President in January to
protest against it.
A strong supporter of the Keystone Company’s efforts has been Captain
Grow, formerly of the United States Navy, who is now Inspector General of
Aviation for Peru, and directs the Army Air Service as well as the Naval Air
Service besides having supervision over commercial and civilian flying.
This enlargement of his previous authority as head of the Naval Air Service
was effected about two weeks ago by Presidential decree and is of

considerable significance in the interest of the United States in that it
removes a German officer from control of the Army Air Service and
replaces him by an American.…
The matter is now in the hands of the Minister of Gobierno, Sr. Rubio, who
is friendly to the United States. Both President Leguia and Sr. Rubio seem
anxious to grant this concession (which, in its latest draft, is in the form of a
contract) to Mr. Woolman’s company provided the project can be
considered as being as favorable as the German proposal. Sr. Rubio
yesterday expressed himself as satisfied with the terms of the contract and
stated that he would present it to the President for signature today.…
It was not until a day or so ago that Mr. Woolman furnished the Embassy
with a copy of his proposed contract and I have not yet had an opportunity
to translate it or to study it carefully. Moreover, it does not contain the latest
modifications made to it to meet the objections of the Peruvian authorities.
The Embassy has been following his negotiations closely and giving him all
appropriate assistance, and will continue to do so. Captain Grow’s
exceptionally favorable relations with Peruvian officials concerned in the
matter, including President Leguia, have made him very useful and his
cooperation has been effective.
I have [etc.]
MATTHEW E. HANNA
80 Not printed.

[Document 636]
The Chargé in Peru (Hanna) to the Secretary of State
[Received April 21—11 p.m.]
me that the persistent reports that the Peruvian Government has signed
contract with German aeronautical interests to operate in Peru are not true
and says that the present intention is to enter into contracts with both
American and German interests and let them compete.…
Detailed report concerning Woolman’s negotiations are contained in
despatch mailed April 18th.81
HANNA

Proposed air mail service between the
United States and Chile
[637] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[638] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[639] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[640] The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
[641] The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Washington, October 13, 1928.

[642] The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
[643] The Acting Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
Washington, October 19, 1928.
[644] The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
[645] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson)
Washington, October 27, 1928—noon.

[Document 637]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
27. The Department has been informed that the Compagnie Latécoère82 has
requested the Government of Chile to grant it an air monopoly service from
east to west between Chile and Brazil.
The United States Government, through the Post Office Department,
contemplates launching a project for supplying an air mail service directly
from this country to the southernmost populous city of Chile. Persons who
are interested in performing such a service have been conferred with. The
Bureau of the Budget will transmit to Congress a request for an
appropriation of $2,000,000 to be used by the Post Office Department for
the purpose described above.
These plans would be very seriously interfered with if Chile were to grant
such an exclusive right to any company, wherever domiciled, because the
United States Post Office Department contemplates the delivery of the
mails transmitted to Chile by American airships to the east coast of South
America by means of other air companies yet to be consulted. American
interests might be prevented from establishing these lines if any exclusive
concessions to operate air lines in Chile were granted. As you know the
United States has always felt very strongly that an “open door” policy in
such matters is best calculated to benefit all concerned.
Discuss this matter with President Ibanez immediately, informally and
confidentially, and intimate that the Government of the United States would
be pleased to see Chilean and American aeronautical interests eventually
joined in the development of aviation, and that this Government would

appreciate it if the field were kept open pending the presentation and
maturing of these projects.
KELLOGG
82 Compañía General de Empresas Aeronauticas, Lineas Latécoère.

[Document 638]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
54. President of Chile was much gratified by the information contained in
of the Government will cause it to grant no more exclusive concessions,
that the concessions now held by Testart will be canceled, and that all his
proposals for service between Santiago, Valparaiso, and the north will be
refused.
The President did not think that the existing Latécoère contract was
exclusive, but the Director General of Posts has supplied me with copies of
the two contracts with the Government of Chile, one for carrying its mails
between Chile and Argentina, and one for mails to Uruguay, Brazil, Africa
and Europe. The first contract provides that until this company is given 35
percent of the correspondence destined to Argentina, the Chilean Postal
Administration cannot concede to other companies the air transport of mails
for Argentina. Similar stipulations in the contract for service between Chile,
Uruguay, Brazil, Africa and Europe state “35 percent of the total for these
countries.” The last-mentioned contract runs for a period of 18 months from
February 1, 1928, and is renewable for successive equal periods, if not
denounced 6 months prior to expiration. The contract for service between
and runs for a period of 18 months thereafter, unless denounced 6 months
prior to expiration. If within the first 18 month period of the contract the
company maintains service of one round trip weekly, the contract will
continue in effect for 10 years.

The Director General believes that the contract does not affect the mail
transit for Argentina and other countries brought from the United States or
countries north of Chile and not originally deposited in the Chilean
Government offices, but such an interpretation is very doubtful. The
contracts contain clauses authorizing cancelation for interruptions and
undue delays, but the provisions seem to be liberal for the company. I am
sending full text of contracts by mail.83 The Government of Chile is
considering the establishment of its own air mail service between Arica and
Valdivia and it probably would not favor the proposed American service
unless Chilean pilots were to be used within Chilean territory as soon as a
competent force could be assembled. Arrangements would be facilitated if
such assurances could be given to the Government of Chile. So far the
Latécoère Company has failed utterly to maintain its schedules between the
city of Buenos Aires and Europe. The Director General of Posts says that
Chile will endeavor to annul the contract if improvement is not made within
a few months, but it is my opinion that the contract restrictions will make
this difficult.
COLLIER
83 Not printed.

[Document 639]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, June 7, 1928.
[Received July 5.]
No. 1410
SIR: I have the honor to state that on June 1st I accompanied the Minister of
Foreign Affairs and the then acting Minister of the Interior, Señor Osvaldo
Koch (Minister of Justice), and the Director General of Posts (Señor
Brieba), in the car of the President of the Republic, to Valparaiso to attend
the ceremonies arranged by the Grace Line to celebrate the arrival, for the
first time in that port, of their new motor ship, the Santa Maria.
I had an opportunity to talk with the Director General of Posts with regard
to the possibility of the establishment of an air mail service between the
United States and Chile. The Department will recall my despatches, sent
some two months ago,84 with regard to other conversations with him
concerning this matter and particularly as to the French Latécoère
Company’s contract for the air mail service between Chile, Argentina,
Uruguay, Brazil, Africa and Europe.
The Director General also said that he had been giving much thought to air
mail service in Chile and that he believed that the principle of “cabotage” or
coastwise trade ought to be applied to air ships as well as to ocean going
ships; namely, that the transport of mail, passengers and packages from one
Chilean town to another by air ought to be reserved to Chilean air ships, and
that foreign air ships should be allowed to carry on trade only between
Chilean towns and foreign towns. I expressed the opinion that this rather
novel suggestion would militate against the establishment of air service;
that at the present time every incentive should be given to the establishment

of such services rather than restrictions imposed which would prevent or
retard their establishment and development.
In the conversation which I had with the Minister of Foreign Affairs at his
weekly reception on June 6, 1928, I brought up the matter and reiterated
these views and expressed the hope that Chile would not adopt a policy
which would in any way impede the establishment and maintenance of an
air mail service between the United States and Chile or impair the service.
I have [etc.]
WM. MILLER COLLIER
84 Despatches not printed; see Ambassador’s telegram No. 54, supra.

[Document 640]
The Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson) to the Secretary of State
[Received 12:46 p.m.]
April 20.85 Any pertinent information which the Department can give
Embassy regarding contemplated projects Peru to Santiago section air mail
route New York to Chile would facilitate latter’s obtaining from the
Government more precise indication as to the extent of Chilean
Government’s cooperation and facilities.
CULBERTSON
85 Latter not printed.

[Document 641]
The Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
WASHINGTON, October 13, 1928.
SIRS: With reference to your project for supplying air mail service from the
United States to the southernmost part of Chile, concerning which the
Department informed the American Embassy at Santiago some time ago, I
have to inform you that the American Ambassador to Chile has now
telegraphed that he would be pleased to receive any pertinent information
regarding the Chilean section of the proposed air mail service which would
facilitate his obtaining from the Chilean Government more precise
indication as to the extent of that Government’s probable cooperation and
facilities.
In order that the Department may reply by telegraph to the Ambassador, I
shall be pleased to receive any information you can give me regarding the
latest developments with regard to this project.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
Assistant Secretary

[Document 642]
The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
NEW YORK, October 16, 1928.
[Received October 18.]
SIR: Reply to yours of October 13th has been delayed owing to my absence.
The President of this Company, Mr. J. T. Trippe, is now in Europe and
nothing will be done toward formulating definite plans for extending the
operations of the Peruvian Airways Corporation beyond Peru, until his
return.
The Peruvian Airways Corporation, which is jointly owned by W. R. Grace
& Co. and Pan American Airways, Inc., is now operating a service between
Callao and Talara, Peru, and it is hoped that this operation can develop
sufficient data to justify its expansion and extension within a reasonably
short time. It will be several months yet, however, before we could
undertake negotiations with the Chilean Government, unless it is felt by the
State Department to be of vital importance to begin these negotiations soon.
Respectfully yours,
PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS, INC.
JOHN A. HAMBLETON, Vice President

[Document 643]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Pan American Airways, Inc.
WASHINGTON, October 19, 1928.
SIRS: The Department has received your letter of October 16 answering its
communication of October 13 and notes that it will be several months
before you can undertake negotiations with the Chilean Government
looking to the extension of your service beyond Peru unless it is felt by the
State Department to be of vital importance to begin these negotiations
sooner. In reply the Department desires to inform you that from information
which it has received from the Embassy at Santiago as reported to you in
the Department’s letter of October 13 it would appear that the possibility of
your reaching a satisfactory agreement with the Chilean Government may
be seriously jeopardized through any considerable delay on your part in
undertaking negotiations and the Department does feel that it is of great
importance that these negotiations be undertaken at an early date, or at least
that the Chilean Government be given some assurance that an extension of
your operations to Chile is seriously contemplated in the near future.
For the Acting Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
Assistant Secretary

[Document 644]
The Pan American Airways, Inc., to the Assistant Secretary of
State (White)
NEW YORK, October 24, 1928.
[Received October 25.]
DEAR SIR: In reply to yours of October 19th, I beg to advise that this Company
now has under consideration plans for undertaking negotiations with the
Chilean Government within the reasonably near future.
It must be realized by the Department that the commencement of air
transport operations by this Company in the Republic of Chile is entirely
dependent upon possible revenues obtainable. Any concession negotiated at
the present time must assure the Company a reasonable return on its capital
investment, and operations under such concession must necessarily be
contingent upon the award of a United States mail contract at a rate
sufficient to justify a through international service to Valparaiso. The
question of just what this return must be for such an extended service, we
are at this moment not prepared to say.
You may rest assured, however, that an extension of our operations to Chile
is seriously contemplated provided a satisfactory arrangement can be made
with the Chilean Government and provided, further, that an advantageous
contract can be secured for the transportation of United States mail.
Respectfully,
PAN AMERICAN AIRWAYS, INC.
By JOHN A. HAMBLETON, Vice President

[Document 645]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Culbertson)
WASHINGTON, October 27, 1928—noon.
Incorporated informs Department that it now has under consideration plans
for undertaking negotiations with Chilean Government within reasonably
near future. Department will inform you immediately Company’s definite
plans are available.
KELLOGG

Department of Commerce flight—
Demonstrations by Curtiss Company
and
Consolidated
Aircraft
Corporation
[646] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[647] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Schoenfeld)
[648] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[649] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru
(Poindexter)

[650] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
[651] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[652] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[653] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[654] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[655] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[656] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[657] The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
[658] The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
[659] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Williamson)
Washington, July 12, 1928.
[660] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

[Document 646]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)86
1. The Department of Commerce states that arrangements have been made
to send two American built airplanes, one a Curtiss-Hawk equipped with
pontoons and the other a Curtiss-Falcon, to South America on an
experimental and path finding flight. These planes will be under the
supervision of Mr. James D. Summers, Aeronautical Trade Commissioner
of the Department of Commerce for Latin America, and in direct charge of
Mr. C. W. Webster. In the party will also be Lieutenant James Doolittle, an
Army pilot on leave, William H. McMullen, a civilian pilot, and Mr. J. A.
Todhunter, a mechanic.
Please request permission for flight in Argentina. The expedition plans also
to visit Peru, Chile, Bolivia, Uruguay and Brazil.
KELLOGG
86 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the missions in Bolivia

[Document 647]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Schoenfeld)87
2. The Department of Commerce states that arrangements have been made
to send two American built airplanes, one a Curtiss-Hawk equipped with
pontoons and the other a Curtiss-Falcon, to South America on an
experimental and path finding flight. These planes will be under the
supervision of Mr. James D. Summers, Aeronautical Trade Commissioner
of the Department of Commerce for Latin America, and in direct charge of
Mr. C. W. Webster. In the party will also be Lieutenant James Doolittle, an
Army pilot on leave, William H. McMullen, a civilian pilot, and Mr. J. A.
Todhunter, a mechanic.
Please request free entry for equipment and permission for flight in Brazil.
Name of steamer and date of arrival will be cabled later. The expedition
plans also to visit Bolivia, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Peru.
KELLOGG
87 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Ambassador in Peru
as telegram No. 1.

[Document 648]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7:35 p.m.]
authorizes with great pleasure flight over Peruvian soil, free entry of planes,
equipment and supplies, and will give full and complete friendly reception
to the expedition, aiding in every way possible the success of the purposes
which it has in view.
POINDEXTER
89 See telegram No. 2 to the Ambassador in Brazil, supra.

[Document 649]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru
(Poindexter)
Luisa.
OLDS

[Document 650]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
Duke Banks is local representative of the Curtiss Airplane and Motor
Corporation and desires Legation and Consulate to cooperate with him in
promoting interest in American aircraft products and aeronautics in Bolivia.
Please comply and inform Consulate.
KELLOGG

[Document 651]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:35 a.m.]
BLISS

[Document 652]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, February 2, 1928—noon.
has granted permission flight to visit Uruguay and to pass over its
territories.
It is suggested that the use of the word “pathfinding” might give rise to
misunderstanding.
GRANT-SMITH

[Document 653]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:45 p.m.]
COLLIER

[Document 654]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8:30 p.m.]
50. Lieutenants Doolittle and Wade,92 and other American airplane
representatives here are of the opinion that their difficulties in obtaining
orders are due to a belief of the Government of Chile that in case Chile
becomes involved in war the United States will prevent subsequent
deliveries either because of sympathy for Bolivia and Peru or because of its
determination to permit no war in South America, especially if related to
the Tacna-Arica dispute,93 or because the United States may rule that
airplanes are in the same category as armed ships and may not be outfitted
in the territory of neutrals.… Has the Department any suggestions to meet
the situation? Chilean agents of certain American arms manufacturers also
feel that the first two reasons cause the Government of Chile to hesitate
giving contracts to them.
COLLIER
92 Lt. Leigh Wade, representative of the Consolidated Aircraft Corporation
of Buffalo, N. Y., who, with J. W. Mussen of the same company, sailed in
January 1928, to Peru to demonstrate their company’s products in that and
other South American countries.
In instructions to the American missions in Chile, Feb. 29, 1928, and in
Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil, Mar. 1, 1928, the American representatives
were directed to accord appropriate assistance and to request free entry and
the American representative in Peru was instructed to obtain a refund of the

customs charges paid when the Consolidated airplane entered Peru. (File
No. 811.79620 Consolidated Aircraft Corp.)

[Document 655]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
avoid any discussion of this subject because it does not desire to indicate
even indirectly what this Government’s policy might be in case of
eventualities to which you allude. This should not prevent you, however,
from rendering assistance to the representatives of American companies to
obtain a fair consideration of their propositions.
KELLOGG

[Document 656]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 1, 1928.
[Received May 23.]
No. 1367
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s cablegram No. 28 of April
referred to certain impressions which the local representatives of the Curtiss
Airplane Company and certain local agents of American munition firms had
as to causes operating against their securing contracts with the Government
of Chile, and as to the source of certain insinuations which they felt
underlay these causes. The Department’s reply is so phrased that I fear that
it was of the opinion that I had discussed the matter with the Chilean
authorities. This had never been done by me and the only participation that
I had in the conversations with these American representatives and agents
as [was?] to listen to what they had to say. I did not even tell them that I
was about to report to the Department what they had told me in order to
give it an opportunity to give me any necessary instructions.
I have made most vigorous efforts with both the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and the President of the Republic to get them to give these American firms
a part of the contracts for airplanes which are about to be let. Always these
officials have admitted the superiority of the Curtiss planes, but have
alleged that price stood in the way of letting the contract to them. The
Curtiss Company denies that there is an appreciable difference in the price;
at least, that the difference bears any proper relation to the great superiority
which they have demonstrated that their planes possess.
In a recent conversation with President Ibáñez, he surprised me by telling
me that he did not favor the purchase of military planes, but wished to get
very many cheap planes which could be put into commercial services that

could be inaugurated and that could afford an opportunity for the Chilean
military aviators to practice. The President was most explicit in this
statement, but what he said is so different from repeated declarations and
undoubted intentions of the military authorities, that the only reconciliation
of the two statements is that the President would prefer the purchase of
cheap civilian planes and the training of military aviators in them, but that
his military advisers wish military planes. It is probable that the President
will defer to the judgment of the latter and even if some cheap commercial
planes are bought, a large number of military planes will undoubtedly be
acquired. I am told by the Curtiss people that they have fairly reliable
information that the Army desires to purchase not merely 18 military planes
as has been announced, but 36.
While in my talks, with these officials, I have not in any way mentioned the
probable attitude of the United States with regard to the permission or the
prohibition to fulfill contracts for airplanes and munitions in case war
should break out, the President in his recent talk with me did say that a
certain element in the Army entertained this view, and he even intimated
that the idea had been inspired by competitors.
With specific reference to munitions, the President said that the Colt Arms
Company, through their agent, was trying to make sales to Chile and that he
(the President) personally always had favored purchasing from American
manufacturers but the majority of the Army officers charged with the study
and purchase of this equipment, favored making the purchases in Europe.
I have [etc.]
WM. MILLER COLLIER

[Document 657]
The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, June 8, 1928.
[Received July 6.]
No. 642
SIR: Reference is made to the Department’s instructions Nos. 1 of January 7,
expeditions of the aviators Lieutenant J. H. Doolittle and Lieutenant Leigh
Wade, respectively.
In this connection I have the honor to report that Lieutenants Doolittle and
Wade arrived in Montevideo by airplane on the morning of June 6th and
were met at the Military Aviation School by the Commercial Attaché and
myself. In the afternoon Lieut. Doolittle demonstrated a Curtiss Hawk
Pursuit Plane, and Lieut. Wade a Consolidated Aircraft Company Training
Airplane before the Minister of War and Marine, the Chief of the Military
Aviation Corps, and various naval and military aviators. The demonstration
was highly successful and the military authorities expressed their
admiration for the qualities of the machines and the skill displayed by the
pilots.
Lieutenant Doolittle expects to return in the near future with his airplane
equipped with pontoons, and Lieut. Wade plans to pass through Montevideo
en route to Rio de Janeiro.
I have [etc.]
GERHARD GADE

[Document 658]
The Ambassador in Cuba (Judah) to the Secretary of State
HABANA, June 26, 1928.
[Received July 5.]
No. 325
SIR: I have the honor to quote below the text of a telegram dated June 25,
five p.m., 1928 today received from the American Ambassador at Buenos
Aires:
“Lieutenant James Doolittle, who has been visiting various South
American countries for the purpose of demonstrating Curtiss
aeroplanes and regarding whom you may have received
instructions from the Department, asks me to inform you that he
proposes to leave here about July 22 in a Curtiss Hawk aeroplane
on a flight from Buenos Aires to New York. As he plans to stop at
Cienfuegos for fuel enroute from Colon to New York he requests
you to obtain permission from the Cuban Government to land and
fly in Cuba and also customs courtesies.”
The Embassy, not having received any previous information concerning the
flight of Lieutenant Doolittle, I respectfully request instructions whether I
should ask the Cuban Government to accord permission for the aviator to
land in this Republic and to extend special customs courtesies to him.
I have [etc.]
NOBLE BRANDON JUDAH

[Document 659]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Cuba (Williamson)
WASHINGTON, July 12, 1928.
No. 191
Embassy at Habana, transcribing a telegram received by it from the
Embassy at Buenos Aires with respect to a flight from Buenos Aires to New
York contemplated by Lieutenant James Doolittle, in which it is stated that
Lieutenant Doolittle plans to stop at Cienfuegos for fuel and requests that
permission be obtained from the Cuban Government to land and fly in Cuba
and that customs courtesies be accorded him. In the absence of previous
information concerning the flight of Lieutenant Doolittle, the Embassy
requested to be instructed whether it should ask the Cuban Government to
grant the facilities mentioned.
In reply you are informed that, under arrangements made by the
Department of Commerce, two American built airplanes recently were sent
to South America on an experimental flight under the supervision of Mr.
James D. Summers, Aeronautical Trade Commissioner of the Department
of Commerce for Latin America, and that Lieutenant Doolittle was a
member of the party. In connection with this flight the Department
addressed instructions to certain missions in Latin America directing them
to request free entry for the equipment and permission for the flight in the
territory of the countries to which they were respectfully accredited.
In view of the foregoing, you are authorized to inform the appropriate
authorities of Lieutenant Doolittle’s proposed stop at Cienfuegos and to
request free entry for such equipment as he may carry and permission for
his flight in Cuba.

For the Secretary of State:
Francis Ware

[Document 660]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 17, 1928.
[Received August 2.]
No. 3037
SIR: Replying to the Department’s telegraphic instruction No. 2, of January 7
last, 8 P.M., I have the honor to report that Lieutenant James Doolittle, an
Army pilot on leave, arrived at Rio de Janeiro by airplane from Asunción,
has received what assistance this office has been able to render him in
making known the Curtiss Hawk single-seat pursuit plane which he
employs and the manufacturer of which he represents. Our Naval and
Military attachés have introduced him to officers of the Brazilian army and
navy.
Lieut. Doolittle contributed an exhibition of sensational “aerial stunts”
never before seen in this city to the 4th of July program with which the
American colony commemorated our national birthday. He repeated this
exhibition on July 14, at the military aviation field, before a large number’
of spectators, among whom were the members of the French Military
Mission, which organized “an afternoon of aviation” to commemorate the
French national holiday.
Lieutenant Doolittle and Mr. Webster, the business manager of the Curtiss
Company, have been on excellent terms with Lieutenant Wade, representing
the Consolidated Aircraft Corporation, of Buffalo, New York, who is also in
Rio de Janeiro engaged in attempting to dispose of airplanes of the said
company.
In reporting the activities of Messrs. Doolittle and Wade the Military
Attaché, under date of July 9, makes the following observations regarding

the relations of these representatives of competing aeroplane manufacturers:
“A particularly pleasing feature of the local situation and one
bound to impress the Brazilians strongly is the cordiality
manifested by the competing representatives of American
concerns.… and the fact that the Americans, each out for orders,
are able to co-operate and assist each other in many details of
their local arrangements is a valuable object lesson to their
prospective customers.”
I have [etc.]
EDWIN V. MORGAN

Boeing Airplane Company and Pratt
and Whitney Motor Corporation
[661] The Assistant Secretary of Commerce (MacCracken) to the
Assistant Secretary of State (White)
Washington, February 4, 1928.
[662] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil
(Morgam)
[663] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Commerce (Hoover)
Washington, February 8, 1928.
[664] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)
Washington, February 9, 1928.
[665] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[666] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina
(Bliss)
[667] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[668] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[669] The Minister in Ecuador (Boding) to the Secretary of State
[670] The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
[671] The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State

[672] The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State

[Document 661]
The Assistant Secretary of Commerce (MacCracken) to the
Assistant Secretary of State (White)
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Mr. Ralph A. O’Neill of the Boeing Airplane Company,
Seattle, Washington plans to sail on the Steamship Southern Cross February
11 for Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. He also represents the Pratt and Whitney
Motor Corp. of Hartford, Connecticut. He is taking with him a Boeing
pursuit plane and a Boeing mail plane. At the end of six months, there will
be shipped to him a Boeing flying boat which is now in the process of
construction. Mr. O’Neill plans to give demonstration flights of these ships
for the army and navy air services of the various countries which he visits.
He is taking with him the necessary personnel and subsidiary equipment.
Mr. O’Neill’s contemplated route is as follows: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil to
Buenos Aires, Argentina; Buenos Aires, Argentina to Montevideo,
Uruguay; Montevideo, Uruguay to Buenos Aires, Argentina; Buenos Aires,
Argentina to Santiago, Chile; Santiago, Chile, to La Paz, Bolivia; La Paz,
Bolivia to Lima, Peru; Lima, Peru to Guayaquil, Ecuador; Guayaquil,
Ecuador to Bogotá, Colombia; Bogotá, Colombia to Caracas, Venezuela;
Caracas, Venezuela to Panama City, Panama. This is a contemplated
itinerary only and may be subject to change depending upon local
conditions. At the end of six or eight months, Mr. O’Neill plans to be in
Panama to assemble the flying boat, which will be shipped to him and to
reverse his route around South America, ending in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Will you kindly communicate the necessary information to the governments
concerned through the American Embassies and Legations and obtain the
necessary permission for this expedition to visit and fly in these countries.
Also, if possible, please obtain permission for the equipment of the
expedition to be entered and shipped out of the various countries free of
customs charges. It is suggested that Brazil, the Argentine, and Uruguay

might be communicated with by cable and the remaining countries by letter.
It would be advisable to have a reply from Brazil before the expedition
sails. It might also be useful to suggest that the American diplomatic
missions in each place render all possible assistance to the expedition,
especially with regard to communicating with the American diplomatic
mission in the next contemplated stop and obtaining necessary permits,
visas, etc.
The Department of Commerce is notifying its representatives in the cities
named of the itinerary and plans of this expedition, and they are being
requested to render every aid possible by cooperating with representatives
of the Department of State and officials of the local governments. The
Department of Commerce is also requesting the War and Navy Departments
to advise the military and naval attaches in South America to render all
possible assistance.
For your information, I may say that the Boeing Airplane Company is one
of the leading manufacturers of airplanes in the United States, supplying
planes to the Navy Department and also supplying mail planes to certain
airmail routes which it operates in the west. The Boeing planes, powered
with the Pratt & Whitney motors, rank among the very best manufactured in
the United States.
Mr. O’Neill is a captain, aviation specialist, Air Corps Reserves. He served
in the First Pursuit Group, A. E. F., and was one of the first Americans to be
rated as Ace. He received the D. S. C. with two oak leaves, and the Croix de
Guerre while serving as Flight and Squadron Commandant of the 147th
Aero Squadron. After the war, he obtained a contract with the Mexican
Government to organize the Mexican Air Force, and he served there as
Chief and Technical Consuitor for five years.
Any assistance that can properly be accorded Mr. O’Neill and this
expedition will be beneficial to American aeronautics.
Faithfully yours,
WM. P. MACCRACKEN, Jr.

[Document 662]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil
(Morgam)96
3. Captain Ralph A. O’Neill, representing the Boeing Airplane Company of
Seattle, and the Pratt and Whitney Motor Corporation of Hartford,
Connecticut, is sailing on S. S. Southern Cross February 11, for Rio de
Janeiro for an experimental flight and to demonstrate before army and navy
air service.
Please request free entry for equipment, including Boeing pursuit plane,
Boeing mail plane and accessories, and ask permission for flight in Brazil.
Reply by cable.
OLDS
96 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the missions in

[Document 663]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Commerce (Hoover)
WASHINGTON, February 8, 1928.
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Honorable the
Secretary of Commerce, and with reference to Mr. MacCracken’s letter of
February 4 to Mr. White regarding the projected journey of Mr. Ralph A.
O’Neill to various South American countries in the interest of the Boeing
Airplane Company and the Pratt and Whitney Motor Corporation, has the
honor to say that appropriate instructions have been sent by cable to the
American Embassies at Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, Santiago and Lima,
and to the American Legation at Montevideo.97 Instructions have also been
sent by mail to the American Legations at La Paz, Quito, Bogotá and
Caracas.98
It is assumed that Mr. O’Neill will communicate with the United States War
Department in order to obtain permission to fly over the Panama Canal
Zone and to arrange for flying in Panama.

[Document 664]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Colombia (Piles)99
WASHINGTON, February 9, 1928.
No. 1036
SIR: The Department transmits herewith for your information and
appropriate action a copy of a letter under date of February 4 from the
Department of Commerce1 in connection with the journey of Mr. Ralph A.
O’Neill to various South American countries in the interest of the Boeing
Airplane Company and the Pratt and Whitney Motor Corporation.
It is desired that you request the Colombian authorities for permission to fly
in Colombia, as well as for the free entry of the equipment mentioned in the
enclosed letter.
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
99 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the missions in Bolivia

[Document 665]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
to demonstrate before Argentine Army and Navy air service? What
information have you as to approximate date of his arrival in Argentina and
does he intend to arrive by air or by ship?
BLISS

[Document 666]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina
(Bliss)
will be communicated to you by Embassy at Rio de Janeiro. (3) He plans to
fly from Rio de Janeiro to Buenos Aires and thence to Santiago in order to
demonstrate capabilities of machines.
OLDS

[Document 667]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:30 p.m.]
38. Application for customs free entry aeroplane and accessories Captain
O’Neill denied but will be admitted under bond canceled upon leaving
Chile. Expect the same response similar application for Lieutenant Wade,3
grounds commercial undertaking. Have not requested customs free entry for
Curtiss aeroplanes and accessories as Department did not so instruct but
believe Chilean Government would also treat as commercial venture. Have
advised Wade, Lima; Doolittle,4 La Paz; and Somers5 and O’Neill, Rio de
Janeiro, accordingly.
COLLIER
3 Lt. Leigh Wade, representative of the Consolidated Aircraft Corporation;
4 Lt. James Doolittle, with Department of Commerce experimental and
path-finding flight to South America; see pp. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc.
646 and Doc. 647] ff.
5 Presumably James D. Summers, aeronautical trade commissioner of the
Department of Commerce for Latin America.

[Document 668]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 12, 1928.
[Received April 3.]
No. 907
P.M.,6 and to acknowledge the Department’s Instruction No. 415 of
February 9, 1923,7 relative to Captain Ralph A. O’Neill, representing the
Boeing Airplane Company of Seattle, Washington, and the Pratt and
Whitney Motor Corporation of Hartford, Connecticut, who sailed on the
Southern Cross on February 11, 1928, for Rio de Janeiro for an
experimental flight and demonstration before the Brazilian Army and Navy
Air Service. In accordance with the Department’s instructions, free entry
was requested from the Peruvian Government for the planes and equipment
of Captain O’Neill as well as permission for a flight over Peruvian soil, and
in reply a Note was received from the Foreign Office by the Embassy under
date of February 23, 1928, a copy of which in Spanish, together with an
English translation, is enclosed herewith for the Department’s information.
I have [etc.]
MILES POINDEXTER
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Rada) to the American Ambassador (Poindexter)
LIMA, February 23, 1928.
No. 13

MR. AMBASSADOR: I have had the honor of receiving Your Excellency’s courteous
Note Number 463 of the 14th of the present month in which you inform me,
under instructions from your Government, that Captain Ralph A. O’Neill,
representative of the Boeing Airplane Company of Seattle, Washington, and
the Pratt and Whitney Motor Corporation of Hartford, Connecticut, has
gone to Brazil to make experimental flights before the representatives of the
Army and Navy of that country.
Your Excellency has been pleased to add that Captain O’Neill desires to
make a visit to Peru with the same intention and therefore Your Excellency
has asked my Government for the appropriate permission for such flights on
Peruvian territory and the free entry of the equipment which Captain
O’Neill is bringing with him.
In reply I take pleasure in informing Your Excellency that my Government
will be happy to receive the visit of Captain O’Neill and will give him the
permission which Your Excellency requests, all the facilities which he
needs for the successful accomplishment of his purpose, and free entry for
the equipment above mentioned. To this end I have addressed the Ministers
of War, Navy, and Finance.
I take [etc.]
PEDRO JOSÉ RADA Y GAMIO
7 Not printed; it transmitted a copy of the letter of February 4 from the

[Document 669]
The Minister in Ecuador (Boding) to the Secretary of State
QUITO, April 24, 1928.
[Received May 23.]
No. 1076
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 574, dated
February 9, 1928,8 instructing the Legation to request the Ecuadorean
authorities to grant Mr. Ralph A. O’Neill permission to fly in Ecuador, in
the interest of the Boeing Airplane Company and the Pratt and Whitney
Motor Corporation, and to enclose, herewith, a copy and translation of the
reply of the Ecuadorean Ministry for Foreign Relations9 to the Legation’s
informal note sent in compliance with the Department’s instruction.
It will be noted that the request to fly in Ecuador is granted and that orders
extending all possible facilities to Captain O’Neill will be issued.
I have [etc.]
G. A. BADING
9 Not printed.

[Document 670]
The Minister in Colombia (Piles) to the Secretary of State
BOGOTÁ, April 27, 1928.
[Received May 16.]
No. 1312
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s Instruction No. 1036 of
February 9, 1928, instructing me to request permission of the Colombian
authorities for Mr. Ralph A. O’Neill, a representative of the Boeing
Airplane Company and the Pratt and Whitney Motor Corporation, to fly in
Colombia as well as the free entry of his equipment and to advise the
Department that I have this day received a note from the Ministry for
Ministry of War, which grants Mr. O’Neill permission to fly in Colombian
territory. Inasmuch as no reference was made with respect to the free entry
of his equipment I am to-day again addressing the Foreign Office in the
premises.
I have [etc.]
SAMUEL H. PILES

[Document 671]
The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
[Received 10:55 a.m.]
authorities here report this morning Captain O’Neill and companion in
Comet aeroplane crashed near Minas last night. Latest information affirms
injuries to both aviators slight.
GADE

[Document 672]
The Chargé in Uruguay (Gade) to the Secretary of State
flight, is expected to leave hospital tomorrow.11 Aeroplane badly damaged.
GADE
of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674] ff.

Tri-Motors Airways concession in
Argentina
[673] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[674] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[675] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
[676] The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[Document 673]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
38. Department of Commerce states that Captain Ralph A. O’Neil, who was
in charge of the Boeing expedition,12 negotiated with Argentine postal
authorities a very favorable air mail concession. Upon his return to the
United States he endeavored to interest Boeing Company in financing it but
they declined and the Remington-Rand Corporation has agreed to finance it.
In view of the fact that the time limit within which O’Neil was to notify
Argentine authorities that he was able adequately to finance the project has
practically expired, he anticipates there may be some difficulty in actually
securing the grant. Department of Commerce states that if you were
informed that O’Neil has secured adequate financing for the project you
might be in a position to assist in getting the concession.
As European Governments are reported to have already secured a foothold
in Argentina, the Department would of course be glad to have American
interests obtain contracts there also.
For your information the Post Office Department has already given
contracts to an American Company to carry air mails to Panama via Central
America and to Porto Rico via Cuba, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic.13
It is hoped eventually to extend these lines from the Canal Zone down the
west coast of South America and across to Buenos Aires and from Porto
Rico to Venezuela and down the east coast of South America.
KELLOGG

[Document 674]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8 p.m.]
power of attorney saw Director of Posts and Telegraphs this morning and
was advised that no contracts could be consummated in short time
remaining of present administration. He advised waiting till matter could be
taken up with new government. O’Neil’s lawyer counsels deferring further
action until appointment of new Director of Posts and Telegraphs.
BLISS

[Document 675]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss)
contract was signed by the Director of Posts with Tri-Motors Airways
December 22, subject to approval by other officials. Please report present
status of the matter and possibilities of final ratification of the contract in
the near future. Lend all appropriate assistance to O’Neil’s representative
and report by telegraph.
KELLOGG

[Document 676]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State
[Received 9:10 p.m.]
ratification of contract by Executive prior to end of Alvear term it was
thought safer to inaugurate fresh negotiations with the new administration.
These are not concluded yet, the main point of discussion being method of
reimbursing company. O’Neil’s representative seems to be confident as to
ultimate prospects14 but by reason of recent change of administration
Government business is subject to delay. Commercial attaché also cabling.
BLISS
14 A decree granting Tri-Motors Airways the right to establish an air service
with the United States was signed Feb. 28, 1929. The decree embodying the
contract was printed in the Buenos Aires La Epoca, Feb. 28, 1929. (File No.

Possible extension of American air
lines to Venezuela
[677] The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[678] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
[679] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Commerce (Hoover)
Washington, March 3, 1928.
[680] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
[681] The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State

[682] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
Washington, May 26, 1928.
[683] The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[684] The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State

[Document 677]
The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[Received 7 p.m.]
5. Please see confidential letter from transportation division, Department of
Commerce, to the commercial attaché in Caracas January 12.15 Does the
Department desire the Legation to make discreet inquiries regarding the
Government’s attitude towards the proposed air line?
ENGERT
15 Not printed; copy was transmitted to the Department in despatch No.

[Document 678]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
[Paraphrase]
representatives of the United States Government should not initiate or
conduct private business negotiations on behalf of private American
interests with foreign governments. You should not, therefore, approach the
Government of Venezuela in the matter as suggested. Of course the
Department expects the Legation to give all proper assistance to responsible
American interests engaged in legitimate activities in foreign countries, and
you may give such assistance to the representative of the interests in
question.
Department is informing Department of Commerce.
KELLOGG

[Document 679]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Commerce (Hoover)
WASHINGTON, March 3, 1928.
SIR: The Department has received a telegram from the American Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim at Caracas, referring to a confidential communication
dated January 12, 1928, sent by the Transportation Division of the
Department of Commerce to its Caracas office on the subject of air line
concessions in Venezuela and inquiring whether the Legation should
institute inquiries with a view to obtaining the Venezuelan Government’s
attitude towards the proposed air line.
It appears from the Department’s information that the American interests
concerned have not themselves taken up this matter with the Venezuelan
Government, and are relying upon representatives of the United States in
Venezuela to take the initial steps.
The Department of State expects its representatives abroad to render all
proper assistance and support to responsible American interests in their
legitimate activities abroad. It is, however, the practice of this Department
to avoid having the representatives of this Government abroad initiate or
conduct private business negotiations with foreign governments on behalf
of private American interests.
In view of the above considerations, this Department, after careful
consideration, feels, in the light of the information at hand, that it is not in a
position to instruct the American Legation at Caracas to take up this subject
with the Venezuelan Government, and has instructed the Legation to that
effect. The Legation, however, will of course give all proper assistance to a
representative of the American interests in question.
I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Francis Wiaurre

Assistant Secretary

[Document 680]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
[Paraphrase]
Endeavor in an informal and discreet manner to ascertain the attitude of the
Government of Venezuela toward the establishment by American interests
of commercial air lines in Venezuela, or air lines connecting Venezuela with
neighboring nations and the United States. Without further definite
instructions, do not make any statement which could possibly be interpreted
as favoring any specific interest or any particular project.
This information is desired by the Department simply for its guidance when
advising American interests which may inquire as to the probable attitude
of the Government of Venezuela toward the possible extension of air lines
to Venezuela or the establishment of air lines within that country.
KELLOGG

[Document 681]
The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
CARACAS, March 13, 1928.
[Received March 30.]
No. 1502
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
the Venezuelan Government towards American interests desiring to
establish air lines in Venezuela or between Venezuela and neighboring
countries.
In reply I have the honor to refer to the Legation’s despatch No. 1497 of
March 616 in which I reported that Mr. Frederic D. Grab, the Assistant
Trade Commissioner, had had an interview with the Minister of Fomento on
this subject. As stated in Mr. Grab’s letter of March 5 to the Department of
Commerce, a copy of which was enclosed with despatch No. 1497, the
Minister of Fomento did not appear to hold out much hope that an
application for an air line would receive favorable consideration. However,
as this inquiry related more specifically to a proposed line between
Maracaibo and Curasao, the Department may perhaps desire me to make
discreet inquiries as to the attitude of the Venezuelan Government towards
commercial aviation in general. But before taking any steps in that direction
I shall await further instructions from the Department.
I have [etc.]
C. VAN H. ENGERT
16 Not printed.

[Document 682]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Venezuela (Engert)
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1928.
No. 1248
SIR: With further reference to the Department’s confidential telegram No. 7
regarding the attitude of the Venezuelan Government towards American
interests desiring to establish air lines in Venezuela, or between Venezuela
and neighboring countries, you are informed that it is the intention of
certain American aeronautical interests, operating with the approval and
encouragement of the United States Government, to interest themselves
within a short time in the carrying of air mail and passengers in the
Caribbean area, probably establishing a connection between Panama and
Venezuela via Colombia. There is now a bill pending in the United States
Congress to authorize the United States Government to give financial
assistance to air lines to Central and South America. It is important for the
success of their endeavors that the Venezuelan Government grant no
exclusive concessions to foreign aeronautical interests to operate in
Venezuela, and it is of course highly desirable that the Venezuelan
Government grant no concessions at all to foreign interests for air transport
in Venezuela until the American companies above mentioned have had an
opportunity to develop their project, since any concessions to operate air
lines in Venezuela might in effect serve to prevent American interests from
establishing a line. The United States, as you know, has always felt very
strongly that an “open door” policy in such matters is best qualified to
benefit all concerned.
The Department desires you to seize a favorable opportunity to discuss this
matter informally and confidentially with President Gomez, intimating that
the United States Government would be happy eventually to see
Venezuelan and American aeronautical interests joined in the development

of aviation in Venezuela, and that this Government would appreciate it if
the field were kept open pending the maturing and presentation of
American projects which are now being considered.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE

[Document 683]
The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
it seemed best not to approach the President direct, but the substance of the
last paragraph has been informally conveyed to him by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs.
No concessions appear as yet to have been granted to any foreign interests
but the German Colombian Company has long been trying to obtain one
and there is a vague British proposal for a line between Trinidad, La
Guayra, Curaçao, Maracaibo.
ENGERT

[Document 684]
The Chargé in Venezuela (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:16 p.m.]
the United States has been rather slow in entering this field,17 and that it
cannot hope to keep out foreign interests indefinitely.
ENGERT

Representations
by
foreign
governments with respect to Senate
bill relating to payment of advance
wages to seamen on foreign vessels
undated
[686] Memorandum by Mr. C. B. Hosmer, Division of Foreign Service
Administration, of a Conversation With Mr. J. Balfour, First Secretary
of the British Embassy
Washington, February 25, 1928.
[687] The British Embassy to the Secretary of State
Washington , April 26, 1928.
[688] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.
Washington, April 28, 1928.

[689] The Italian Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , April 30, 1928.
[690] The Swedish Legation to the Department of State
Washington , April 30, 1928.
[691] The Netherlands Legation to the Department of State
Washington , May 3, 1928.
[692] The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Assistant Secretary of State
(Castle)
Washington, June 12, 1928.
[693] The Secretary of State to the Italian Embassy
Washington , June 29, 1928.
[694] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.
Washington, December 8, 1928.

[Document 685]
undated
A BILL relating to the payment of advance wages and allotments in respect of
seamen on foreign vessels, and making further provision for carrying out
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That the first paragraph of
paragraph (e) of section 10 of the Act entitled “An Act to remove certain
burdens on the American Merchant Marine and encourage the American
foreign-carrying trade, and for other purposes,” approved June 26, 1884, as
amended, is further amended to read as follows:
“(e) This section shall apply to payments of advance wages and
allotments, in respect of seamen on foreign vessels, whether made
within or without the United States or territory subject to the
jurisdiction thereof, as well as to payments of advance wages and
allotments in respect of seamen upon vessels of the United States;
except that no criminal penalty under this section shall be
imposed for a violation of this section in respect of a seaman
upon a foreign vessel if such violation occurs outside the United
States and territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof. The courts
of the United States shall be open to seamen for suits for payment
of wages, irrespective of whether the wages were earned upon a
vessel of the United States or a foreign vessel, or within or
without the United States or territory subject to the jurisdiction
thereof, and in any such suit the provisions of this section shall be
applicable. Any master, owner, consignee, or agent of any foreign
vessel who violates the provisions of this section within the
United States or territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof shall
be liable to the same penalty to which the master, owner, or agent

of a vessel of the United States would be liable for a similar
violation.”
18 Introduced in the Senate by Mr. La Follette, Jan. 27 (calendar day, Jan.
31), 1928; read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce.

[Document 686]
Memorandum by Mr. C. B. Hosmer, Division of Foreign Service
Administration, of a Conversation With Mr. J. Balfour, First
Secretary of the British Embassy
WASHINGTON, February 25, 1928.
Mr. Balfour desired to discuss the provisions of Senate Bill 2945,
introduced by Senator La Follette. This bill seeks to impose upon foreign
vessels which enter ports of the United States, the same restrictions which
are now imposed against American vessels in regard to advancements of
wages to seamen shipped in foreign ports.
In the case of Jackson et al v. the Archimedes, decided by the United States
Supreme Court on January 3, 1928,20 it was decided that American vessels
are prohibited from making advances to seamen shipped by them in foreign
which were rendered before the amendment of the law by Section 32 of the
I suggested that I was not in a position to speak for the Department
regarding the proposed bill, but assured Mr. Balfour that if he desired to
take the matter up with the Western European Division, I would be glad to
contribute such knowledge as I have in the premises, if asked to do so. He
appeared to be content at present with a very general discussion of the
matter, dealing chiefly with the motive which had probably inspired the
introduction of the bill. Although Mr. Balfour carefully refrained from any
suggestion that retaliatory legislation might be passed if the United States
should endeavor thus to regulate contracts between aliens and foreign
vessels, entered into in foreign ports, there was a clear inference that he felt
this would constitute a very radical departure from long accepted practices
among nations and indicated that he might receive instructions at a later
date to discuss the question more in detail with the Department along the
lines of the expediency of this class of legislation.

I have ascertained that the Bureau of Navigation, Department of
Commerce, has not been asked by Congress for any report on the bill in
question. It appears doubtful whether Congress will require a report from
this Department unless it should be brought to the attention of the
appropriate Committees that this class of legislation might involve us in
perplexing questions with other nations. A copy of the proposed bill is
attached.
HOSMER

[Document 687]
The British Embassy to the Secretary of State
MEMORANDUM
The British Embassy understand that Senate Bill No. 2945 relating to the
payment of advance wages and allotments in respect of seamen of foreign
vessels, and making further provisions for carrying out the purposes of the
Seamen’s Act, approved March 4th, 1915, was passed by the Senate on
April 24th. It appears to the Embassy that the effect of this bill is to declare
unlawful the payment of advance wages abroad to seamen engaged in
British and other foreign ships outside the United States. The Bill therefore
appears to seek to vary forcibly the provisions of a contract made within
British jurisdiction, and in many cases between British subjects, which is
perfectly valid under British law, and apparently purports to regulate the
manner in which the master of a British ship may engage a British crew in a
British port. The effect of the bill, therefore, appears to the Embassy to be
contrary to the generally accepted principles of International Law. In view
of the serious effect which such a measure would have upon the ocean
borne commerce between Great Britain and the United States, the Embassy
desire to draw attention to the difficulties which would appear to them to
follow from its enactment.
WASHINGTON , April 26, 1928.

[Document 688]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.22
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to enclose for your consideration a copy of a
memorandum of April 26, 1928, left at the Department by the British
Ambassador,23 in which attention is drawn to the difficulties which may
attend the enactment into law of an amendment to the Seamen’s Act of
The amendment in effect appears to declare illegal contracts for the
payment of advance wages concluded by aliens without the jurisdiction of
the United States in connection with the employment of alien seamen on
board alien vessels and declares that “the courts of the United States shall
be open to seamen for suits for payment of wages, irrespective of whether
the wages were earned upon a vessel of the United States or a foreign
vessel, or within or without the United States or territory subject to the
jurisdiction thereof …”.
Without taking into consideration the question whether Congress has the
power to declare that contracts made abroad by aliens are invalid, it is
believed that the action contemplated in the amendment runs contra to
generally accepted principles of law to the effect that contracts of all kinds
are to be governed as to their nature, validity, and interpretation of the law
of the place where they were made. While it is generally conceded that the
courts of one State will not enforce a contract made in another where to do
so would be in violation of their own statutes, or a settled public policy of a
State, it is believed that contracts of this character are not in a true sense
exceptions to the rule of universal validity being not invalid but merely
unenforceable in the particular forum.
I may add that a representative of the Italian Embassy, under instructions
from the Ambassador, called recently at the Department to state that his

Government wished to make all reserves in connection with the passage by
the Senate of the amendment to the Seamen’s Act and adverted to the
provisions of Article 11 of the Consular Convention between the United
States and Italy of 1878,24 which reads in part as follows:
“Consuls-General, Consuls, Vice-Consuls, and Consular Agents
… shall alone take cognizance of questions of whatever kind, that
may arise, both at sea and in port, between the captain, officers
and seamen, without exception, and especially of those relating to
wages and the fulfilment of agreements reciprocally made. The
courts, or federal, state or municipal authorities in the United
States and the tribunals or authorities in Italy, shall not under any
pretext, interfere in such questions, …”
There would seem good grounds to fear that in so far as the amendment
refers to the shipment of seamen on foreign vessels in foreign ports, it will
give rise to numerous conflicts of laws, and may render the American
merchant marine subject to retaliatory measures by foreign governments
which in their effect may far out-weigh any advantages which might be
secured by this legislation.
I have deemed it proper to bring these considerations to your attention, in
the event that the amendment to the Seaman’s Act passed by the Senate be
referred to your Committee, for such action as it may deem it appropriate to
take in the matter with a view to meeting the objections discussed above.
I have [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
Under Secretary
22 Chairman of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of
Representatives.
23 Supra.

[Document 689]
The Italian Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The Italian Ambassador wishes to call attention to the fact that the Senate
has passed a Bill (S 2945) which amends the Seaman’s Act of March 4,
1915, and is relating to the payment of wages and allotments due to seamen
of foreign vessels.
The Italian Ambassador desires to point out that, while said Bill provides
that the Courts of the United States shall be open to seamen for claims
concerning payments of wages irrespective of whether these wages were
earned upon a vessel of the United States or a foreign vessel, Article XI of
the Consular Convention between Italy and the United States disposes that
the Royal Italian Consular Officials shall alone take cognizance of such
questions.
WASHINGTON , April 30, 1928.

[Document 690]
The Swedish Legation to the Department of State25
MEMORANDUM
The attention of the Swedish Legation has been drawn to a bill, “S. 2945—
An Act relating to the payment of advance wages and allotments in respect
of seamen on foreign vessels, and making further provision for carrying out
the purposes of the Seamen’s Act, approved March 4, 1915,” which bill
passed the Senate April 20, 1928.
On perusal of the bill the Swedish Legation finds that it contains
stipulations which, should the bill become law, would gravely affect
Swedish shipping interests, inasmuch as a contract legally entered into
between Swedes on a Swedish vessel while in Sweden would fall within the
jurisdiction of the Courts of the United States. Such a law would not be
confined to limits over which a law-making power has jurisdiction and
would therefore, according to the Swedish Government’s view, be contrary
to fundamental principles of law commonly acknowledged among nations.
WASHINGTON , April 30, 1928.
25 Copy transmitted to the Chairman of the Committee on Merchant Marine
and Fisheries, House of Representatives, May 4, 1928.

[Document 691]
The Netherlands Legation to the Department of State26
No. 1413
The Royal Netherland Legation is aware that a Bill introduced in the Senate
by Mr. La Follette, relating to the payment of advance wages and allotments
in respect of seamen on foreign vessels and making further provision for
carrying out the purposes of the Seamen’s Act, approved March 4, 1915,
has been passed by the Senate on April 24th.
The Netherland Legation has the honor to draw the attention of the State
Department upon the fact, that in case this Bill is coming into force, great
difficulties will result therefrom for the Netherland shipping, inasmuch as
the courts of the United States will have to judge claims of wages between
Dutch seamen and Dutch shipowners according to the clauses of this new
Bill, but under contracts drawn up before a Dutch authority in Holland or a
Dutch Consul under law terms entirely different from the American law.
The shipping interests as well as the commercial relations between the
United States and The Netherlands undoubtedly will suffer from these facts.
The Netherland Legation is of opinion, that the provisions of the proposed
Bill are contrary to the conventional understandings of International Law.
WASHINGTON , May 3, 1928.
26 Copy transmitted to the Chairman of the Committee on Merchant Marine
and Fisheries, the House of Representatives, May 10, 1928.

[Document 692]
The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Assistant Secretary of State
(Castle)
WASHINGTON, June 12, 1928.
No. 82
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: The Danish Minister of Foreign Affairs has directed me
to call the attention of your Department informally to the provisions of
Senator La Follette’s bill S–2945, relating to the payment of advance wages
and allotments in respect of seamen on foreign vessels, and making further
provision for carrying out the purpose of the Seamen’s Act, approved
March 4, 1915. You are no doubt well acquainted with this bill and with the
provision therein proposed which says: “(e) This section shall apply to
payments of advance wages and allotments, in respect of seamen on foreign
vessels, whether made within or without the United States or territory
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, etc.”
In this respect I beg leave to state, that pursuant to the Danish Seamen’s Act
advance wages and allotments are legal, and that in the opinion of the
Danish Government the extension of jurisdiction contemplated in the bill
under discussion would conflict not only with Danish law, but also with the
generally accepted principles of International law and practice on this
subject, to wit: the status and rights of merchant ships in foreign ports, and
with the adjustment of an International navigation policy in a practicable
and desirable way.
The bill was as you know passed by the Senate on April 24th last, but was
not reported from the Committee of the House before the session was
closed on May 29th. I presume, however, that it is to be expected that the

bill will be reported or come up for discussion in the coming session of
Congress next December and, with this eventuality in view, I would be
greatly obliged to you, if you could see your way to advise the proper
Committees of the considerations set forth above and of the difficulties that
we anticipate if the bill should become law.
Believe me [etc.]
C. BRUN

[Document 693]
The Secretary of State to the Italian Embassy
MEMORANDUM
The Secretary of State refers to the memorandum of the Royal Italian
Ambassador dated April 30, 1928, in which the Ambassador called
attention to the provisions of Senate Bill No. 2945 relating to the payment
of advance wages and allotments to seamen on foreign vessels and stated
that the bill is in conflict with the stipulations of Article XI of the Consular
Convention between the United States and Italy concluded on May 8, 1878.
The Secretary of State has the honor to inform the Ambassador that while
the bill referred to was passed by the Senate on April 24, 1928, and was
sent to the House of Representatives where it was referred to the Committee
on Merchant Marine and Fisheries on April 26th, no further action in regard
to it was taken before the adjournment of Congress.
In this relation the Secretary of State would bring to the Ambassador’s
notice that Article XI of the Convention of 1878 was annulled by the
Supplemental Consular Convention between the United States and Italy
concluded on February 24, 1881,27 which substituted a new article therefor,
consequence of a notice given by this Government through the American
such notice by the Italian Government.28
WASHINGTON , June 29, 1928.

[Document 694]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Wallace H. White, Jr.
WASHINGTON, December 8, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s letter of April 28, 1928,
relative to the difficulties which may attend the enactment into law of an
amendment to the Seamen’s Act of March 4, 1915, passed by the Senate on
April 24, 1928, and to enclose for your further consideration, a copy of a
note of June 12, 1928, received from the Royal Danish Legation at this
capital29 setting forth the opinion of the Danish Government that the
extension of jurisdiction contemplated in the Bill would conflict not only
with Danish laws but also with the generally accepted principles of
international law and practice on this subject.
For your information it should be stated that Article 11 of the Consular
Convention between the United States and Italy of 1878 to which the Italian
Ambassador adverted and which was quoted in the Department’s letter of
April 28, 1928, is no longer in force.
If the proposed amendment be adopted, it is not improbable that foreign
Governments might regard it as contrary to international comity, thereby
causing embarrassment to this Government in the conduct of its foreign
relations. Moreover, as has already been pointed out by the Department, the
enactment into law of the amendment in question may render the American
Merchant Marine subject to retaliatory measures by foreign Governments
which in their effect may far outweigh any advantages which might be
secured by this legislation. For the reasons stated, the Department considers
that the passage of the bill under discussion would be undesirable.
I have [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

Representations
by
foreign
governments regarding Senate bills for
the
deportation
of
certain
alien
seamen30
30 These representations were brought to the attention of the Senate
Committee on Immigration.
[695] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 4, 1927.
[696] The German Ambassador (Maltzan) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 5, 1927.
[697] The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 7, 1927.
[698] The British Embassy to the Department of State
[ Washington ,] January 4, 1928.

[699] The Swedish Legation to the Department of State
Washington , January 13, 1928.
[700] The Netherlands Legation to the Department of State
Washington , January 17, 1928.
[701] The German Embassy to the Department of State
undated
[702] The Norwegian Legation to the Department of State
Washington , January 28, 1928.

[Document 695]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1927.
No. 74
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that my attention has been drawn to a
Bill S. 357431 providing for the deportation of certain alien seamen and for
other purposes, which was considered on the 2nd instant by the United
States Senate, and passed in the third reading.
Section 3 of this bill provides that every alien employed on board of any
vessel arriving in the United States who is found on examination by an
immigration inspector not to be a bona fide seaman is immediately to be
removed from the vessel to an immigration station, and if found to be
inadmissible to the United States is to be deported as a passenger “on a
vessel other than that on which brought, at the expense of the vessel by
which brought, and the vessel by which brought shall not be granted
clearance until such expenses are paid or their payment satisfactorily
guaranteed.”
Furthermore, it appears from Section 7 of this bill that foreign vessels
entering United States ports are to be debarred from including as members
of their crew aliens ineligible to United States citizenship who are non-
admissible to the United States under Section 13 (c) of the Immigration Act
of 1924,32 unless such aliens are natives of the particular country, island,
dependency or colony to the merchant marine of which the vessel in
question belongs.
This Section of the Bill also lays down that any alien seaman brought into a
port of the United States in violation of this provision shall be excluded
from admission or temporary landing and shall be deported to the place of
shipment or to the country of his nativity on a vessel other than that on

which brought, the deportation expenses being defrayed by the vessel on
which the alien is brought to the United States.
Inasmuch as the above mentioned sections, if interpreted in a restrictive
sense, must, I cannot but feel, meet with the strenuous opposition of
shipping interests in the different parts of the British Empire, I have drawn
the attention of His Majesty’s Government thereto for such action as they
may consider suitable. At the same time, I am not clear as to the exact
interpretation which should be placed upon the above mentioned sections of
the Bill and as to the manner in which their provisions, if enacted, will be
applied to vessels of the mercantile marine of Great Britain and the self-
governing Dominions, and I should accordingly be grateful to receive from
the appropriate authorities of the United States Government at their earliest
convenience an authoritative interpretation of the meaning of Sections 3
and 7 of the Bill under reference.33
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
33 The British Embassy was informed orally by an officer of the
Department of State regarding the status of the bill and that it was unlikely
that any House committee action would be taken without the Department of
State having an opportunity to be heard.

[Document 696]
The German Ambassador (Maltzan) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, February 5, 1927.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor to refer to the fact that the Bill S. 3574, “a
bill to provide for the deportation of certain alien seamen, and for other
purposes” was taken up in the Senate.
I reported to my Government in due course concerning the Bill and also the
whole of the hearings in the Immigration Committee of the Senate
concerning the Bill. My Government, reserving the right of further
instructions, has now instructed me to call the attention of the Government
of the United States to the fact that the enactment of the Bill would prove an
extraordinary burden to German shipping interests in its application.
Accept [etc.]
MALTZAN

[Document 697]
The French Chargé (Sartiges) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, February 7, 1927.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: My attention has been called to Bill S. 3574, printed on
which provides for the deportation of certain foreign seamen, and was
passed by the American Senate at its third reading.
Section 3 of the Bill provides that any foreigner employed on board a vessel
arriving in the United States who, after examination by the immigration
inspector is not found to be a bona fide sailor shall immediately be brought
to an immigration station and if found to be an undesirable shall be
deported as a passenger on a vessel other than that which brought him. The
Bill also provides that the expenses of the return trip will be borne by the
vessel which brought the undesirable, which vessel will not be allowed to
leave the port until the expenses are paid or adequate bail for such payment
has been filed.
Furthermore, it appears from Section 7 of the same Bill that foreign vessels
entering the ports of the United States will not have the right to carry in
their crew foreigners who, if they would seek to enter the United States as
immigrants, would have admittance denied them under the provisions of
Paragraph (c) of Section 13 of the Immigration Law of 1924, unless those
aliens are from the country, colony or dependency of the merchant marine
to which the said vessel belongs.
That section provides the same penalties as Section 3.
If the restrictive interpretation is put on the foregoing provisions they will
not fail to prove considerably cumbersome to the French colonial merchant

marine and I should like to be in position to forward as soon as possible to
my Government some explanations as to the precise meaning to be given to
the sections of that Bill and also the way in which the provisions, if enacted,
shall apply to the French merchant vessels. I should therefore be thankful to
Your Excellency if you would kindly acquaint me at the earliest possible
date with the official interpretation to be put on Sections 3 and 7 of the said
Bill.35
Be pleased [etc.]
SARTIGES
stated that, if it were decided to consider the bill further, hearings would be
held and that “these hearings will undoubtedly bring out more clearly the

[Document 698]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
SENATE BILL S–717 TO PROVIDE FOR THE DEPORTATION OF ALLEN SEAMEN AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
Senate Bill S 717, copy of which is attached,36 is almost identical with the
bill S 3574, which was killed in the House of Representatives last year. This
bill appears to be open to serious objection on the part of foreign nations.
In the first place, the bill provides for interference with the composition of
the crews of foreign vessels while in United States ports. It is the general
international understanding that when private ships of a foreign state are in
port the territorial authorities should refrain from interference with the
interior economy of the vessel. The composition of the crew is a matter
which affects the interior economy of a vessel, and the proposed clauses, if
enacted, would therefore conflict with a well-established, well-recognized
and useful international practice.
Further, the bill would in effect discriminate against foreign vessels trading
in American ports. It would cause great embarrassment to all ships in which
Chinese labor and Lascars are employed, and in particular to British Tramp
Steamers trading with American Ports in the course of their world voyages.
The technical difficulties of eliminating from the crews of tramp steamers
the Asiatic elements against which this bill is aimed would, in practice,
probably result in the masters of such vessels being compelled to cut out
American ports from their sailing schedules. In this way freight rates on
American exported produce would automatically rise, prices of American
grain and cotton and other produce would be increased in the countries of
consumption, and British consumers of such produce would be obliged to
curtail their purchases with resulting damage to themselves and their trade
with the United States.

Even stronger objection may be taken to the proposed legislation on the
ground that it constitutes a direct interference with trade, its effect being to
dictate to other countries how they are to carry goods to and from the
American market. At the same time, the proposed interference with the
composition of the crews of foreign vessels and in particular the difficulty
of complying with Section 6 of the Bill, which refuses clearance to vessels
departing from the United States unless carrying a crew of at least the same
number as on arrival, are likely to lead to much inconvenience and in many
cases to long delay, involving the alteration of sailing schedules and serious
loss to business. Further, the Bill would prohibit the employment of Lascars
and Chinese on ships registered outside their own States, and countries such
as India might well consider this as a direct and unwarrantable interference
with the employment of their subjects on the high seas. Active
apprehensions have in fact been caused in the Legislative Assembly in
India, who have been in communication with His Majesty’s Government in
Great Britain on the subject.
At the same time, protests have been received from many of the principal
shipping interests in Great Britain. The opinion was expressed before the
House Committee last year that the bill would in practice constitute a
discrimination in favour of Japanese and other Asiatic vessels at the
expense of the merchant marine of Great Britain and all other maritime
countries, since whereas vessels of these countries would be prevented from
employing Japanese and Asiatic labour, Japanese or other Asiatic merchant
vessels would be free to call at United States ports with crews of their own
nationality on board. In addition, as pointed out above, there would appear
to be discrimination against Asiatic seamen serving in European or other
vessels not of their own country.
Detailed objections to the Bill on technical grounds were laid before the
House Committee on Immigration by representatives of shipping interests
last year.
[ WASHINGTON ,] January 4, 1928.

[Document 699]
The Swedish Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
Swedish shipowners operating vessels on the United States have voiced
their deep concern on account of Senate Bill 717, introduced in the United
States Senate on December 9, 1927, by Senator King, regarding the
deportation of certain alien seamen (“Alien Seamen Act of 1926”). The
provisions of the bill seem to give room for such a strict interpretation as to
exclude seamen of a kind that masters of ships very often have to employ in
traffic between North and South America on account of a shortage of such
seamen as would ordinarily come within the category “bona fide seamen”.
The passage of the bill would undoubtedly create great difficulties in
securing the necessary crews and cause many hardships and considerable
losses to Swedish shipowners.
The provisions in the bill which prescribe that all vessels entering ports of
the United States manned with crews the majority of which, exclusive of
licensed officers, have been engaged and taken on at foreign ports shall,
when departing from the United States ports, carry a crew of at least equal
number, may also create great difficulties for the Swedish shipowners.
WASHINGTON , January 13, 1928.

[Document 700]
The Netherlands Legation to the Department of State
No. 170
The attention of the Royal Netherland Legation has been drawn on a Bill,
which, if passed, will be called, “Alien Seamen Act of 1926”, and is
mentioned on page 347 of the Congressional Record of December 9,
1927.37 It is reintroduced into the Senate and referred to the Committee on
Immigration.
Two clauses of this Bill will create, if enforced as introduced, serious
difficulties for several steamship Companies of the Netherlands.
The first is the provision prohibiting any ship from entering an American
port, if among her crew are aliens, who would not be admissible to the
United States under the Immigration Laws (Section 7). A great number of
Netherland ships, especially those of the Pacific Lines, have in their crew
Javanese and Chinese, both being most times Netherland subjects. If the bill
should come into force, the strange fact would occur, that a ship, carrying
the Netherland flag, would not be allowed to have certain subjects of her
own country in her crew when entering a port of the United States.
The second clause is to the effect that clearance will be refused to any ship
whose crew, as far as engaged and taken at foreign ports, shall, when
departing from the United States, be smaller than at the arrival of the vessel.
It is obvious, that this provision in many cases will cause a long delay and
considerable pecuniary loss to Netherlands vessels and it seems hardly fair
to force the latter to take on board a number of undesirable aliens simply in
order to bring the crew up to its full number.
The Netherland Government considers that this Bill, if passed, will be most
detrimental to the shipping interests of the Kingdom and will constitute a

strong impediment to the development of the economic relations between
the United States and Holland.
The Royal Government would therefore highly appreciate if the United
States Government and Congress, when the bill is under discussion, would
give due consideration to the very important interests of Netherlands
navigation, endangered thereby.
WASHINGTON , January 17, 1928.

[Document 701]
The German Embassy to the Department of State38
undated
Senate Bill 717 “To provide for the deportation of certain alien seamen and
for other purposes[”] in the opinion of the German Government if enacted
will entail serious hardships to German shipping interests. Especially
Section 3 and Section 6 are considered to cause objections on the part of
German shipping.
Section 3 provides that if an alien who is held not to be a bona fide seaman
has been found inadmissible “such alien shall be deported, as a passenger,
on a vessel other than that by which brought, at the expense of the vessel by
which brought, and the vessel by which brought shall not be granted
clearance until such expense[s] are paid or their payment satisfactorily
guaranteed.”
Section 6 provides that “all vessels entering ports of the United States
manned with crews the majority of which, exclusive of licensed officers,
have been engaged and taken on at foreign ports shall, when departing from
the United States ports, carry a crew of at least equal number, and any such
vessel which fails to comply with this requirement shall be refused
clearance”.
38 Left at the Department by the Secretary of the German Embassy, Jan. 21,
1928.

[Document 702]
The Norwegian Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
Norwegian Shipowners interested in the shipping trade on the ports of the
United States have expressed their great concern to the Norwegian
Government about a Bill (Senate Bill 717), introduced in the United States
Senate by Senator King and providing for the deportation of certain alien
seamen. The said Norwegian Shipowners are of opinion that the Bill, if
passed, undoubtedly will cause many difficulties and great expenses to their
ships.
1) In the first place the provisions of the Bill excluding all seamen not
falling under the strict category of “bona fide” seamen would, in case of
shortage of the crew brought about say by sickness, death or desertion in
foreign ports and when, as frequently happens in certain countries ordinary
professional seamen not are available, prevent captains from completing the
crew, thus exposing their ships to risks and perils from being undermanned.
2) The necessity for ships, under section 6 of the Bill, when departing from
the United States, to carry a crew of at least equal number as when entering
alien seamen found inadmissible from the reasons therein stated shall be
deported on a vessel other than that on which they were brought, at the
expense of the vessel by which brought. These provisions will in frequent
cases result in extraordinarily heavy expenses to the ships as well as in
inconveniences to ships, captains and often to the seamen themselves.
WASHINGTON , January 28, 1928.

Albania:

Recognition of Zog I, King of the
Albanians1
1 For previous correspondence regarding relations with the revolutionary
government in Albania, see Foreign Relations, 1925, vol.  I, pp. 489 ff.
[703] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[704] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
[705] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[706] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[707] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)

[708] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[709] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
[710] King Zog to President Coolidge
[711] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
(Prince) to the Secretary of State
[712] The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State

[Document 703]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:10 p.m.]
HART
2 Ahmet Zogu, President of Albania.

[Document 704]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
[Paraphrase]
to keep it advised by cable regarding the proposed change of regime in
Albania. The Department also wishes information at the appropriate
moment regarding the action your colleagues will take concerning
recognition and presence at the coronation.
CASTLE

[Document 705]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, August 30, 1928.
[Received September 11.]
No. 510
reference to the proposed early change of the form of government in
Albania, I have the honor to report that the decision to proclaim Ahmet
Zogu the King two days hence, or on Saturday, September 1, appears to be
final.
For the last two days the Constituent Assembly has had before it a motion
made by Feizi bey Alizotti to give the new monarch the title of “King of the
Albanians.” Two or three dissenting voices were hissed down and the title is
likely to be approved, as a consequence of which Yugoslavia may take
abundant time to investigate the inception of this idea.
My Yugoslav colleague said today that the question is one that calls for
consideration and that his government will take time to satisfy itself that
there is not something sinister about this proposed title which in effect
would make the new monarch the king of all Albanians either inside or
outside Albania.
The Constituent Assembly, according to the present schedule, will adjourn
on Saturday, September 1, after revising the form of government and
writing Ahmet Zogu’s name into the constitution as King. Ilias Vrioni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, informs me that the King will take the title of
Zogu I.
I have [etc.]
CHA[RLE]S C. HART

3 Not printed.

[Document 706]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
56. Ahmet Zogu was proclaimed at 9 o’clock this morning as “Zog First,
King of the Albanians.” It is probable that there will be no coronation and
no ceremonies which might raise embarrassing questions for the diplomatic
body, acting in unison here. The French Government is indicating an
attitude of caution because of the title of “King of the Albanians,” while my
colleagues from Yugoslavia, Turkey, Germany, and Great Britain, although
without instructions, believe their Governments will for the same reason
proceed slowly. Today I was confidentially informed that the Italians
through Feizi Alizotti and S. Verlaci forced Zogu to change his title when
they visited the palace yesterday and asserted they would resign from office
and cause a scandal if Zogu persisted in using “King of Albania.”
The change of government, in my view, has been brought about in a regular
manner and will be accepted by Albania.
HART

[Document 707]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
[Paraphrase]
receipt of a note dated Boston, September 3, from the Albanian Minister at
Washington, Faïk Konitza, as follows:5
“Acting on instructions from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at
Tirana, I have the honor to bring to your knowledge that the
Constitutional Convention has unanimously voted the restoration
of the monarchy in Albania and subsequently has elected, on
September the 1st, 1928, President Zogu as King of the
Albanians.”
You will please ascertain and cable a report of the action so far taken or
planned by the Governments of your colleagues in connection with
recognizing the new regime in Albania.
CLARK
5 Quotation not paraphrased.

[Document 708]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 8 p.m.]
58. The Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs requests the recognition of
the Kingdom of Albania in a note which extends the5
“assurance that the Government of His Majesty is solicitous to
develop the good relation existing between the two countries and
that we will observe in letter and spirit the treaties which have
been signed with other states under the Republic. Furthermore the
entire efforts of the Royal Government will have as its aim the
making of the new Kingdom a factor in the peace of the Balkans.
The Government of His Majesty hopes that Your Excellency will
have the kindness to employ with his Government all of his
influence to obtain new letters accrediting him to His Majesty.”
As the change of regime in Albania is by statute, no question of treaty
observance is involved. I am confident that the United States will continue
to have the good intentions of the new government as of the former one.
Recognition has been granted by Italy, Greece, and Hungary, other
Governments not having responded as yet. The King’s title is Zog (not
Zogu) I.
HART
5 Quotation not paraphrased.

[Document 709]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
6 p.m. Upon receipt of this telegram please address a note in the following
terms to the Minister for Foreign Affairs:
“My Government has taken note of the action of the Constituent
Assembly of Albania in changing the form of the government of
Albania to that of a constitutional monarchy and in proclaiming
President Ahmed Zogu, ‘Zog First, King of the Albanians.’ I now
take pleasure in informing Your Excellency, under instructions
from my Government, that the Government of the United States
extends recognition to the Kingdom of Albania, it being
understood that the exchange of notes of June 22, 1922, between
the United States and Albania7 and the provisions of Albanian
law enacted in pursuance therewith will continue in force.”
The following telegram is being sent today by the President to the King of
the Albanians:
“It is with pleasure that I extend to Your Majesty and to the
people of Albania congratulations on the occasion of your
accession to the throne. The American people join with me in
expressing best wishes for Your Majesty’s good health and
happiness and for the prosperity of Albania.”
The Department will communicate with you later concerning new letters of
credence.
KELLOGG

Foreign Relations, 1924, vol.  I, p. 316.

[Document 710]
King Zog to President Coolidge
[Translation]
Deeply moved by the congratulations and the good wishes Your Excellency
has so kindly expressed on the occasion of my accession to the throne of
Albania, I hasten to present to you the assurance of my most profound
gratitude for this act of cordial friendship toward my person and for the
Albanian people.
On this occasion it is a pleasure for me to convey to you an expression of
the sentiments of gratitude which my people continue to cherish toward the
noble people of the United States for the humane assistance which they
gave through the medium of the American Red Cross to my people at a
critical time.
Furthermore, the Albanian people are most grateful for the generous
hospitality which the great Republic of the United States so liberally
extends to the Albanians in the United States, thus bestowing upon them the
benefits of American culture and welfare.
Please accept, Excellency, my most sincere good wishes for your happiness
and for the greater prosperity of the noble people of the United States.
ZOG
8 Date of receipt by the Department not indicated; released to the press on
Sept. 20, 1928.

[Document 711]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
(Prince) to the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, September 20, 1928.
[Received October 10.]
No. 493
SIR: I have the honor to report, in connection with the recent recognition by
the United States of America of Ahmed Beg Zogu as King of the
Albanians, that Mr. Štylla, the Albanian Chargé d’Affaires at Belgrade,
called upon me yesterday to express his appreciation of this action on the
part of our country. Mr. Štylla emphasized that fact that the United States
was the first great power, after Italy, to recognize his new sovereign. He
stated that the recognition of the Albanian Kingdom by Italy (a foregone
conclusion), Hungary, Bulgaria and Greece was of great importance to the
new regime, but that the United States by its very friendly action had gone
far toward establishing King Zogu’s Government in the eyes of the world.
Mr. Štylla also expressed his gratification at the recognition of his King by
Yugoslavia, which followed so closely upon the action of the United States
in this matter, that he expressed his belief that there must be some
connection between them. I assured him, however, that the United States
had had no connection with nor had taken any part in persuading
Yugoslavia to take the step of acknowledging the sovereignty of King Zogu.
Mr. Štylla then smilingly said, “At least the American example no doubt
stimulated Yugoslavia to recognize my King, without awaiting the action of
France and England as Mr. Šumenković, the Acting Foreign Minister, sent
word to me he would be obliged to do.”
It is interesting to note that, although Mr. Šumenković had told me in a
recent interview (See the Legation’s despatch No. 488 of September 8,
1928)9 that he would await the action of France and England before

recognizing the new regime at Tirana, he smilingly said to me yesterday,
“We decided not to be dependent upon any other nation’s action in this
matter, because we know that, if we wish to maintain good relations with
Italy, we must recognize the new Albanian Kingdom sooner or later. Our
present act we look upon as a friendly gesture to Italy, whom we have no
desire to offend.”
I have [etc.]
JOHN DYNELEY PRINCE
9 Not printed.

[Document 712]
The Minister in Albania (Hart) to the Secretary of State
TIRANA, September 27, 1928.
[Received October 10.]
No. 525
SIR: I have the honor to report that in the order named Italy, Greece,
Hungary, Uruguay, the United States, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, France and
Great Britain have recognized the Albanian Kingdom.
After recognition by Uruguay a silence reigned for several days which
became exceedingly oppressive to King Zog and his advisers. This spell
was broken by the receipt on September 13, of President Coolidge’s
telegram of felicitation. The King sent at once to the Foreign Office for a
translator and when the telegram was read to him all of official Tirana
began to buzz. At about 4 o’clock in the afternoon of the same day, Ilias
Vrioni, Minister for Foreign Affairs, asked an appointment and came to see
me a half hour later, exhibiting the original telegram.
His face was lighted and he was in ecstasies. He handed me the telegram to
read, as I had to confess that I had received no word from Washington. With
all of his joy there was an underlying malice against Great Britain, France
and Yugoslavia. He intimated that the American recognition would force
the other powers to take notice. Then, as when I presented the formal note
of recognition on September 15, he said this was the crowning diplomatic
triumph of the new government.
The recognition of Italy he said had no special significance because Italy is
an ally of Albania, and while Albania was pleased to have the
acknowledgement of Greece and Hungary, their recognition failed to
impress the world. “But”, he continued, “when the greatest government on

earth recognizes, the others will realize that it is time for them to find out
what they are going to do.”
Vrioni saw to it that everybody in official life in Tirana heard the news of
President Coolidge’s telegram before the night was over and the following
morning representatives of most of the governments which had not
recognized came early to see me and verify the report. It seemed to me that
there was an atmosphere of gloom hovering over them because they
believed that it might upset the consultations which they had heard were
going on between Paris, London and Belgrade.
The Yugoslav government recognized on the same day that I delivered the
formal note, and it is my opinion that immediately after American
recognition the British and French governments suggested that Belgrade act
favorably at once and without reservations. My French and British
colleagues made no effort to veil the fact that their governments were
studying the question of Recognition jointly and that the stumbling block up
to that time had been the title voted to the new monarch, “Bang of the
Albanians.”
While Great Britain and France recognized on September 21, it is my
conviction that, if they did not make representations to the Royal Albanian
Government, they agreed upon a joint policy to be pursued in the event that
any new pacts with Italy are brought to light which threaten to cause
another ruction in the Balkans. And I also can say most assuredly that even
Italy had become just a little worried over the silence of Great Britain and
France. And no doubt was left in my mind that the Italian Legation here
was more than gratified when the United States recognized.
A demonstration was ordered to be held in front of the Legation on the
evening of September 15. I invited the multitude to come into the Legation
court. There were about 1,500 persons, headed by the Government’s
military band. The band first played the American and then the Albanian
anthem and gave vociferous applause at which juncture nothing was left for
me to do but make a speech, which I had not intended doing.
The Department will not receive a copy of the speech, which was entirely
impromptu, but let it suffice to say that I said nothing that would do any

harm. While it is the usual course for many foreigners, official and
otherwise, when speaking to the people of this country, to treat the
Albanians as children, I have never done that.
My policy adopted at the beginning of my career here was followed once
again. I assumed that I was facing an assemblage of several hundred
intellectual Babe Ruths and gave everyone of them a base on balls. An
Albanian who is a graduate of the American Junior Red Cross School
responded in genuine oratory.
The Constituent Assembly, meeting at irregular intervals, continues the
work of revamping the Constitution. The Statute creating the monarchy,
which is about the only finished product of the Assembly, is made an
enclosure herewith.10 I quote here the reply of the Royal Government to my
formal note of recognition:
Mr. Minister:
I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 14th instant by
which Your Excellency kindly informed me that the government
of the American Republic had taken note of the resolution of the
Constituent Assembly of Albania concerning the establishment of
the Monarchical régime in Albania and the elevation to the throne
of His Majesty, Zog I, King of the Albanians.
This act of cordial friendship on the part of your honorable
Government, recognizing, among the first, the new regime in
Albania, is very much appreciated by the Royal Government and
the Albanian people, who see in it one more testimonial of the
sympathetic sentiments of the great Republic towards Albania.
I pray that Your Excellency be kind enough to interpret to His
Government the warmest thanks and the profoundest gratitude of
the Royal Government for this amiable action on the part of the
Government of the Republic, an action which will add new forces
to the cordial relations which exist so happily between our two
countries.

I beg Your Excellency to kindly accept the assurances of my very
high consideration.
The President of the Council, Minister for Foreign Affairs, ad
interim
K. KOTTA
I have [etc.]
CHARLES C. HART
10 Not printed.

Treaties of arbitration and conciliation
between
the
United
States
and
Albania, signed October 22, 1928
[713] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
[714] The Albanian Minister (Konitza) to the Secretary of State
[Washington,] October 9, 1928.
[715] Arbitration Treaty Between the United States of America and
Albania, Signed at Washington, October 22, 1928
Done at Washington the twenty-second day of October in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
Treaty Series No. 770
[716] Conciliation Treaty Between the United States of America and
Albania, Signed at Washington, October 22, 1928
Done at Washington the twenty-second day of October, in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
Treaty Series No. 771

[Document 713]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
10. The Secretary today handed to the Albanian Minister a draft of a
proposed treaty of arbitration between the United States and Albania. The
provisions of the draft operate to extend the policy of arbitration enunciated
in the Arbitration Convention concluded in 1908 between the United States
and several other countries. The language of the draft is identical in effect
with that of the arbitration treaties recently signed with France and Italy11
and with the draft arbitration treaty already submitted to other governments
in the general program for the extension of these principles.
The Secretary also handed to the Minister a proposed draft of a conciliation
treaty modeled after so-called Bryan treaties signed by the United States
with many countries in 1913 and 1914.
Full texts are being forwarded in next pouch.12
KELLOGG
12 Drafts not printed; both treaties were signed without change.

[Document 714]
The Albanian Minister (Konitza) to the Secretary of State
[WASHINGTON,] October 9, 1928.
SIR: With reference and as a sequel to my letter dated July 31, 1928,13 I have
the honor to inform you that I have now received instructions to sign both
the Treaty of Arbitration and the Treaty of Conciliation, and also the Treaty
for the Renunciation of war.14 I have the honor to enclose a copy of the
documents appointing me a Plenipotentiary for the signing of these treaties.
I have the Albanian texts ready.
My Government having asked me to pay as soon as possible a visit to
Tirana in connection with some internal affairs, I shall wait for the signing
of these treaties and I will take them with me and hope to bring the
ratifications when I come back on December.
Awaiting your pleasure, I take [etc.]
FAÏK KONITZA
13 Not printed.

Treaty Series No. 770
[Document 715]
Arbitration Treaty Between the United States of America and
Albania, Signed at Washington, October 22, 192815
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
the Albanians
Determined to prevent so far as in their power lies any interruption in the
peaceful relations that have always existed between the two nations;
Desirous of reaffirming their adherence to the policy of submitting to
impartial decision all justiciable controversies that may arise between them;
and
Eager by their example not only to demonstrate their condemnation of war
as an instrument of national policy in their mutual relations, but also to
hasten the time when the perfection of international arrangements for the
pacific settlement of international disputes shall have eliminated forever the
possibility of war among any of the Powers of the world;
Have decided to conclude a treaty of arbitration and for that purpose they
have appointed as their respective Plenipotentiaries
The President of the United States of America:
Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States of
America, and
His Majesty the King of the Albanians:
Mr.
Faïk
Konitza,
Envoy
Extraordinary
and
Minister
Plenipotentiary of Albania in the United States of America;

Who, having communicated to one another their full powers found in good
and due form, have agreed upon the following articles:
ARTICLE I
All differences relating to international matters in which the High
Contracting Parties are concerned by virtue of a claim of right made by one
against the other under treaty or otherwise, which it has not been possible to
adjust by diplomacy, which have not been adjusted as a result of reference
to an appropriate commission of conciliation, and which are justiciable in
their nature by reason of being susceptible of decision by the application of
the principles of law or equity, shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of
Arbitration established at The Hague by the Convention of October 18,
1907,16 or to some other competent tribunal, as shall be decided in each
case by special agreement, which special agreement shall provide for the
organization of such tribunal if necessary, define its powers, state the
question or questions at issue, and settle the terms of reference.
The special agreement in each case shall be made on the part of the United
States of America by the President of the United States of America by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and on the part of
Albania in accordance with its constitutional laws.
ARTICLE II
The provisions of this treaty shall not be invoked in respect of any dispute
the subject matter of which
(a) is within the domestic jurisdiction of either of the High
Contracting Parties,
(b) involves the interests of third Parties,
(c) depends upon or involves the maintenance of the traditional
attitude of the United States concerning American questions,
commonly described as the Monroe Doctrine,

(d) depends upon or involves the observance of the obligations of
Albania in accordance with the Covenant of the League of
Nations.
ARTICLE III
The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of
America by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof and by
Albania in accordance with its constitutional laws.
The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible, and
the treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of the ratifications. It
shall thereafter remain in force continuously unless and until terminated by
one year’s written notice given by either High Contracting Party to the
other.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in
duplicate in the English and Albanian languages, the English text to have
authority in case of conflict between the two texts, and hereunto affixed
their seals.
Done at Washington the twenty-second day of October in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
FRANK B. KELLOGG [SEAL]
FAÏK KONITZA [SEAL]
15 In English and Albanian; Albanian text not printed. Ratification advised
exchanged at Washington, Feb. 12, 1929; proclaimed by the President, Feb.

Treaty Series No. 771
[Document 716]
Conciliation Treaty Between the United States of America and
Albania, Signed at Washington, October 22, 192817
The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of
the Albanians, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity that bind
them together and also to advance the cause of general peace, have resolved
to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have appointed as
their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America:
Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States of
America; and
His Majesty the King of the Albanians:
Mr.
Faïk
Konitza,
Envoy
Extraordinary
and
Minister
Plenipotentiary of Albania in the United States of America;
Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following
articles:
ARTICLE I
Any disputes arising between the Government of the United States of
America and the Government of Albania, of whatever nature they may be,
shall, when ordinary diplomatic proceedings have failed and the High
Contracting Parties do not have recourse to adjudication by a competent
tribunal, be submitted for investigation and report to a permanent
International Commission constituted in the manner prescribed in the next
succeeding Article; and they agree not to declare war or begin hostilities
during such investigation and before the report is submitted.

ARTICLE II
The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be
appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by
the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government
from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common
agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall
not be a citizen of either country. The expenses of the Commission shall be
paid by the two Governments in equal proportions.
The International Commission shall be appointed within six months after
the exchange of ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled
according to the manner of the original appointment.
ARTICLE III
In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by
diplomatic methods, and they do not have recourse to adjudication by a
competent tribunal, they shall at once refer it to the International
Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission
may, however, spontaneously by unanimous agreement offer its services to
that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request
their cooperation in the investigation.
The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International
Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation
and report.
The report of the Commission shall be completed within one year after the
date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the
High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual
agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be
presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission
for its files.
The High Contracting Parties reserve the right to act independently on the
subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have
been submitted.

ARTICLE IV
The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of
America by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by
Albania in accordance with its constitutional laws.
The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible, and
the treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of the ratifications. It
shall thereafter remain in force continuously unless and until terminated by
one year’s written notice given by either High Contracting Party to the
other.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in
duplicate in the English and Albanian languages, the English text to have
authority in case of conflict between the two texts, and hereunto affixed
their seals.
Done at Washington the twenty-second day of October, in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
FRANK B. KELLOGG [SEAL]
FAÏK KONITZA [SEAL]
17 In English and Albanian; Albanian text not printed. Ratification advised

Austria:

Negotiations respecting subordination
of the Austrian relief loan to a
proposed
new
Austrian
loan;1
authorization of a debt agreement
[717] The Economic Adviser (Young) to the Secretary of State
[Washington,] December 29, 1927.
[718] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[719] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 16, 1928.
[720] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[721] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[722] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[723] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 28, 1928.
[724] The Department of State to the Austrian Legation
Washington , February 2, 1928.
[725] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[726] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

[727] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 7, 1928.
[728] The Minister in Sicitzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[729] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[730] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[731] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[732] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[733] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[734] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] March 5, 1928.
[735] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[736] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[737] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 7, 1928.
[738] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 7, 1928.

[739] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[740] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Assistant Secretary of
State (Castle)
[741] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[742] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[743] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[744] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)

[745] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[746] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[747] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[748] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[749] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[750] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)

[751] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
[752] The Ambassador in Cheat Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[753] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[754] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] March 19, 1928.
[755] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 19, 1928.

[756] President Coolidge to the Congress of the United States
The White House, March 20, 1928.
[757] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[758] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 22, 1928.
[759] The Assistant Secretary of State (Castle) to the Minister in
Austria (Washburn)
Washington, March 23, 1928.
[760] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] April 3, 1928.
[761] The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
Washington, April 7, 1928.

[762] The Secretary of State to the Honorable Willis C. Hawley
Washington, April 11, 1928.
[763] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] April 18, 1928.
[764] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[765] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[766] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[767] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

[768] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[769] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[770] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[771] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)
[Washington,] June 2, 1928.
[772] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[773] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] June 14, 1928.

[774] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, June 21, 1928.
[775] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[776] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] August 16, 1928.
[777] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)
[Washington,] August 28, 1928.
[778] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] September 28, 1928.
[779] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[780] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 14, 1928.
[781] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] November 20, 1928.
[782] Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[Washington,] November 20, 1928.
[783] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[784] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, December 12, 1928—noon.

[Document 717]
The Economic Adviser (Young) to the Secretary of State
[WASHINGTON,] December 29, 1927.
MR. SECRETARY: The New York Journal of Commerce of December 23 stated that
“failure of Washington to approve the protocols under which the new
Austrian $100,000,000 international reconstruction loan is to be issued is
holding up the flotation of the bonds.”
Since it is possible that similar statements may be made in other papers, the
following brief summary of the situation is furnished for your information:
The Austrian Government desires to float a loan of $100,000,000 for
continuing the program of reconstruction by means of railway construction
and other public works. The project has received the approval of the
Committee of the States which guaranteed the international Austrian loan
floated in 1923. Under the Lodge Resolution,2 the Secretary of the Treasury
extended until 1943 the maturity of the $25,000,000 relief bond
representing advances made immediately after the war. He also raised the
liens which that bond enjoys to the extent necessary to permit the
reconstruction loan of 1923.
Several weeks ago the Austrian Government asked the United States to
extend the maturity of the relief bond until 1957 and also to release the liens
in favor of the proposed new loan. The Secretary of the Treasury submitted
to the Attorney General the question of his authority, and the ruling was that
no further authority to act remained under the terms of the Lodge
Resolution. The Austrian Government was so informed.
The Austrian Government has now proposed in principle to make an
agreement for payment of the relief bond in 25 years beginning 1943. A
similar proposal has been made to the other creditor governments. It is now
learned informally that the International Relief Bonds Committee is at the

present time meeting in London. At the invitation of that Committee, this
Government at one time had arranged for a secretary of the Embassy at
London to attend its meetings to keep the Department informed. We have
not, however, been invited to participate in the present meetings.
The most recent Austrian proposal is being referred to the Treasury for
comment.
In case any question is raised by the press, it might be well to state that it is
not correct to say that the United States is holding up the matter. You could
say that you understand Austria desires a loan of $100,000,000; that the
matter is very complicated because of the liens of the relief bonds and the
provisions of the treaty regarding Austrian reparations (whose amount has
not been fixed); that various plans have been discussed for arranging the
loan; and that you have not been advised that the other governments have
accepted any particular plan covering these matters, and that the
Department has not been informed that the Reparation Commission has
taken any action in the matter with reference to the reparation claim against
Austria.
It is my opinion that it would be desirable now to make a proper agreement
covering the relief indebtedness of Austria. I should also like to see an
arrangement made whereby the Executive Branch of our Government
would not have to continue protecting liens which affect Austrian assets and
revenues, since we have no interest in the situation which warrants
maintaining such a degree of control over Austrian finances. Our position
would be the more embarrassing if the other Governments should be willing
to take action to facilitate a further reconstruction loan by Austria, but the
Executive of the United States lacked authority to do so. I think we should
have in mind this possibility, although I see nothing specific to be done
until the situation develops further.
We have not had any inquiries from bankers as to our attitude on the
proposed loan, which obviously is only at the preliminary stage, though J. P.
Morgan and Company have indicated that they are interested in it.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]

[Document 718]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
13. Reparation 72. At Reparation Commission meeting today:
(4) Commission took note of the issue of Austrian renewal bonds
to replace the relief bonds of 1920.
(5) Took note of the amounts fixed in the restitution agreements
concluded between the Austrian and certain Allied governments
but declared that in so doing, having regard to the terms of the
Austrian relief bonds, its decision must not imply an invitation to
the Austrian Government to discharge these liabilities save by
preliminary agreement with the governments holding relief
bonds. Reservations, however, were made by various delegations
which would have the effect of authorizing in fact certain
payments under the restitution agreements. I entered a reserve as
to the position of the United States toward these reservations. The
Commission finally decided to communicate its decision to the
Austrian Government and the relief bond holding countries, with
the suggestion that they reach agreement as to the payments
covered by the reservations. The payments involved are not of
considerable importance.
(6) As regards the proposed new Austrian loan, the Commission
decided that “It will be willing, in principle and to the extent
which it may deem necessary, to ensure the service of the loan to

give favorable consideration to an application from the Austrian
Government for an exception in favor of the said contemplated
loan under Article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain3 of such
revenues of Austria as may hereafter be approved by Reparation
Commission from the first charge for treaty obligations created by
that article.” In these matters I found it advisable to make a
statement based on the first part of paragraph two of the
Department’s Reparation 37.4
(8) Date [of] next meeting February 18.
WHITEHOUSE
4 Not printed; it stated that an enabling act of Congress would be necessary
to effect the actions requested regarding the suspension of the lien and the
postponement of the payments due for the relief credit bond. (File No.

[Document 719]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 16, 1928.
No. 7
EXCELLENCY: Pursuing my previous notes and verbal discussions in matters
relating to the intended Austrian investment-loan and its chief rerequisite
[sic] i. e. deferment of lien held by various States for relief credits, I have
the honor to notify Your Excellency that the Reparations Commission as
well as all the other creditor countries (with the exception of the United
States) have, as I just was advised by my Government, deferred their lien
for a period of 30 years beginning from the issue of the new loan.
At the same time negotiations are pending for the settlement (funding) of
the relief credits on a proposed scale which I have communicated to the
economic adviser of the State Department, Mr. Young, for further
consideration by Your Excellency’s Government.
Negotiations for the loan could now proceed without further obstruction, if
the Government of the United States, with authorization by Congress,
would likewise defer their lien for a period of 30 years beginning from the
issue of the said loan.
I just received a cable from my Government instructing me to petition Your
Excellency’s Government to recommend to Congress with a least possible
delay a bill authorizing the above mentioned deferment.
Your Excellency will readily see that a debt settlement by itself is a matter
requiring considerable time for its finalization and being apt to meet with
various causes of delay, the more so if, like in our case, an agreement on
one and the same base is to be reached with a number of different countries.

My Government would, therefore, appreciate a technically separated
treatment of these two questions (deferment of lien and debt settlement),
although materially there may exist some relations between them.
Another difficulty in obtaining a timely solution in the case of deferment of
lien by the United States lies in the necessity of parliamentary action. The
failure of securing such an act by Congress before its adjournment would
spell doom for the investment loan intended by the Austrian Federal
Government to be used for a general improvement of the whole economic
conditions of the Country.
Submitting the aforementioned request of my Government to Your
Excellency’s favorable consideration I have the honor to ask for a
notification at the earliest possible convenience as to Your Government’s
intentions in regard to the same.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 720]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 3:34 p.m.]
Minister at Washington has apparently reported that obstacles exist, for
Chancellor Seipel is uneasy about Congress delaying passage of a
resolution. The Chancellor hopes the United States Government is
convinced of the Austrian Government’s earnest attempt to effect a
settlement of the relief-credit debts and, consequently, will be satisfied with
expediting action without awaiting a final settlement by agreement, which,
involving so many countries, may require some months. The Reparation
Commission having now given its approval, only favorable action by the
United States is still needed for a consummation of the loan negotiations.
Any protracted delay would cause great embarrassment and imperil the
loan. I have been asked by the Chancellor to cable to this effect. The next
pouch will have a further report with documents.
WASHBURN
Morgan and Company, regarding discussions in progress between the
Austrian Government and the European Relief Creditor States, was
enclosed; see Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, p. 473.

[Document 721]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[Paraphrase]
carefully considered by the United States Government, and everything
possible to expedite a decision will be done by the Department. However, it
will be appreciated that the Executive is in no position—particularly if, as
the Austrian Government wishes, the deferment of lien is to be considered
independently of the funding of relief credits—to make Congress a
recommendation which is based only upon such ex parte data as submitted
by the Austrian Government to the Reparation Commission. A necessary
prerequisite to a decision on the Austrian request to approach Congress
would be an independent examination by this Government of the proposed
loan’s bearing upon Austria’s economic and financial status.
This has been informally stated to the Austrian Minister, who has been told
that, if his Government wishes to supply any data in addition to that already
furnished, the United States Government would welcome such.
KELLOGG

[Document 722]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, January 23, 1928.
[Received February 10.]
No. 1692
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
proposed Austrian loan. Several groups are badly garbled, but I think I
divine the sense of the communication.
Mr. F. Carrington Weems, on behalf of the firm of J. P. Morgan & Co., has
been in Vienna for some days collecting data for his principals. He is well
equipped for his task, having been here at one time for several months
familiarizing himself with the Austrian situation when Zimmermann was
Commissioner General. I have talked with the Chancellor this morning, and
he is giving instructions to have duplicates of the material which the
Government is supplying to Weems furnished to me. The Morgan
representative, with whom I am in frequent touch, is making, together with
an associate, a very thoroughgoing investigation of Austria’s financial
status, and I hope to be able presently to place at the disposal of the
Department the substance of the data which he is collecting from various
sources.
herewith:
(1) A copy in the German original, together with a translation, of
the Government’s revised proposal to the International Relief
Committee.6 This proposal, I am advised, was submitted by the
Austrian Minister Franckenstein in London on Friday or Saturday
of last week. I am aware that the substance of it has been

communicated to Minister Prochnik, and is very likely already in
the Department’s possession. As originally submitted, there was a
typographical error. The sentence, “The present value is, reckoned
(40 instalments) 339 million Schillings” should read, “The
present value is, reckoned at 5%, in the first case (25 instalments)
Prochnik has, I believe, been advised of this error.
(2) A copy in the German original, together with a translation, of
the proposal to the American Government, which was likewise
transmitted to Prochnik.7
(3) A copy of the resolution of approval adopted by the
Reparations Commission in Paris on the 14th instant.8
Exhibit 1, it will be appreciated that the revised offer of the Austrian
Government to the International Relief Committee is in the nature of a
compromise offer. The Austrian Government in its memorandum points out
that the suggestion of the International Relief Committee that 1250 million
Schillings be paid in 40 annual instalments beginning in 1929 would mean
a present value of 402 million Schillings, whereas if 1250 million Schillings
were paid in 25 annual instalments beginning 1943 (which Austria would
only be obligated to do) it would mean a present value of 339 million
Schillings. In other words, if 339 million Schillings were set apart at the
present time, it would suffice to fund the Austrian Relief Debt in 25 annual
instalments beginning in 1943. The Austrian Government reasons that it
should not be penalized for beginning to make advance payments in 1929,
and as a counter-proposal, as the Department will perceive from Exhibit 1,
in 1943, reserving to itself the right to pay from 1929 on the basis indicated.
It proposes, however, to adopt the latter alternative and figures that “the
present value of these payments amounts in both alternatives to 315 million
Schillings”. This 315 million Schillings, it is thought, measurably
approximates the 339 million Schillings which the Austrian Government

would be obligated to pay from 1943 on the basis of the 1250 million
Schilling proposal.
The offer to the American Government, of course, is calculated upon the
same basis. Dr. Schüller,10 who is now in Rome for some days, told me on
the eve of his departure last week that the revised Austrian proposal is
between the Italian debt settlement and the proposed French debt settlement
with the United States. The Hungarian and Yugoslav settlements with the
United States, he asserts, were for much smaller sums, the Austrian debt
being relatively higher.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
10 Dr. Richard Schüller, Sektionschef, Austrian Foreign Office.

[Document 723]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 28, 1928.
No. 11/R
EXCELLENCY: Enclosed I have the honor to submit to Your Excellency copy of
the correspondence passed between the Austrian Government and the Relief
Committee in London in regard to the proposed settlement of Relief credits
extended to my country, viz:
A. Original proposal of the Austrian Government,
B. Counter proposal of the Relief Committee,
C. Answer of my Government to B.
In addition I beg to submit to Your Excellency a schedule of payments
prepared for the American share in accordance with the last propositions of
the Austrian Federal Government (sub C).
These figures I have previously brought to the attention of Your Dr. Young.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
[Enclosure 1—Aide-mémoire]
Original Proposal Made by Autrian Government11
The Austrian Government undertakes the obligation of paying through 25
years beginning from 1943 40 million schillings annually[,] i. e.[,] a total of
1000 million schillings.

The Austrian Government reserves the right to pay from 1929 on during 5
per annum, these sums with 8% compound interest until 1943 to be
deducted from the total of 1000 [million] sch.
After having paid off in aforestated way 200 million sch. prior to 1943 the
[Enclosure 2]
Counterproposal Made by the Relief Bonds Committee
AIDE-MÉMOIRE
1. The International Relief Bonds Committee[,] representing the
Governments of Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland, Italy,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland, welcome the proposal of the
Austrian Government for the final settlement of their Relief Debts
outlined in the Aide-Memoire handed to the Committee on the
12th December 1927,12 as they are convinced that it will be in the
interests both of Austria and of the Creditor Governments that a
definitive settlement of this question should be reached.
2. The Committee accept in principle the proposal that the Relief
Debts should be funded by means of an arrangement under which
the Austrian Government would undertake the obligation of
paying, in settlement of the debts, 25 annuities from 1943
onwards, but would at the same time reserve the right to make
payments from 1929 onwards, the sums paid before 1943,
together with interest thereon, being in that case deducted from
the payments from 1943 onward which the Austrian Government
would undertake the obligation to make. The Committee accept
this basis of settlement on the understanding that this arrangement
will not give rise to any objection on the part of the Trustees of
the League Loan.
3. The total amount of the Relief Debts (including that due to the
United States Government) as at the 1st January 1928, is

approximately 1,250 million schillings and the Committee are not
disposed to recommend their respective Governments to accept
any settlement less favourable than the following, to wit that the
Austrian Government should undertake the obligation of paying
annually or a total of 1,250 million schillings, reserving the right
million schillings annually, during the subsequent 10 years
annually.
4. The annuities agreed upon would be denominated in gold
schillings and would be payable on the 1st January of each year.
The share of the annuities due to each Creditor Government
would be proportionate to the amount of the debt to that
Government as at 1st January 1928. The amount so calculated
would be payable at the option of such Government in Austrian
schillings or United States of America dollars or sterling or in the
national currency of such Creditor Government at the current rate
of exchange.
5. The Relief Debts will retain their full priority over Reparations,
until they have been finally settled and discharged in accordance
with the arrangements proposed. The agreement for the settlement
of the Relief Debts will be submitted to the Reparation
Commission for their approval and would become definitive on
such approval being obtained.
6. The Committee would be glad to receive a revised proposal
from the Austrian Government on the above lines.
[Enclosure 3]
Answer of the Austrian Federal Government to the Relief Bonds Committee, dated Vienna,
January 14, 1928

The Austrian Federal Government, on their part too led by the conviction
that it will be in the interests both of the creditor Governments and of
Austria that a definitive settlement of the Relief Debts should be reached,
have taken note, with thanks, of the consent given in principle by the
International Relief Bonds Committee, to the proposal made by the Federal
Government of an alternative plan for the payment of the Relief Debts. The
Federal Government have already received a letter from Messrs. J. P.
Morgan & Co. according to which the said banking house have to make no
objections to the present plan of payments as seen from the point of view of
the League Loan prospectus. Moreover, the Federal Government have
addressed a letter to the Trustees of the League Loan asking them whether
any objections will be raised by them to the said proposals. As soon as an
answer will be received from the Trustees it will be transmitted to the
International Relief Bonds Committee. To the proposals, as laid down in the
Aide-Memoire of the International Relief Bonds Committee, the Federal
Government have the honour to reply as follows:
1. In order to exclude any misunderstanding the Federal Government beg to
state beforehand that by making their offer of paying certain amounts
denominated in Austrian schillings, it was by no means their intention to
turn the debts hitherto denominated in various currencies into debts
denominated in schillings. The offer was made in the schilling currency for
the reason only to reduce for the purpose of the present negotiations and for
the sake of calculation, the various currencies to a common denominator
and to give hereby the clearest and most lucid possible idea of the plan of
payment, which otherwise would have had to be made for each currency
separately or expressed in percentage. It is a matter of course that after an
agreement had been reached on the principles of the plan of payment,
payment, in accordance with the plan, in respect of the debts to the various
States was to be made in original currencies of the respective debts.
Now, a completely new arrangement in respect of the character as regards
currency, of the present obligations is provided for in point 4 of the Aide-
Mémoire. In place of the present obligations denominated in the various
respective currencies, the obligation towards all the creditor Governments is
to come to pay in gold. This would mean that Austria would have to secure
the creditor Governments against the risk of fluctuations, if any, of

exchange. It is difficult for the Federal Government to see which is the basis
the Relief Bonds Committee wish to take in making this demand; they think
that it would be impossible for them to advocate in the face of public
opinion of their country a concession in this direction.
2. Concerning the plan of payment proposed by the International Relief
Bonds Committee the Federal Government have the honour to make the
following statement: The International Relief Bonds Committee have
informed the Austrian Federal Government that they accept in principle
their proposal. They start, however, from the supposition that from 1943
onward up to 1968 1250 million schillings must be paid in all, while the
proposal of the Federal Government provides a total payment from 1943 to
1968 of 1000 million schillings. In the proposal of the International Relief
Bonds Committee the right would be reserved to the Austrian Government
to begin the payment of annuities as early as 1929 and to pay during the
schillings annually. The Federal Government must point out, that the 25
annuities (1943–1968) provided for in the proposal of the International
Relief Bonds Committee, very considerably differ as regards their present-
day value, from the present-day value of the 40 annuities provided for in the
proposal of the International Relief Bonds Committee. Calculated at 5% the
present-day value is 339 million schillings in the former case (25 annuities)
and 402 million schillings in the latter (40 annuities). A most unwelcome
situation would arise therefrom, for under such circumstances it would be
too difficult for the Federal Government to advocate in parliament the
making of payments in anticipation to begin from 1929. Naturally the
alternative proposal must be constructed so as to avoid that the annuities
from 1929 onward will represent a higher present-day value than does the
plan of payments beginning from 1943. It is true that also the proposal
made by the Federal Government on 12. December last,13 represented a
higher present-day value for the plan of payments beginning in 1929; this
was caused by the fact, that the Federal Government is on the standpoint
that with payments beginning from 1943 they intended to increase the
principal only by the amount of 8% compound interest on the payments
which would have been made in anticipation. We realize that it was a
mistake to make a proposal which in the two alternatives would have

represented different present-day values of the annuities. In order to remove
this defect which was contained also in the first Austrian proposal, and to
have to a certain extent regard to the wish of the International Relief Bonds
Committee that the annuities of the second period (1934–1943) as proposed
by the Austrian Government should be increased, they have the honour to
submit the following new proposal:
3. Austria undertakes the obligation of paying from 1943 onward a total
25,84 million schillings each. The present-day value of these payments is in
both alternatives 315 million schillings. If this present-day value is
compared with the present-day value (339 million schillings) of the
payment from 1943 onward of 1250 million schillings as proposed by the
International Relief Bonds Committee, it can be seen that the Federal
Government are meeting the wishes of the International Relief Bonds
Committee in a high degree.
For reason of simplicity the annuities are expressed in schillings also in the
present proposal. But the Austrian Government are interpreting the proposal
as meaning that the payments to be made to the several States in the sense
expressed above in the paragraph of point 1, shall be made in the currencies
in which the debts were contracted; this principle will have to be followed
when the definitive text will be drawn up.
[Enclosure 4]
Proposal for the Funding of Austrian Relief Debts to the United States of America
Austria undertakes to pay, within 25 years beginning from 1943 [,] a total of
24 instalments of $1,319,000,
one instalment of $1,321,250.

Austria reserves the right to make instead of the above stated instalments
the following payments, beginning from January 1st 1929:
5 years $284,000 each;
10 years $455,000 each;
24 years $735,000 each;
1 year $729,000.
Minister in Austria, Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, p. 465.
12 Supra.

[Document 724]
The Department of State to the Austrian Legation
MEMORANDUM
On January 19, 1928, the Austrian Minister was informally advised that it
had been decided by the competent branches of the Government of the
United States that further study was necessary in relation to the economic
and financial questions presented by reason of the request of the Austrian
Government that the United States Government recommend to Congress the
enactment of legislation authorizing the deferment for thirty years of the
lien of the United States Government on assets which it is desired to pledge
as security for the contemplated new Austrian loan. The Minister was also
informally advised that the Department of State would be glad to receive
and consider any data bearing on these questions that might be available in
addition to the data in the possession of the Government of the United
States, the nature of which was then outlined to the Minister.
Careful and earnest study has been made of the data available in the files of
the Governmental Departments concerned, and it has been found that there
is a lack of adequate data bearing upon some of the principal aspects of the
proposed loan.
The Committee of Guarantor States, in its letter of October 12, 1927, to the
Austrian Minister of Finance,14 stated that it had been informed that it was
the intention of the Austrian Government to apply to the proposed loan the
principle recommended in 1924 by the Financial Committee of the League
of Nations that revenue-producing undertakings such as the post, telegraphs
and telephones, and the railways, should recoup to the Austrian Treasury
the charges for interest and amortization on such part of the proceeds of the
loan as may be allocated to such undertakings. Data available to this
Government do not give adequate information as to the basis the Austrian
Government has for believing that the proposed loan would lead to the
recoupment of amounts paid for service of the loan.

With respect to the Austrian postal, telegraph and telephone administration,
the Department finds in its files a statement that the estimated deficit in
1927 was 80,000,000 schillings. It is desired to know whether this figure is
exact, and also what estimate has been made as to the effect of the loan in
removing the deficit and creating net revenues sufficient to carry the
interest and amortization of the part of the loan proceeds that would be
applied to investment in those services.
With respect to the Austrian Federal Railways, the only available report is
that for the year 1925, which was published in June, 1927. It is understood
that the budget of the Austrian Government for 1928 provides for an
appropriation of 26,400,000 schillings to cover the excess of current
expenditure over current revenues of the Federal Railways. Of 414,000,000
schillings total capital investment in the Federal Railways which it is stated
schillings are required for electrification. Reports such as that in the Vienna
correspondence in the London Economist of December 24, 1927, refer to
doubts as to the economic wisdom of electrification of the Federal Railways
in view of the present coal situation. The Department of State would be
glad to receive such data as are available bearing upon the desirability of
electrification, taking particular account of the current experience as to
electrification in Austria. Such pertinent data as are available are also
desired as to the “urgently necessary station equipment and other capital
outlay” to which the remaining 224,000,000 schillings investment in the
Federal Railways would be devoted, and as to the productivity of such
investment.
With respect to the contemplated investment under the heads “other
railways and tobacco”, it is stated that “the demands are of the same kind as
the actual requirements of the last few years”. The Department of State
would be glad to receive further data regarding these requirements and also
regarding the productivity of the investment.
Since no information is available regarding “other capital outlay” of the
“central administration” and “monopolies and other concerns”, the
Department of State would be glad to have further data regarding this
proposed investment and its productivity.

Likewise, the Department of State would welcome the receipt of any other
data which the Austrian Government may care to furnish regarding the
desirability and the economic effects of the contemplated loan.
WASHINGTON , February 2, 1928.

[Document 725]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, February 3, 1928.
[Received February 23.]
No. 1704
SIR: Supplementing and confirming my despatch No. 1692 of the 23rd
ultimo, I now have the honor to transmit, in quadruplicate, the following
documents:15
(1) A table showing the public revenues derived from taxes and
1927, according to the reform plan of the League of Nations.
(2) Five tables showing in more detail by months the aforesaid
revenues in accordance with the statements made in the foot-note
of Exhibit 1.
(3) Statement explanatory of the above tables.
(4) A table showing in detail the current account of federal
administration, both as to expenditures and receipts for the year
1927, according to the League Plan.
(5) Two statements explanatory of the foregoing table.
(6) Statement giving information regarding the balance in hand of
the Austrian Federal Government on December 31, 1927.
(7) Statement showing the status of the debts of the Republic of
Austria affected by the depreciation of the currency.

(8) Statement showing the application of the League of Nations
Loan as of December 31, 1927.
The foregoing tables, it will be perceived, are in millions of Schillings, and
comprise the documents transmitted by the Austrian Federal Ministry for
Finance to Mr. Weems (referred to in my despatch under reference) for the
confidential information of the Morgan firm. Dr. Kienböck, the Federal
Minister for Finance, in talking to me stressed the fact that much of the
information was confidential, and I promised him that it would be so
regarded. He was good enough to supply me with additional copies upon
my statement that such copies would be useful for possible distribution
among the various interested departments of my government.
Mr. Weems left for New York on Thursday and he came to see me on the
eve of his departure. His task here had been, he said, to articulate the
various statements and statistical figures submitted to him. Wherever he and
his assistant detected a discrepancy, an explanation was asked from the
different departments, usually orally. Inasmuch as the major part of the new
projected loan was to be expended in railway, telephone and telegraph
developments (the two latter branches are under the postal administration),
he had concentrated his attention mainly upon the condition of these three
public utilities, which are all government owned. Weems told me that he
had found the railways and the administration of the posts in a better
condition than he had expected. Since he is cautious and not given to
optimism, I attach importance to this statement. He has had some training in
the railway field, and his conclusions here are entitled to weight. Altogether
Weems found a substantial improvement as compared with the general
situation when he was here two or three years ago. The agricultural
development had been, he thought, quite phenomenal and the banks and
government-owned public utilities were in a stronger position. The
improvement in the industrial field had been less marked, though even here
there were exceptions. The paper industry was more prosperous than it had
been before the war, and the Austrian iron and steel industry was doing
fairly well, due no doubt largely to its participation in the European cartel.
There is one fact to be kept in mind in passing upon the condition of
Austrian public utilities. It is always possible that the Government may

have to yield to pressure for higher wages and greater expenditures to such
a degree as to throw all estimates out of alignment. There is some reason for
the conclusion that the Austrian railway system is no worse off certainly
than that of any other Succession State. My own belief is that the
government ownership and control of all these systems is a necessary evil.
The political obstacles in the way of private leasing even are too great to be
overcome, though it is generally recognized that such action would greatly
curtail the overhead charges. The Director of Posts, Hocheisel, is a highly
trained and efficient bureaucrat of the old school, hard-headed and well
equipped to deal with all proposals disturbing his budgetary balance.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
15 Enclosures not printed.

[Document 726]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
15. Please see Sir Arthur Salter16 as soon as you can; talk over, informally
and discreetly, the situation described below; and then cable your report:
The Austrian Government has requested the deferment of relief credit liens
by the United States in order to permit the raising of a $100,000,000 loan.
Other creditors and the Separation Commission have already taken such
action. Before taking steps, however, to recommend the necessary
legislation, the Department felt that there should be undertaken an
independent investigation of the economic and financial aspects of the
proposed loan. In the opinion of experts who have studied the data
submitted by the Austrian Government (which, it is understood, submitted
the same also to other Governments) and other available data in
Washington, a good case has not been made out by Austria, no matter what
the merits of the proposition may be. A memorandum has been furnished
the Austrian Minister with certain inquiries as to the loan’s productivity and
its consonance with the principle recommended by the League’s Financial
Committee in 1924 that undertakings producing revenue should recoup
their share of interest and amortization on the loan proceeds which have
been allocated to them. It is asked how it is estimated that surpluses will be
converted from the present deficits of these undertakings.
The Department, in principle, wishes to give the most sympathetic attention
to the Austrian request, especially as other creditors than the United States
have acted, but unless at least a good prima facie case is made out for the
loan there is obviously little chance of Congress acting favorably.

Any informal, confidential estimate of the situation would be welcomed for
its guidance by the Department, which desires to know particularly whether
the League’s Financial Committee has made any study of or arrived at any
conclusion concerning the proposed loan and whether the Committee has
any special reason for not interesting itself in this proposal as it did in the
1923 case.
The above is to be repeated to the Legation at Vienna for its confidential
information; so also your reply when it is ready. Mail the texts to the
Embassies at London and Paris. The Legation in Austria is being instructed
to keep you informed.
KELLOGG
16 Director of the economic and financial section, Secretariat of the League
of Nations.

[Document 727]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 7, 1928.
No. 18/R
EXCELLENCY: On February second, a memorandum embracing a number of items
in which further information regarding the use and productivity of the
contemplated Austrian loan is sought by the Department of State, was
handed to me by your Mr. Young.17 A copy thereof, as I understand, has in
the meantime been cabled to Mr. Washburn for transmission to the Federal
Chancellery, Department of Foreign Affairs.
I do not doubt that my Government will, in due course, be in a position to
furnish Your Excellency with such data which will thoroughly, and in a
satisfactory way, enlighten, as to the merits of the project in question.
It does not behove me nor am I competent to anticipate, by entering into the
details of the problem, the answer of my Government to Your Excellency’s
memorandum, the less so as some questions are involved which still require
closer study. It may not have escaped Your Excellency’s attention, that the
Austrian Parliament, for instance, just recently passed a resolution,
providing for a thorough reexamination, by a special committee of
uninterested experts, of the various reports submitted to the Government in
regard to electrification of railroads, a measure, which to a certain extent
created the wrong impression abroad that Austria had practically dropped
said plan. I am able to state that this is not the case. On the contrary, the
harnessing of my country’s abundant waterpower and its use for running
railroads has by no means been abandoned, although the aforementioned
investigation concerning the productiveness of electrification on certain
lines ordered by Parliament, may or may not result in a temporary cessation
of further activities, in a pause, during which the effects of the work “so far

accomplished may be watched, and the experience thereby gained applied
to the continuation of the electrification project.
In whatever findings these studies may result, the necessity and principal
purpose of the new loan, a general overhauling, repairing and
modernization of the country’s whole communication system during the
next five years is so outstanding that it fairly overshadows all other
considerations of minor consequence.
The most valuable asset of the very few left to Austria by the Peace Treaty
is undoubtedly her geographical and consequently commercial position.
Austria is compelled to make the utmost use thereof, if she intends to assure
her future. There is no other way of accomplishing this task if not by
keeping her railways, roads and other means of communication up to date.
Who could dispute the fact that lagging in this respect would mean a
gradual elimination of my country from the main system of European
traffic, a slow but sure death.
The War left the Austrian railways, roads, telegraphs and telephones in a
deplorable condition. Immediate even though insufficient repairs were
urgently needed, requiring sums which to a small portion only could be
spared from the proceeds of the League of Nations loan. The rest had to be
born by appropriations provided for in the ordinary budget, i. e. by
overburdening the present generation with a task which would yield its fruit
to a more remote posterity. If the contemplated loan should fail, the
Austrian people would face the following alternatives: or [either] to adhere
to the present method and ruin business and the whole economic outlook by
an excessive tax burden, or to drop the entire project for which the loan is
sought and equally meet their doom.
There is an other point to be seriously considered from a general standpoint,
i. e. that no constructive, systematic and economic plan could be adopted
without having in advance secured the funds necessary for the execution of
the whole.
The aforementioned facts alone seem to have sufficient weight in
supporting an opinion generally shared by our creditor nations, that an
investment loan is most essential to Austria’s reconstruction, regardless

what the outcome of the investigations into the details connected therewith
may be. I shall not attempt to solicit Your Excellency’s final decision
concerning the advisability of an American participation in said loan, so
long as you are not fully convinced that the same is not incompatible with
the protection of prospective American investors and with the general
policy laid down by your Government in regard to foreign loans and
investments.
There are strong reasons for apprehension however that more than usual
delay may be experienced (the more so as the investigations under way on
both sides seem to assume the form of a painstaking scrutiny) and that
Congress may close its session before termination of the inquiry, or, at least,
enter into such an advanced period when pressure of other urgent business
will exclude the passing of a bill dealing with deferment of lien. In that case
Austrian reconstruction would come to a standstill before a mere technical
obstacle, even if the results of the examinations under way may
consequently prove satisfactory.
On behalf of my Government I, therefore, entreat Your Excellency to kindly
cause a legislative measure authorizing deferment of lien to be urgently
recommended to Congress and to postpone judgement as to the merits of
the Austrian loan to a time when the question of American participation
comes up for decision. In complying with this petition Your Excellency by
no means could jeopardize American interests as an authorization by
Congress does not necessarily entail an obligation on the part of the
Secretary of the Treasury to actually defer the lien, if he should not see fit to
do so and, as even after deferment of lien the Department of State, as we
understand, is in a position to effectively dissuade American capital from
participation.
Briefly recapitulating my arguments I beg to request Your Excellency to
take the following points into a favorable consideration: 1.) The undisputed
necessity of an investment loan for Austria; 2.) The intention of having this
loan floated in Europe and not only in the United States; 3.) The fact that a
failure on the part of the United States in joining all our other creditors in
the deferment of lien would kill the entire loan project, not only here but
also in Europe; 4.) The deferment of lien by the United States does not

necessitate American participation; 5.) American participation could be
decided upon after deferment of lien and after all data having a bearing on
this decision will be available; 6.) The very short time left for bringing an
appropriate legislative measure before Congress with some chance for
enactment; 7.) The nature of the investigations under way which is apt to
further shorten the available time limit.
Your Excellency would greatly oblige me by enabling me within the next
[near] future to bring a favorable decision to the notice of my Government.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 728]
The Minister in Sicitzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 5:09 p.m.]
London, I consulted Felkin, acting head of the League’s financial section.
(1) This explains why the financial committee does not interest itself in the
present loan: Acting on Austria’s petition to the League Council, the
committee in 1923 set up the machinery handling the original
reconstruction loan and, in accord with the League’s policy, does not take
any further direct interest in the proceedings unless there is (a) another
Austrian Government appeal to the Council, or (b) such action by the
Austrian Government as might jeopardize seriously the country’s entire
financial structure.
(2) A confidential estimate of the situation: I am told by Felkin that the
Austrian negotiator, Dr. Schtiller, discussed the proposed loan informally
and in advance with Sir Arthur Salter, who favors it. But, owing to the
reasons explained above, the committee has not studied it exhaustively and
has no official information about it. Their only data came from Austrian
sources and undoubtedly are in the Department’s possession.
Felkin also pointed out the Austrian Government’s desire for approximately
900,000,000 schillings to invest in permanent revenueproducing
enterprises. About 200,000,000 schillings of this sum would be supplied by
Austria from its budget surplus, while about 20 percent of the remaining
700,000,000 schillings would be internally raised. Felkin said Austria needs
to foresee a considerable time ahead what it must have, since the procedure
to obtain priority for new loans is exceedingly cumbersome. So they have

tried to see ahead for five years as to their needs. The reconstruction loan
provides for 26,000,000 sterling, while this loan’s ear-marked revenue
exceeds its service by about five times. Felkin is not informed as to whether
Austria wishes to offer a further lien on assets already ear-marked for the
reconstruction loan as security for the new loan or to set aside for this
purpose other assets. A good indication that the proposal is not unsound, he
points out, is the fact that the Austrian petition has been assented to by the
committee of control, the trustees committee on loan, the Reparation
Commission, and the relief credit committee of European states.
(3) Felkin cannot express an opinion, since the League secretariat has not
made exhaustive studies, as to whether all the investments proposed are
actually productive in character.
The above has been repeated to the Legation in Austria.
WILSON

[Document 729]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 8:45 p.m.]
Austrian Government requests me to transmit the following translation of
statement prepared by it, to wit,
1. Communication is the nerve of Austrian economics. Of the one
thousand million schillings deficit of the trade balance, about six
hundred millions are covered by transit, foreign trade
commissions and tourist traffic. Since the war the urgent
investments for means of communication could not be made to
the necessary extent. Economic management of the railroads
requires admissible axle pressure of from 18 to 20 tons, while at
present even on the principal lines often only fourteen and one
half to sixteen tons of axle pressure is possible. Hitherto only
about twenty-five per cent of the length of rail has been furnished
with strong superstructure and this chiefly on the lines electrified
by means of contributions from the League” of Nations loan.
Requirements for traffic at least forty per cent. On nearly half of
the total rail length there still exist about fifty different old
fashioned rail systems so that the management is still
uneconomic, especially as regards the necessity of dividing trains,
increased requirement of engines, coal and staff, smaller signals,
restriction of free disposals of engines, expressive maintenance of
the superstructure and accessories of traffic.
2. Because of the war and the distribution of the rolling stock to
the succession states the rolling stock is about two-thirds old
fashioned and is no longer sufficient, the repairs in consequence
being expensive and uneconomic (on the average, costs of

maintenance are fifty per cent higher than in peace time) and
management uneconomic (limitation of speed, slower circulation
of cars and therefore greater requirements of cars). All freight
cars are furnished only with hand brakes; [there is] necessity
therefore of introducing automatic brakes for the whole freight
rolling stock. Reasons: hand brakes require numerous personnel,
especially on mountain lines which are frequent in Austria.
Automatic brakes require no personnel for service. Hand brakes
mean slower speed and therefore greater requirement of rolling
stock and staff. Finally, difficulties with neighboring states which
have introduced the automatic brakes.
3. Federal railways now intend in the first place to bring the
railway lines and rolling stock up to date more quickly than
hitherto and therefore wish first to postpone the electrification of
the line Salzburg-Vienna planned some time ago. The
modernization above described pays very well while the
electrification, because of the present very low price of coal
(twenty schillings per metric ton normal coal of forty-four
hundred calories), is not sure to pay so well.
4. The present new investment plan for the railways: for
electrification second (Salzburg-Buchs nearly completed), instead
of twenty million schillings, fifty million schillings (see exhibit
number 4, my despatch number 1704, February third).
Electrification third, Salzburg-Vienna, is left out of revised
program. Other investments: For railways, instead of 234,000,000
schillings, 364,000,000 schillings. For rails, machines, bridges
and other railway constructions 131,000,000 schillings. For
rolling stock 163,000,000 schillings. For automatic freight train
brakes
70,000,000
schillings.
Besides
these
investments
calculated to enhance the value of the railways, the normal
renewal and spare parts purchases will continue to be covered
from the current receipts.
5. Annual report of the Federal Railways for 1926 now ready.
Austrian deficit, because of notoriously unfavorable European

traffic year, nine and a half million schillings. In 1927 probably
no deficit. Appropriation of 26,400,000 schillings to Federal
Railways in the budget for the year 1928 appears in this budget in
the same amount also on the receipt side, and is therefore only a
current [balancing?] item (formal reason: participation of
Federation in gross traffic receipts by a 5 per cent traffic tax).
6. Austrian Post, Telegraph and Telephone Administration had no
deficit in 1927 but a surplus of about 200,000 schillings. Similar
results to be expected for 1928. This situation as in the case of the
railways results after the full inclusion of all expenditure for
interest and amortization of approximately 80,000,000 schillings
appearing in 1927 budget, representing sums hitherto allocated
from League of Nations loan for investment purposes. For the line
Passau-Vienna, 16,000,000 schillings short-term credit was used.
Of this sum in the first year 4,200,000 schillings were paid back
and the clear profits obtained on these lines which shows that they
pay exceedingly well. The construction of further long-distance
cable lines [is] necessary in order to meet urgent requirements of
traffic and to avoid the danger that the cable lines of neighboring
countries will be utilized in international communication to the
exclusion of Austrian lines. Only such lines will be established as
are sure to pay. Redrafting investment plan for long distance
cables, the costs for the improvement of the domestic Austrian
telephone plants necessitated by the increase of traffic are of
course included.
7. The investments planned for “other lines” concern a negligible
participation of the state in the costs of the urgently necessary
construction of the two new local lines and the purchase of motor
engine cars for the local lines, guaranteed by the state but which
have little traffic. Experience shows that the use of electric motor
engine cars on such lines always pays well.
8. Data on the investments for tobacco, administration proper,
monopolies and other undertakings are not given because
according to the resolution of the control committee the

investment loan may only be used for railway and post purposes.
Please give a copy to Prochnik.
WASHBURN
18 Not printed; it transmitted, for delivery to the Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Department’s memorandum of February 2, p. 869 [Pg.
869 is part of Doc. 724].

[Document 730]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 10:20 a.m.]
at the expense of the Austrian Government because of the importance of
expediting the matter. The Government is beginning to be criticized sharply
by the opposition press. For example, yesterday the Arbeiter Zeitung in a
leading article taking as its text Seipel’s visit to Prague (which has no
special political significance as there are no Austrian-Czech questions at the
moment pressing for solution), states that the Chancellor can talk and travel
but that he gets little accomplished. Proposed new loan, among other
illustrations, is mentioned as a case in point and emphasis is placed on the
difficulties created by the foreign powers. It is now generally known,
although no power is specifically mentioned, that the United States is the
sole remaining stumbling block to the negotiations and flotation of the loan.
As the Chancellor is apprehensive that a government and cabinet crisis may
develop if delay is prolonged, he is getting sensitive over the general
situation. He fears that the alleged ease with which municipal loan was
obtained may be invidiously compared with the difficulties facing the
government. Of course it is true that the Federal Government is obliged by
treaty to deal with the Powers, but voters are apt to overlook fine political
points of this kind. The Chancellor hopes that early congressional action
will be deemed to be justified by the information now furnished. Cipher text
of this telegram together with a copy of the Legation’s telegram No. 9 is
being mailed to London, Paris, and Berne.
WASHBURN

[Document 731]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
of words “Superstructure” [and] “Rail Systems” which have no clear
meaning in American railway usage.
discussion of electrification investment in paragraph 4 of your telegram,
summarizing your despatch 1704 if advisable.
Please rush reply. Department is giving immediate consideration to the
matter.
KELLOGG

[Document 732]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
was taken largely from English expert Acworth’s report on Austrian
railways made in 1923.20
1. “Superstructure” and “rail systems” interchangeably used to
mean permanent way or roadbed, sleepers, ballasting of track,
rails, switches, bridges.
2. Cost of electrification second, Salzburg–Buchs, originally
estimated at 240,000,000 schillings. This amount actually
expended; announced a year ago that additional investment of
20,000,000 schillings in 1927 would be required to complete this
construction, making total cost 260,000,000 schillings instead of
240. Twenty million schillings increased to 50,000,000 schillings
in latest estimates to provide for (1) enlargement of water-power
stations by eight million cubic meters and (2) larger number of
electric locomotives to accommodate estimated increased traffic.
This brings total cost of electrification two to 290,000,000
schillings. Electrification three Salzburg–Vienna meant paring
down other investments for railway improvements to 224,000,000
schillings. By postponing three on account of present low coal
prices as mentioned in paragraph three it was possible to increase
other investments for railways deemed absolutely necessary to
364,000,000 schillings allocated as explained in paragraph four.
3. My despatch No. 1704 contains statistical information supplied
Morgan representatives and impractical to summarize. Despatch
left with Paris courier [on] 8th instant and undoubtedly caught

Cherbourg steamer [on] 11th. It should reach the Department
certainly on Monday [the] 20th.
WASHBURN
20 See League of Nations, Financial Reconstruction of Austria: Report on
the Reconstruction of the Austrian State Railways, pp. 51–72.

[Document 733]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
issued a press statement summarizing the Austrian loan situation and
announcing that recommendation will be made to Congress for appropriate
legislation to permit the subordination of American lien. Naturally no
assurance can be given that Congress will act favorably on the
recommendation.
Formal reply to Austrian notes will be prepared after the holiday tomorrow.
You may informally advise appropriate officials. Repeat to London, Paris
and Berne.
KELLOGG.

[Document 734]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] March 5, 1928.
Mr. Mills21 telephoned to state that on March 3 he had had a long talk in
New York with Mr. Leffingwell of J. P. Morgan and Company concerning
the Austrian loan. As to the merits of the proposition, Mr. Leffingwell
expressed the opinion that in general it is a very good thing for Austria to
receive continued assistance from foreign capital, and that the situation
should work itself out. Mr. Leffingwell, however, doubted whether the loan
would be a sound proposition if it rested only upon the credit and prospects
of the Austrian railways. With the credit of the Austrian Government,
however, he felt it would be all right. Mr. Leffingwell gave Mr. Mills for his
confidential information data furnished by Morgan’s representative in
Vienna.
Mr. Leffingwell further stated that he understood that the European relief
creditors had conditioned their agreement to subordinate the lien upon
Austria’s agreeing to a definite settlement of the relief credits. Mr.
Leffingwell feared that the relief creditors may be demanding too much
from Austria. He stated that Morgan and Company were not disposed to go
ahead with the business unless this matter were suitably arranged.
Mr. Leffingwell further stated that the Reparation Commission had only
agreed to subordinate the reparation debt and not to postpone it. He was
afraid that reparation payments might in the future be required from Austria
in a manner that might prejudice the position of the loan now proposed. He
stated that Morgan and Company were not inclined to go ahead with the
proposed loan unless the reparation debt were postponed as well as
subordinated.
I told Mr. Mills that we would at once seek further information on the
subject.

[Document 735]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
(1) Department had understood that Governments holding relief
bonds were making no conditions other than those set forth in
Relief Bonds Committee’s letter of December 12 to the Austrian
Minister
at
London.22
Department,
however,
is
now
confidentially informed that European Governments holding
relief bonds are conditioning subordination of lien in favor of new
loan upon Austria agreeing to definite settlement of relief credits.
Basis on which settlement is said to be desired is not known but
may be that of Relief Bonds Committee counter-proposal to the
also Austrian note to the Secretary of State, January 28,24
transmitted with Department’s instruction 644, February 925 ).
(2) Please at once inquire of the Austrian Government whether
the foregoing report is correct and also inquire concerning status
of relief debt negotiations. You should state that obviously the
Government of the United States expects the Austrian
Government to treat it on an equal footing with all other
Governments in these matters and also that you wish to be kept
closely informed of all pertinent developments.
Telegraph reply as soon as possible.
KELLOGG

25 Not printed.

[Document 736]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
[Paraphrase]
56. Referring to previous communications regarding the proposed Austrian
loan:
The Department is informed confidentially that the European Governments
which hold relief bonds are making the subordination of lien in favor of the
new loan conditional upon agreement by Austria to settle definitely the
relief credits. The Department’s understanding was that these Governments
were in principle agreeable to subordination of lien if all Governments
similarly situated took like action and if the Reparation Commission
allowed suitable release. Mr. Leith Ross, of the British Treasury, on
December 12, 1927, so informed the Austrian Minister in London (see the
Reparation Commission’s Annex 3271–J).26
The Department would welcome any discreetly available information as to
the report above as well as with regard to the status of negotiations on the
relief debt.
Please cable your reply and repeat it to the Legation in Austria.
KELLOGG

[Document 737]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 7, 1928.
No. 46/R
EXCELLENCY: As Your Excellency are aware of, the Austrian Government had
resolved to settle the country’s relief debts and for this purpose entered into
negotiations with the pertaining Creditor States in Europe.
Austria assumes the obligation of paying in 25 equal annuities, beginning
from the year 1943, a total of 1,162,500,000 Austrian schillings (to all
Creditor States incl. the United States) and reserves the right to commence
payments on January 1st, 1929, on the following scale:
856,000,000
Corresponding to the above scale my Government offers to fund Austria’s
relief debt to the United States on the following plan:
$ 1,420,000
10 “
$ 4,550,000
24 “
$17,640,000
1 annuity
(1968)
of $729,000 “
$729,000
total $24,344,000
I have the honor to solicit on behalf of my Government Your Excellency’s
kind intermediary in recommending with the least possible delay
acceptance by your Government and Congress of a settlement as outlined
before.

In support of my petition I beg to point out the fact, that our offer, as it
stands now, already is based on terms less favorable for us than those
granted by the United States to other debtors (less favorable even than the
terms accorded to Italy). Prompted by a desire of offering to the United
States no lesser terms of settlement than those we had to propose to our
European relief creditors we already have deprived ourselves of the benefit
of the policy adopted by your Government in regard to debt settlements, i.
e. a funding based on the debtor’s paying capacity.
Austria, although one of the poorest debtors of the United States, will,
under the funding plan offered by her, be among the less favored debtor
nations, as her offer provides for a total payment, which, reduced to its
present value (at 5% interest), would represent 37% of her entire
indebtedness to the United States. Still more unfavorable would be her
position as compared with that of the other debtors of the United States if
Your Excellency’s Government should decide to strictly adhere to their
indisputable right of accepting no lesser terms than those Austria will have
to grant to her other creditors and in view thereof would refuse to consider
our proposal prior to a conclusion of our negotiations with our other
creditors; with other words, if Your Excellency’s Government should
resolve to strictly conform their final decision to the outcome of our
negotiations in Europe.
Your Excellency would greatly oblige me by obtaining and communicating
to me at your earliest possible convenience a statement by your
Government as to their attitude towards the funding proposal submitted by
this Legation.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 738]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 7, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY
OF STATE: I have the honor to enclose herewith a
Memorandum concerning the present status of deferment of a lien held
against Austria by European countries.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
[Enclosure]
The Austrian Legation to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The Austrian Minister upon being told by the Economic Adviser, Mr.
Young, that an information had reached the Department of State to the
effect that the European countries holding a lien against Austria for relief
credits had decided to make their consent for further deferment of said lien
dependent on a funding of their credits, immediately cabled to the Federal
Chancery, Department of Foreign Affairs, for advice and instructions, as
aforereferred to information was quite in contradiction to the answers given
by the Relief Committee, the Governments concerned and the Reparations
Commission to the request made by the Austrian Federal Government for
an extension of the period of deferment in connection with the intended
loan.
The Minister of Austria was informed by his Government that it does not
know of any change in the status of the case and that the information
received by the Department of State must obviously be based on some
misapprehension, as all the creditor countries (the United States excepted)

already deferred their lien with the consent of the Reparations Commission,
while negotiations for a settlement of the relief debts still are pending.
There was originally an intention on the part of the Creditor States to make
deferment of lien dependent on funding of relief debts, but this plan was
abandoned at the request of the Austrian Government.

[Document 739]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:57 p.m.]
shown me protocol of Relief Bonds Committee meeting which indicates
that “consent in principle” mentioned in Committee’s letter of December 12
refers to the three conditions therein enumerated as stated on page 6 of my
States, condition two met by resolution transmitted as exhibit 5 of my
not yet agreed upon with underwriting bankers because negotiations await
Congressional action but when approved by Relief Committee’s English
chairman Leith Ross it is the understanding here that subordination of relief
bonds lien becomes automatic assuming American Government acts;
apparently nobody has hinted that this third condition will be utilized to
exert presure on the Austrian Government.
(2) Status of relief debt negotiations: Foreign Office assures me that French,
Italian, Swiss and Dutch Governments have indicated their willingness to
accept Austrian proposal set forth in enclosure C of Prochnik’s note of
January 2829 provided British Government will do the same. Austrian
Minister at London reports that British Government shows good will but
Chancellor of the Exchequer has not yet given final answer. Schüller admits
he recognized necessity for making proposal for relief bond settlement but
there has been no suggestion of any intention to make such settlement a
condition precedent of lien subordination and this would be contrary to
terms of letter of December 12 but he does not exclude possibility that
interested parties would welcome it if the United States should stipulate
such condition precedent. Schüller relies on Mussolini’s personal promise
of favorable action though latter’s South Tyrol speech on Saturday30
contained threat Italy may delay loan.

(3) Why is not situation fully met by passage of a joint resolution similar to
the light of the action of other interested powers.
WASHBURN
portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718].

[Document 740]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Assistant Secretary of
State (Castle)
VIENNA, March 7, 1928.
[Received March 20.]
DEAR CASTLE: Before the courier goes today I snatch a moment to say that
perhaps you can find time, if the necessity exists, again to glance at my
telegram No. 12 of even date, 3 p.m., relating to the Austrian loan. It would
be a pity to make a cat’s-paw of us and very possibly there is no desire to do
so, but I think the Austrian Government is right in its contention that the
other relief credit states cannot now in good faith, in view of their
commitments, make a prior relief credit settlement a condition precedent to
lien subordination. None of them would openly attempt to do so.
I think you will agree with me that the passage of a resolution similar to the
one enacted in 1922 will meet the situation. We will be amply protected and
the Secretary of the Treasury could delay the exercise of his discretion until
fully satisfied everything was in order. I hope too that the resolution will not
be permitted to die in committee or on the calendar, since, as the
Department has made plain, we can have no reason to do other than the
other interested powers are doing.
Sincerely yours,
ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Document 741]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
of view expressed in the Department’s telegram is correct, namely, that
European Governments holding relief bonds are conditioning the
subordination of their lien in favor of the new loan upon Austria agreeing to
a definite settlement of relief credits. This viewpoint was known in
influential circles here about a fortnight ago and as far as can be found out
still prevails. I understand that the Austrians have agreed in principle to the
settlement of [apparent omission] has not yet been agreed upon.
I learn informally from the Italian Embassy that there is to be a meeting of
representatives of the interested Governments in the near future.
Repeated Vienna.
HOUGHTON

[Document 742]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
66. Reparation 46.
(1) To permit loan contemplated, recommendation is to be made to
Congress that the Secretary of the Treasury be authorized to release
Austrian assets. However, confidentially, it appears possible that the
position may be taken by the bankers that they would not be warranted in
issuing the loan unless status of reparation payments and relief debt for
which Austria will be liable is first satisfactorily determined. They fear that
the exactions from Austria might conceivably be so large as to threaten the
credit of Austria. They have raised the question whether, in view of the
terms of the 1923 reconstruction loan, payments should not be postponed at
least until 1943; also whether reparation payments should not be postponed
until after the maturity of the contemplated loan (1958), pointing out that
the decision of the Reparation Commission of January last merely related to
excepting certain revenues from the charge created by article 197 of the
Treaty of St. Germain.
(2) As a relief creditor of Austria, the Government of the United States is
also obviously interested in the situation as to Austrian reparations. As to
fixing Austrian reparations, are there any developments subsequent to those
outlined in section 6 of the memorandum referred to below and your letter
(3) The proposals of Austria for funding her relief debt present a question as
to the amount of the liability of Austria for army costs and other charges
which rank ahead thereof according to the terms of the relief bond (for text

of bond and other relevant information see memorandum transmitted with
The latest available information as to the Austrian army costs is contained
in part III of the monthly accounting annex for April 1925,34 page 3, which
indicates that the claim of Italy was set off against the value of property
ceded to Italy, presumably pursuant to paragraph two of the agreement of
effect? Is there any indication as to the amount of the claim of France on
Austria for army costs? Are data available for ascertaining the amount of
Austria’s liability, if any, for other costs which, according to its terms, rank
prior to the relief bond?
(4) Telegraph briefly and report by mail fully any information discreetly
available on the foregoing matters, together with your comments. Mail
cipher text of this telegram together with your reply to the Legation at
Vienna and to the Embassy at London.
KELLOGG
34 Not printed.
34 Not printed.
34 Not printed.

[Document 743]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
official [the] general nature of report contained in London Embassy’s
comment as soon as possible.
KELLOGG

[Document 744]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
(1) Department has been informed that a meeting of Control
Committee will be held March 15 at which new proposals from
Austria in regard to expenditure of proceeds of proposed loan and
possibly other matters will be considered.
(2) The Treasury has publicly announced that it is proposed to
recommend to Congress that authority be granted to subordinate
the lien of the United States on Austria’s assets and revenues to
permit flotation of proposed loan, subject of course to similar
action by other governments concerned and Separation
Commission. If legislation is not introduced at the earliest
possible moment, there is little chance of obtaining it at the
present session of Congress. The actual introduction of legislation
has, however, been delayed by the lack of definite data as to the
status of proposed arrangements for settling Austria’s relief
obligations. These are held by the United States and eight other
governments, and contain pari passu clause. In order properly to
explain to Congress request for legislative authority, the
Department of State and the Treasury must have definite picture
of situation. Otherwise representatives appearing before the
congressional committees might be subject to embarrassment
from lack of information.
(3) In the circumstances I think you should have a frank talk with
the Foreign Office, explaining the above situation and inquiring
whether such meeting is to be held, and if so, where. If it is to

take place, you should say that you would be interested to receive
specific information as to matters to be considered and also the
views of the British Government as to the prospect of agreement
with Austria in the near future as to basis for settlement of relief
debts. You should also inquire whether in fact definite action in
authorizing proposed loan is to be conditioned on settlement of
relief indebtedness, or if not actually conditioned or connected
whether both propositions are to be settled simultaneously.
(4) Telegraph reply as soon as possible. Repeat these instructions
to Embassy Paris for information and to Legation Vienna for
telegraphic comment. Similarly repeat your reply. See for your
Embassies [at] London and Paris and Legation Vienna should
keep each other mutually informed.
KELLOGG

[Document 745]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
March 10, 8 p.m., to London.
(1) Control Committee meeting Geneva advanced one week to
pass on new investment plan revised as indicated in paragraph 4
before his departure that he regarded this as purely pro forma.
Foreign Office informs me new investment plan approved on
March eighth, no other matter being considered.
(2) According to advices from the Austrian Minister at London,
Relief Committee meeting scheduled for March 30. Chancellor
insists:
First, that lien subordination will not be there
considered, having already been adjusted as explained
p.m., and that therefore definite action in authorizing
proposed loan cannot be conditioned on settlement of
relief indebtedness;
Second, that only question to be considered is action
upon Austrian proposal referred to in paragraph two my
telegram last mentioned;
Third, that proposed loan authorization and relief
indebtedness are separate matters and that European
Governments, especially the British Government, have

given assurances that there is no disposition to force
settlement of both propositions simultaneously.
Chancellor plainly apprehends … intrigue.
WASHBURN

[Document 746]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Received March 13—1 p.m.]
1. Control Committee will meet March 15 at which time Austrian
Government will state they did not desire to use 1923 loan for
electrification purposes but to divert money for another adequate
scheme. This meeting is of course in no way concerned with
relief bonds since Control Committee represents guaranteeing
governments.
2. As regards European relief debts, creditor governments have
already subordinated their liens to permit flotation of proposed
new loan. This is the only step formally necessary to permit
flotation (United States agreeing), but in order to facilitate placing
of loan Austrian Government are negotiating for settlement of
relief debts to European creditors providing for reduced payments
spread over a term of years. It has always been understood on
both sides that identical offer will be made by Austrian
Government to the United States Treasury. On March 30th a
meeting of representatives of European relief creditors is to be
held in London at which it is hoped that terms for settlement of
the European relief debts will be reached. (If discussed figures
have not already been presented to you by Austrian Legation, I
can telegraph data which is also being forwarded by pouch today.)
Result of meeting will be confidentially communicated to me at
once. The settlement will provide that priority of relief debts over
reparations is maintained, and accordingly approval of Reparation

Commission will be required before settlement becomes final. It
may be hoped that final settlement be reached during April.
Above information has been obtained direct from British Treasury.
This telegram has been repeated to Paris and Vienna.
HOUGHTON

[Document 747]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
authority speaking unofficially, meeting of March 30 will accept general
terms of last Austrian offer for settlement of European relief debts.
HOUGHTON

[Document 748]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
March 9, 7 p.m.
(1) Your paragraph (2). In regard to the fixing of Austria’s reparation
liabilities nothing further has developed. Over a year ago the British and
French submitted to the Italians the proposal outlined in my letter of March
14, 1927,37 but the Italians have not as yet given any indication as to their
possible attitude. It seems possible that Italy may prefer, before agreeing to
any piecemeal settlement, to await settlement of the entire reparation
problem (including German reparations).
(2) Department’s paragraph (3) concerning Austria’s liability for costs
ranking prior to the relief bonds:
(a) Regarding Italian army costs: The Commission has never
approved the monthly accounting annex of April, 1925.37 The
army costs of Italy have never in fact been set off against the
value of property ceded. The relevant provisions of the March 11,
1922, agreement as set out in article 11 and the annex to the
agreement38 appear never to have entered into effect. The issue of
C bonds provided by article 11 is a condition precedent to any
settlement on account of ceded property. Of course this provision
has not been fulfilled. Furthermore, the final paragraph of the
annex provides that the pertinent articles thereof shall not become
effective until the liberation debt of Czechoslovakia and Poland
have been discharged by them. Of course this has not been done.

The army cost claim of Italy therefore remains unsettled. A
member of the Italian delegation told me in confidence that Italy
has never contemplated demanding formally this claim in priority
to the relief bonds but will demand priority for it of course over
reparation payments when the question of fixing the reparation
liabilities of Austria is discussed.
(b) Regarding the French army costs, the amount has never been
notified to the Reparation Commission. I understand, however,
that it is relatively unimportant. I may be able to obtain from the
French delegation exact figures and if I am able to obtain them
they will be forwarded to the Department.
(c) The Serbian army costs have been reported to the Commission
at approximately the figure indicated in the accounting annex of
April, 1925. The accounting section has converted this amount in
dinars to 146,043,769.40 gold crowns. The Commission has
never approved these costs. Moreover, Serbia is in debt to the
reparation pool on account of excess receipts and is also a debtor
on account of Austrian ceded property and liberation costs and
will probably, therefore, never obtain the payment of her army
costs except through some arrangement providing for setoffs.
(d) As concerns expenses of restitution, the Department is already
posted (see my letter of February 13, 1928,39 and previous
reports). In general no further payments on this score can be made
by Austria without obtaining the consent of the governments
holding relief bonds.
(e) The share of Austria in the expenses of the Reparation
Commission is comparatively insignificant. Her share amounted
in the third annuity year to about 169,000 gold crowns.
(f) Regarding deliveries in kind for which priority is conceded
according to the text of the relief bonds, it would seem that, by
the exceptions to the priority as defined in the text of the bonds,
particularly by the reference to deliveries under annex two,

effective deliveries have been shut out.
In short, I should feel as a practical matter that there are probably no
effective liabilities of any importance of Austria for costs ranking ahead of
the relief bonds.
(3) In general, it is my impression that the powers guaranteeing the
reconstruction loan of Austria are not likely to stultify their efforts toward
the rehabilitation of Austria by exacting from Austria unduly burdensome
reparation payments or other payments under the treaty. As regards Great
Britain, this is particularly true. The influence of Great Britain seems to
have effectively deterred any attempt to press Austria and Hungary for an
[apparent omission] reparation settlement and will doubtless continue to
prove effective.
(4) Full report being sent by mail.
London and Vienna have been mailed cipher texts.
HERRICK
37 Not printed.
37 Not printed.
39 Not printed.

[Document 749]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 11:40 a.m.]
65. Reparation 82.
(1) Reference the final sentence of paragraph (2) (a), my telegram
by member of the Italian delegation as to Italian position
concerning payment of army costs in priority to relief bonds. I
desire to add, in order to avoid any possible misapprehension on
the part of the Department, that in my opinion the statement
referred to was made presumably in contemplation of the
situation which has existed up to the present as regards payment
of the relief bonds, that is, that such payment has been postponed
until 1943. If, however, Austria should in fact begin payment on
that account in 1929 in accordance with the proposal for funding
the relief debt, I should feel also that it would be quite possible
that Italy, and France perhaps, would seek to raise the question of
obtaining some payment in respect of army costs in view of the
priority of army costs over the relief bonds.
(2) The last sentence of paragraph (2) (f), of my telegram referred
to above, should be read in the light of the foregoing comment.
London and Vienna sent ciphers.
HERRICK

[Document 750]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
received from the Ambassador at London, sufficiently clarify situation to
warrant forwarding to President recommendation that he ask Congress to
grant to Secretary of the Treasury authority to subordinate lien. It is
anticipated that legislation will be introduced within a few days, although
naturally no formal commitment can be made until the President has acted.
given in regard to action of Congress. Also of course the exercise of any
authority Congress may grant will naturally be considered in the light of the
whole situation as it may stand at the time.
You may orally and confidentially inform Chancellor of the foregoing and
may add, with reference to final sentence your 13, that this Government has
no evidence of intrigue by any Government.
Repeat to London and Paris.
KELLOGG

[Document 751]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
19. Please telegraph as soon as possible dollar equivalent of total principal
amount (i. e., not including accumulated interest or bonds given in lieu of
interest) of relief indebtedness of Austria to the creditor governments,
including the Government of the United States. Is the Government of the
United States correct in the assumption that the only Governments other
than the United States now holding relief obligations of Austria are:
Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden
and Switzerland? See part (4) of memorandum transmitted with
OLDS
42 Not printed.

[Document 752]
The Ambassador in Cheat Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
decided to raise no objection to proposed Austrian expenditure.
HOUGHTON

[Document 753]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
1. The various original relief indebtedness amounts were
expressed in different currencies, the total principal amount (i. e.,
not including accumulated interest or bonds given in lieu of
interest) according to yesterday’s check exchange rate is
Austrian
schillings,
the
equivalent
of
2. No governments hold relief obligations other than those
enumerated in the Department’s before-mentioned telegram.
3. Part four of memorandum referred to in said telegram
inaccurate, undoubtedly due in part to inclusion of interest.
Compare aforesaid memorandum with annex (a), my despatch
pertinent information regarding relief indebtedness being
forwarded by next pouch.
WASHBURN
42 Not printed.
“Dr. Schüller advised.”

sum.”

[Document 754]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] March 19, 1928.
On March 17 and 19 I discussed the Austrian situation at considerable
length with Under Secretary Mills. With reference to his suggestion that the
procedure should be to conclude a debt settlement with Austria which
would take care of the question of subordination of the lien, I pointed out,
first, that this would entail some delay because of the time required for
drafting and for getting the necessary approval of the Austrian Government,
and that this delay might interfere with action at the present session of
Congress. I further pointed out that Austria could not make a definitive
agreement with the United States except in connection with a general
agreement with all the debtors. Although there is reason to believe that
agreement with the European relief creditors may be reached, at least in
principle, on March 30, it is not certain that that will result. Furthermore,
the drafting and obtaining of the necessary approval on the part of the
European countries is likely to take some time. I took the above position
after discussing the matter fully with Mr. Castle, Mr. Olds and the
Secretary. Mr. Mills finally agreed to the drafting of a bill which would, in
the first place, authorize subordination of the lien, and, second, would
authorize the Secretary of the Treasury to conclude a debt funding
agreement with Austria.
Mr. Mills and I conferred with Secretary Mellon, who approved that
procedure. Mr. Mills was inclined to the opinion that the Department of
State should take the leading part in urging the proposal upon Congress
inasmuch as the particular methods of handling the matter had been urged
by the Department. I took the position that the matter is predominantly
financial and therefore a matter primarily for the Treasury. Mr. Mellon
agreed that the Treasury would take a leading part. I stated that the
Department of State would, of course, assist in any way it could.

ed by SCCM)

sreed upon was approv

The procedure a

[Document 755]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 19, 1928.
No. 59/R
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to state that I am authorized to assure you that the
Austrian Government intends to make a settlement of the relief debt at the
earliest practicable date, and that it is prepared to make with the United
States a settlement on a basis no less favorable to the United States than
made with the other relief creditor governments, or any of them.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 756]
President Coolidge to the Congress of the United States
TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES
I am submitting herewith for your consideration a copy of a report of the
Secretary of the Treasury regarding the action proposed to be taken by the
Government of the United States in respect of the debt of Austria to this
Government.
The action proposed by the Secretary of the Treasury has my approval. I
recommend that the Congress enact the legislation necessary to enable the
United States to join with the other relief creditors in permitting Austria to
obtain the additional capital urgently needed for continuing its economic
reconstruction, and to authorize the Secretary of the Treasury to conclude
an agreement for the settlement of Austria’s debt to the United States.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
THE WHITE HOUSE, March 20, 1928.
[Enclosure]
The Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon) to President Coolidge
[WASHINGTON] March 19, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have the honor to submit the following report in respect
of the debt of Austria to the United States Government, with particular
reference to the request submitted by the Austrian Government for the
subordination of the lien enjoyed by the Government of the United States
under the terms of the relief bond of the Austrian Government held by the
Treasury Department to a new loan to be issued for reconstruction purposes,
and other questions related thereto.

It will be recalled that during 1919 and 1920 conditions in Austria were so
serious that the United States and a number of European governments found
it necessary to furnish foodstuffs and other relief supplies on credit. The Act
of Congress approved March 30, 1920,45 authorized the United States Grain
Corporation, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, to furnish
flour on credit “to relieve populations in the countries of Europe or
countries contiguous thereto suffering for the want of food”. Pursuant to
that legislation, flour was sold to Austria, and the Government of the United
States now holds an Austrian bond in the principal sum of $24,055,708.92,
given in payment therefor. Certain other governments, namely, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland, hold relief bonds of similar character in the sum of about
$95,000,000. The relief bonds of 1920 enjoy “a first charge upon all the
assets and revenues of Austria”. They rank ahead of Austria’s reparation
obligations.
The bond held by the United States is dated September 4, 1920, and by its
to necessitate financial assistance from abroad in order to permit the
stabilization of the currency, the balancing of the Budget, and the
resumption of the economic life of the country. The credit of Austria was at
a low ebb. No exterior loan could be floated as long as relief loans and
reparations constituted prior charges on Austria’s assets and revenues.
Accordingly, the relief creditors, including the United States, and the
Reparation Commission, agreed to subordinate their liens to permit the
flotation of a reconstruction loan. Under the terms of the so-called Lodge
Resolution of April 6, 1922,46 the Secretary of the Treasury extended the
maturity date of the relief bond held by the United States Government until
June 1, 1943, and at the same time agreed to subordinate the lien enjoyed
by the United States for the purpose of permitting the reconstruction loan of
1923. The Lodge Resolution, which set forth the urgent need for relieving
Austria from the immediate burden of the lien, reads as follows:
“Whereas the economic structure of Austria is approaching
collapse and great numbers of the people of Austria are, in
consequence, in imminent danger of starvation and threatened by
diseases growing out of extreme privation and starvation; and

“Whereas this Government wishes to cooperate in relieving
Austria from the immediate burden created by her outstanding
debts: Therefore be it
“Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That the
Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized to extend, for a
period not to exceed twenty-five years, the time of payment of the
principal and interest of the debt incurred by Austria for the
purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation, and
to release Austrian assets pledged for the payment of such loan, in
whole or in part, as may in the judgment of the Secretary of the
Treasury be necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes of
this resolution: Provided, however, That substantially all the other
creditor nations, to wit, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Great
Britain, Greece, Holland, Italy, Norway, Rumania, Sweden,
Switzerland, and Yugoslavia shall take action with regard to their
respective claims against Austria similar to that herein set forth.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall be authorized to decide when
this proviso has been substantially complied with.”
The action of the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority of the
resolution was taken on June 9, 1923.
In 1923 a reconstruction loan amounting to about $125,000,000 was floated
by Austria in the United States and European countries. This loan was
guaranteed by several of the European governments. It saved Austria from
economic and social disintegration and collapse. The program of
reconstruction led to the stabilization of Austrian currency during 1923 and
the balancing of the Austrian budget by 1924. It has been balanced ever
since.
Austria’s economic reconstruction, however, has not been completed and
the capital resources of the country are not adequate to the task. The
Austrian Government now desires to float a new loan in the net amount of
725 million Austrian schillings, or about $100,000,000, for the continuation
of the program of reconstruction. The proceeds would be applied to capital
expenditures, that is, to the repair, improvement and re-equipment of the

Austrian railway, telegraph and telephone systems. The lien enjoyed by the
relief bonds makes it difficult, if not impossible, for Austria to obtain the
necessary funds for these purposes. Accordingly, the Austrian Government
has requested the Governments holding Austrian relief bonds and the
Reparation Commission to subordinate their liens in favor of the new loan
for a period not exceeding thirty years.
The Treasury Department is advised by the Department of State that all of
the foreign governments concerned have already informed the Austrian
Government to the effect that they are willing to subordinate their liens,
providing all of the governments in a similar position, and the Reparation
Commission, do likewise. It is further understood that the Reparation
Commission has agreed to subordinate the reparation lien on Austria’s
assets and revenues in favor of the new loan. The Austrian Government has
requested the Government of the United States to take similar action. Since
unanimous consent is required, failure of the United States to join the other
Governments concerned in granting Austria’s request would constitute a
barrier to the floating of the new reconstruction loan.
Since the proposed loan would be for a term of thirty years, and the relief
bonds mature in 1943, the mere subordination of the lien may not be
sufficient to permit the flotation of the new loan. The Austrian Government
is at present negotiating with the Government of the United States and the
other relief creditor governments terms of payment of the relief bonds so as
to provide for the liquidation of the indebtedness over a period of years. All
of the relief bonds are of similar tenor and contain the following clause:
“The Government of Austria agrees that no payment will be made
upon or in respect of any of the obligations of said Series issued
by the Government of Austria before, at or after, maturity,
whether for principal or for interest, unless a similar payment
shall simultaneously be made upon all obligations of the said
Series issued by the Government of Austria in proportion to the
respective obligations of said Series.”
The Austrian Government has assured the Government of the United States
that it intends to make a settlement of the relief debt at the earliest
practicable date, and that it is prepared to make with the United States a

settlement on a basis no less favorable to the United States than that made
with the other relief creditor governments, or any of them.
In view of the terms of the bond, as set forth above, Austria can not make a
definitive settlement of the relief obligations without the agreement of all
nine of the creditor governments. Such a settlement obviously may take
some time, and it might well be impossible to submit the terms of
settlement to the Congress at this session. This in turn might mean the
indefinite postponement of the flotation of a new loan, which is urgently
needed. Under these circumstances it is extremely desirable that the
Executive Branch of the Government should have the authority to clean up
the whole matter, with the limitation that our debt should be settled on
terms no less favorable than those granted the other governments, and on
the understanding that the security now enjoyed be not released except in so
far as necessary to permit the flotation of the contemplated reconstruction
loan.
I am strongly of the opinion that the United States should not take a
position that would obstruct any proper and well-considered measures for
furthering Austria’s reconstruction, particularly since such measures will
tend to promote our commercial intercourse with Austria and should
increase Austria’s capacity to repay its indebtedness to the United States.
The matter has been given careful consideration by the Secretary of State
and myself, and I suggest that, if you approve, legislation be sought from
Congress authorizing the Secretary of the Treasury, in his discretion, to
subordinate, for a period not exceeding thirty years from January 1, 1929,
the lien of the United States on Austria’s assets and revenues to the extent
necessary to permit the flotation of the loan now proposed, subject, of
course, to satisfactory notification that the other governments and the
Reparation Commission agree to take similar action; and authorizing the
Secretary of the Treasury, with the approval of the President, to conclude an
agreement for the settlement of the indebtedness of Austria to the United
States upon terms and conditions no less favorable than the terms and
conditions granted by Austria to any of the other relief creditor
governments.
Faithfully yours,

A. W. Metron

41 Stat. 548,

ee

[Document 757]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
21. The President today forwarded to Congress formal message
recommending that the Secretary of the Treasury be authorized to
subordinate lien subject to similar action by other Governments and
Reparation Commission, and that he further be authorized, with the
approval of the President, to conclude debt settlement on terms and
conditions as favorable as Austria may grant to any other relief creditor
Government. Appropriate legislation is being introduced in Congress.
You may inform Chancellor of the foregoing, bearing in mind third and
For your further information, Department points out that authorization
merely to subordinate lien might not be sufficient to permit loan flotation in
view of the fact that principal and interest of relief bonds will fall due 1943,
and since bankers may feel loan could not be floated until provision for
relief debts had been made. Accordingly, it was deemed advisable to
request authority also to settle relief debt. You of course understand that
proposed legislation would not condition subordination on settlement of
debt.
KELLOGG

[Document 758]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 22, 1928.
No. 63/R
EXCELLENCY: The message of the President to Congress, in which the Chief
Executive submitted a copy of a report of the Secretary of the Treasury
regarding the Austrian relief debt and recommended appropriate legislative
measures for a deferment of lien and settlement of said debts, will be highly
appreciated throughout Austria as it constitutes a big step forward in the
Republic’s economic reconstruction.
I am merely voicing the general sentiment prevailing in my country by
expressing to Your Excellency and, through your kind intermediary, to the
Government of the United States the deepest felt gratitude of the Austrian
nation and its Government for the sympathetic attitude shown repeatedly
before and now again by the United States towards their hard but successful
strife for existence. This renewed manifestation of a friendly spirit exerts
itself as a strong moral support.
May I take the liberty to add the expression of my own personal gratitude
for the ready understanding and willing cooperation which I found in the
Department of State and in particular in the Economic Adviser, who
devoted a great deal of his time and zeal in the necessary preparations
clearing the way for an adequate legislative measure.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 759]
The Assistant Secretary of State (Castle) to the Minister in
Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, March 23, 1928.
DEAR MR. MINISTER: I am glad to have your letter of March 7 referring to the
Austrian loan. I think you will find that the material which the Department
is sending by this pouch to you, taken in connection with the Department’s
telegram of March 20, will adequately explain the points which arose and
which had to be cleared up before the formal recommendation of the
President could be forwarded to Congress.
It is, of course, too early to predict the reaction in Congress. I may,
however, say that the general impression is that nobody expected to get very
much out of Austria in the way of debt payments after the action was taken
under the Lodge resolution. Both the Treasury and this Department will do
what is possible in helping legislation through Congress. You will, however,
appreciate that we can give no assurances as to what Congress may do.
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

[Document 760]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] April 3, 1928.
The Austrian Minister stated that he had been instructed to inform the
Department in confidence that at the meeting of the relief creditors last
week all the Governments, excepting Italy, agreed to accept the Austrian
proposal for settlement of relief debts. The attitude of Italy, he stated, is
undoubtedly caused by the Tyrol incident.
The Minister stated that as long as the United States had not adopted the
legislation authorizing it to act in relation to the lien subordination and debt
settlement, the Italian Government could defer action and say that the
United States had not yet acted. If, however, the United States should take
action, Italy would be isolated. The Minister anticipated that the British
Government and possibly others would bring pressure to bear on Italy not
to block the whole enterprise.
The Minister also stated that he would be very glad to go forward with
actual negotiations concerning the relief debt in order that the agreement
might be put in shape.
I told the Minister that no date had yet been set, so far as I knew, for
hearings on the proposed legislation. This Department and the Treasury,
however, would do whatever they could to keep the proposal actively
before Congress. I stated that I would discuss the matter with the
Treasury.47
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]
foregoing matters with Mr. Mills. He will try to expedite the holding of a
hearing. He will consider the matter of expediting actual debt negotiations,

tho[ugh] little can be done toward a definitive settlement till all the
Gov[ernmen]ts can agree.”

[Document 761]
The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
WASHINGTON, April 7, 1928.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 63/R of
March 22, 1928, regarding the Austrian relief debt, and of your previous
notes which, while discussed with you upon receipt and having the prompt
and careful attention of the Government, were not severally acknowledged.
In confirmation of informal conversations, I have pleasure in enclosing
copies of the President’s message to Congress of March 20,48 together with
copies of the Joint Resolution introduced in the Senate and House of
Representatives on March 21 (calendar day),49
I have observed with gratification the expression, in your note of March 22,
of the appreciation of the Austrian Nation and its Government for the
attitude of the United States as shown both on previous occasions and in the
President’s recommendation to the Congress of appropriate legislation
authorizing subordination of the lien and eventual settlement of the
Austrian relief debt. While the action of this Government in these latter
matters must depend on the will of the Congress exercised in view of all the
considerations which it may consider pertinent, the Department of State will
be happy to continue its collaboration with the Treasury Department in
connection with the consideration of the proposed legislation.
In connection with this general subject, I beg to refer to the mention in your
note of February 7, 1928, of the request of this Department for further
information desired from the Austrian Government, and to point out that
these inquiries were not an examination into the merits of the loan as an
investment that may eventually be offered in the American market,
inasmuch as the United States Government does not pass upon proposed
financing from that point of view. The inquiries rather were made in
contemplation of the governmental interest involved and with particular

reference to the preparation of the information and analyses which the
competent departments of the Government felt should be at hand before a
recommendation could be submitted to the examination of Congress.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
49 For S. J. Res. 118 introduced by Senator Smoot of Utah, see
by Representative Burton of Ohio, see ibid., p. 5139.

[Document 762]
The Secretary of State to the Honorable Willis C. Hawley49a
WASHINGTON, April 11, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. HAWLEY: In connection with consideration by the Ways and Means
Committee of H. J. Resolution 247 concerning the Austrian debt, I desire to
call attention to certain aspects of the situation which are of special concern
from the stand point of our international relations.
The relief indebtedness of Austria was contracted for humanitarian reasons
under authority of the Act of Congress approved March 30, 1920,50 which
authorized the furnishing of flour on credit “to relieve populations in the
countries of Europe or countries contiguous thereto suffering for the want
of food”. Austria’s relief debt to the United States, in the principal amount
of $24,055,708.92, is only about one-fifth of her total relief debt, the other
four-fifths being owed to European Governments, namely, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.
Inasmuch as Austria’s relief indebtedness aggregating about $120,000,000
plus interest thereon, will mature in 1943, and since the relief bonds enjoy a
prior lien on Austria’s assets and revenues, Austria can not obtain the funds
necessary for continuation of the program of economic recuperation except
by agreement of the nine creditor governments. All of these Governments
but the United States have agreed to defer their liens, not only in the belief
that the procurement of new capital by Austria is necessary to permit
Austria to continue her difficult but successful efforts for economic
progress, but also with the thought that well-considered measures for
strengthening Austria will facilitate the repayment of the relief debt.
Austria, for her part, has offered to commence the payment of the relief
indebtedness on the basis of a plan which has already been found
acceptable to most of the creditor governments and which conforms to
Austria’s capacity to pay. The proposed legislation provides that the terms

and conditions of settlement of Austria’s indebtedness to the United States
“shall not be less favorable than the terms and conditions granted by
Austria to any of the other relief creditor governments,” to whom Austria
owes 80% of the relief debt.
The reasons in favor of the United States cooperating in the plans being
developed for dealing with the Austrian situation have been fully and
forcefully stated to the Committee by the Acting Secretary of the Treasury,
Mr. Mills. I shall not undertake to rehearse these arguments. I do, however,
desire strongly to emphasize the importance, from the stand point of our
international relations, of early and favorable action. The United States can
not afford to be in the position of blocking this joint effort to deal with the
difficulties of Austria. I am sure the Committee will appreciate that the
failure of the Government of the United States to join in facilitating the
program of Austrian reconstruction, besides tending to prejudice the
ultimate capacity of Austria to repay our advances, would also place the
United States before the world in a highly unfavorable light and would be
embarrassing in the conduct of our foreign relations.
I therefore sincerely trust that it may be possible to take early and favorable
action on H. J. Resolution 247.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
49a Chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of
Representatives.

[Document 763]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] April 18, 1928.
Following the receipt of the attached letter from Under Secretary Mills,51 I
telephoned the Austrian Minister, referring to his call three or four days ago
and to his communication from Dr. Schüller. I called his attention to the
provision of the final part of the proposed legislation, which stipulates that
the United States must receive as favorable treatment as any of the creditors
of Austria. I stated that the Treasury Department had considered the
question, and that if the proposed legislation were adopted, the Secretary of
the Treasury would not have authority to settle with Austria on the basis
now under consideration unless the Italian Government should accept
similar terms. The Minister stated that he would communicate in that sense
to Dr. Schüller.
The Minister also stated that the representative in London of the Austrian
Treasury had yesterday asked him to cable the text of the proposed
legislation, and that he had done so. The Minister thinks that the question
may be receiving further consideration at London.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]

[Document 764]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received May 21—3 p.m.]
128. Reparation 89.
1. Reference proposed new Austrian loan (see Reparation
Austrian Government has now made application to Commission
requesting that certain Austrian revenues (customs gross receipts
of tobacco monopoly and such other revenues as may be required
to make good any deficiencies in receipts from foregoing) be
excepted in favor of the contemplated loan from the first charge
under article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain.
2. British delegation has prepared a draft decision along lines
requested by Austrian Government which will be considered by
the Austrian Section of the Commission on May 23 before being
brought before the Commission at its meeting on the 26th. The
preamble of this draft refers to the understanding that: “The states
holding the relief bonds issued by Austria represented on the
International Relief Bonds Committee have consented in principle
to the release from the prior charge in favor of the relief bonds for
the period of the new loan not exceeding thirty years of such
securities as might be necessary for the said loan”. [Paraphrase.]
The position of the United States as a power which holds relief
bonds is not referred to. Is it the Department’s wish that a
reference should be made in the understanding’s preamble as to
legislation having been introduced in the United States Congress
for subordination of the lien of the United States respecting the
relief bond to a lien favoring the contemplated new loan? There
appears to me to be nothing to be gained by such a move, and, in

my opinion, the draft is satisfactory in its present form. In any
case I can make a brief statement, when the question comes
before the Commission, of the position of the United States,
should this appear at the time to be desirable. The Austrian
Section will meet Wednesday morning, May 23, and I
respectfully request instructions. [End paraphrase.]
HERRICK

[Document 765]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
advantage in mentioning United States in the preamble or decision.
KELLOGG
53 Supra.

[Document 766]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
137. Reparation 93. At resumption Commission meeting this morning:
1. Italian delegation blocked any action on Austrian application that certain
revenues be excepted from first charge under article 197 in favor of
contemplated loan (see first paragraph my Reparation 89, May 21). Their
reasons for refusing to grant Austrian application purport to be:
(a) That Reparation Commission decision of January 14 last
consenting in principle to the proposed loan was taken on
understanding that a certain program of productive works was to
be carried out. It now appears this program has been partly
abandoned or modified (referring to change in plans for
electrification railways). In view of this the Italians hold the
Reparation Commission is released from its earlier decision.
(b) In general that Austrian economic situation is improving and
does not call for such measures as are contemplated by the loan.
In consequence Italians moved to refer whole question to the
allied governments for consideration.
British delegation insisted vigorously that Commission is bound by terms of
its earlier decision; that on strength of that decision negotiations have been
undertaken with the bankers; that the Commission’s good faith is in
question; that a volte face by the Commission would injure Austria’s credit
by seeming to imply that the menace of reparations would again be held
over her; that the considerations involved by the Italians were before the
Commission when it took its January 14 decision; that the only possible
new consideration to arise since that date has been the change in program

for productive works; but that in any case the Commission’s decision in
January was not conditioned upon its approval of any specific program of
expenditures. To meet Italian view, British, with support of French and
common delegations, proposed that Commission request exact information
from Austria as to contemplated program for works and consider question
in the light of such information, without, however, in any way going back
on its January decision.
Italians refused this and, in order to block vote on the British motion, raised
the question of the Commission’s competence to grant exceptions to the
general reparation charge under article 197, maintaining that this could be
done only after authority had been given by the powers who are alone
competent under article 200.54 The Italians therefore raised the question of
interpretation of these articles which fall within part nine of the Treaty and
concerning which the Commission has no power of interpretation. They
also announced their intention in case the Reparation Commission should
eventually be called upon to act in application of article 197 to raise the
question that its decision in such case must be by unanimous vote and to
provoke an arbitration on this point if necessary under paragraph 13, annex
It was finally decided to postpone further consideration of the question until
the next meeting of the Commission set for June 23.
[Paraphrase.] At the Austrian Section meetings, May 23 and 24, it became
apparent that the Italian delegates intended blocking the loan by every
means possible. Their reasons for release of the Commission from its
previous decision strike me as being merely a pretext. There are evidently
other reasons back of the attitude they now maintain. [End paraphrase.]
4. Paragraph 1 of the foregoing mailed to Legation at Vienna for its strictly
confidential information.
HERRICK

[Document 767]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
understand Italian representative on Relief Bonds Committee now opposes
the Austrian loan on much the same grounds as those advanced by the
Italian delegation at the Reparation Commission meeting on May 27.
HERRICK

[Document 768]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
27. Regret to inform you Congress adjourned today without acting upon
Bill authorizing subordination of lien and debt settlement.
KELLOGG

[Document 769]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
some despondency in official quarters. Press temperate in comment, though
opposition papers seeking to capitalize incident politically. Chancellor
feeling his position somewhat weakened is making statement in Parliament
this afternoon and has just supplied me with advance copy of his remarks.
He takes occasion to emphasize his thanks to the President and Secretaries
Kellogg and Mellon for their efforts to secure passage of resolution and
makes also complimentary allusion to me. He seeks to create the impression
that the loan is only postponed and that with strict economy the economic
consequences of the delay will not be disastrous to the State.
WASHBURN

[Document 770]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
informally to interested officials and in reply to press inquiries that the
resolution respecting the proposed Austrian loan did not get as far as the
floor of either House, owing to the pressure of pending legislation towards
the close of the recent session; that hence it was not rejected but merely not
considered and that it will be taken up at the second session of the present
Congress at the beginning of December and will be actively pressed.
[Paraphrase.] In case any publicity has been or hereafter may be given the
Italian attitude of blocking the loan, you are to telegraph the Department.
[End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG

[Document 771]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)
[WASHINGTON,] June 2, 1928.
The Italian Ambassador came to see me yesterday to tell me officially, on
instructions from his Government, that Italy feels that the arrangement to
make a further loan to Austria is not satisfactory. He says that Italy is not
disposed to make any further sacrifices because experience has
demonstrated the fact that Austria will not bear her share. As I understand
it, the agreement must be unanimous if anything is to be done for Austria
and if the Italian Government maintains its present stand, there will be no
particular point in bringing the matter up again to Congress at the next
session.
W[ILLIAM] R. C[ASTLE], Jr.

[Document 772]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
[Received 12:37 p.m.]
(1) A brief statement respecting the situation in Congress which I
made for Thursday morning’s Freie Presse, had, I am told, a good
effect. Am sending a full report by mail.
(2) In a parliamentary declaration Thursday, Chancellor Seipel
stated, “for the sake of completeness”, that the adjournment of the
United States Congress was not the only obstruction to
suspension of the liens. Italy’s attitude in the Reparation
Commission, following unanimous adoption of a resolution in
principle, he referred to as being attributable to the “strained
relations which still exist to our regret.” Differences with Italy, in
the Reparation Commission and the Relief Bonds Committee, he
intimated, do not necessarily involve a “retardation” of the loan
for a relatively lengthy period of time, while the adjournment of
Congress to December is such a retardation. This portion of
Chancellor Seipel’s speech, being his first public statement
concerning Italy’s attitude, has been commented upon by
newspapers to a considerable extent.
WASHBURN

[Document 773]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)56
[WASHINGTON,] June 14, 1928.
The Austrian Minister stated that he was already giving thought to the
question of what steps should next be taken in connection with adoption by
the United States of legislation making possible the desired loan. He had in
the first instance recommended that subordination of the lien and settlement
of the debt should not be separated. His Government, however, had not
accepted his recommendation on that point. He now felt that it would
probably be best for Austria definitely to conclude a debt settlement with
the United States. He felt that the difficulty in Congress had resulted from
the effort to obtain authority for making a debt settlement the nature of
which had not been fully made known. He wondered whether the
Government of the United States would be prepared to go ahead with a debt
settlement in the near future.
I told the Minister that his suggestion raised a question whether under the
terms of the bond one government could make a settlement in advance of
action by all the other creditors. I stated that this Government, however,
would be glad to review the whole matter carefully with a view to seeing
whether any change in procedure would be desirable. I stated that I would
discuss the matter in due course with the Treasury and if necessary speak
informally to Senator Smoot and Mr. Burton.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]
56 Marginal note by the Assistant Secretary of State reads: “He told me the
same thing on June 21. W[illiam] R. C[astle].”

[Document 774]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, June 21, 1928.
No. 691
SIR: The Department transmits herewith for your confidential information
the substance of a conversation which took place on June 1, 1928, between
the Italian Ambassador at this capital and an Assistant Secretary of State.57
The Italian Ambassador stated officially, on instructions from his
Government, that the latter does not consider satisfactory the proposed
present arrangement for a further reconstruction loan to Austria. He added
that Italy is not disposed to make any further sacrifices because experience
has demonstrated the fact that Austria will not bear her share.
Notwithstanding this attitude of the Italian Government, this Government
desires to avoid, if possible, sharing with Italy the responsibility of blocking
the proposed loan. For this reason and unless unforeseen developments
should meanwhile occur necessitating a different course of action, the
attempt to secure from the Congress the necessary legislative authority for
the subordination of lien and funding of relief indebtedness will be
continued at the opening of the next session in December.
You are hence requested to continue to report any developments in the
situation which may be of interest to this Government or may have a
bearing upon its proposed course of action.
Similar instructions are being addressed to the Missions at Rome, Paris and
London.

For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

[Document 775]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
ROME, July 27, 1928.
[Received August 9.]
No. 1798
SIR: Referring to the Department’s confidential instruction No. 1017 of June
21st last regarding the proposed new reconstruction loan to Austria,58 I
have the honor to report that in the course of a conversation at the Foreign
Office to-day with Undersecretary Grandi, he informed me that there had
been no change in the Italian Government’s attitude with regard to this
matter, as expressed to the Department by the Italian Ambassador.
I have [etc.]
HENRY P. FLETCHER
58 Not printed; see similar instruction to Minister in Austria, supra.

[Document 776]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] August 16, 1928.
The Austrian Minister called this morning to discuss the question of the
steps to be taken in further reference to the loan and debt settlement. He
said that he had just received a letter from Dr. Schüller, stating that the
Austrian Government confidently expects an early adjustment of the
difficulties with Italy which lead to the blocking by the latter of the loan
proposal. The Austrian Chancellor had, with great reluctance, deemed it
advisable to make a statement to the effect that the questions arising in the
Italian Tyrol are regarded by Austria as wholly of Italian domestic concern.
The Italian representative, who had just returned to Vienna, had stated that
Mussolini would change his attitude on the Austrian loan. Mr. Prochnik
gathered that a settlement of the Austrian debt to Italy on the lines of the
settlement made with the other European creditors is likely within a very
few weeks.
The Minister stated that the Austrian Government had assured the European
creditors other than Italy that it would make no settlement with Italy on
terms more favorable to the latter than the terms embodied in the settlement
made with the other creditors.
The Minister then raised the question of further procedure in the United
States. He wondered whether it would not be better to drop the Bill
introduced at the last session of Congress and submit the definitive terms of
a debt settlement. He stated that the Austrian Government would be
prepared to sign with the United States a debt agreement embodying terms
analogous to those already agreed upon with the European creditors (except
Italy) with a clause added to the effect that, in the event of granting more
favorable terms to any other creditors, similar terms would be granted to the
United States. I stated that I would discuss with the Treasury and others the
question involved as to the tactics to be followed, and talk with him further.

I told the Minister that, having in mind the likelihood of a definite proposal
by Austria as to settlement of the debt, it would be desirable that the
Austrian Government submit full data in support of any proposal it might
make. I recalled my previous requests for such data, and that the data had
not been supplied. I further stated that other Governments in proposing debt
settlements had furnished very full data. The Minister said that he had
written for data, but that his Government had apparently not understood
exactly what we wanted. He asked whether I would send him quite
informally a statement on the subject. I undertook to consider the matter.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]

[Document 777]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)
[WASHINGTON,] August 28, 1928.
The Austrian Minister when he came to see me yesterday said that his
Government was, of course, exceedingly anxious to get through the waiver
of the lien at the next session of Congress. He says that Vienna has word
that the Italians will not make any trouble. He feels, however, that Congress
will not pass on this unless there has been made a debt funding agreement.
He, therefore, asks whether Austria should send to this country a debt
funding commission. I told him I did not know exactly with whom they
would treat, if they came, but that I would find out definitely whether this
would be considered a wise move.
W[ILLIAM] R. C[ASTLE,] Jr.

[Document 778]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)59
[WASHINGTON,] September 28, 1928.
Dr. Young informed the Austrian Minister that the proposed Austrian debt
settlement had recently been under consideration within the American
Government and that there was every disposition on the part of the
American executive branch to do everything possible to promote the
enactment at the next session of Congress of the pending Joint Resolution.
It would, of course, be necessary to inform Congress of the fact that since
the adjournment of the last session Austria has negotiated terms of
settlement with its other creditors other than Italy.
The Austrian Minister stated that he was expecting to receive in the near
future an exhaustive economic and financial study which the Austrian
Government, on his recommendation, had prepared for submission to the
American Government in support of the proposed debt settlement. When
this was received he would communicate it to the Department of State,
together with official notice regarding the other debt settlements which
Austria had negotiated.
The Austrian Minister referred to his previous suggestion that his
Government might send representatives to negotiate a settlement with the
United States. He was told that, after consideration, the American
Government did not want to be in the position of taking any responsibility
for the dispatch of such representatives. It was felt that the presence in
Washington of such a Commission, while the Joint Resolution is pending,
might be misconstrued. The Austrian Minister stated that he had
recommended to his Government that Dr. Schüller be sent and had been
informed that the latter would come to Washington, about November 15. He
had felt that Dr. Schüller would be of real assistance to him and also relieve
him of some of the responsibility in case the Resolution was not enacted
during the next short session. It would be difficult for him to recommend

against Dr. Schüller coming. He would report the doubt whether the visit
would be helpful and he requested Minister Washburn to discuss the matter
with the Austrian Foreign Minister and Dr. Schüller at an early date after
his arrival in Vienna. It was suggested that in case only one man came,
presumably Dr. Schüller, and visited the Legation quietly to assist the
Minister in the matter, there might be no ill effect. It was for the Austrian
Government to determine whether it desired to take the possible risk which
had suggested itself to the minds of the American officials.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]
59 The American Minister to Austria and Mr. Livesey from the Office of the
Economic Adviser were also present at this conversation.

[Document 779]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, October 22, 1928.
[Received November 10.]
No. 1992
SIR: I have the honor to report that upon the first day of my return from the
United States, on Thursday last, the 18th instant, I had a long conversation
with Dr. Schüller at his earnest request. The Foreign Office informed me on
that day also that the Chancellor was anxious to see me at the earliest
possible moment. He made a special appointment for me on Saturday. The
loan and the action of Congress upon the favorably reported House Joint
conversation upon both occasions.
Dr. Schüller will go to the United States—as the Department will have
already gathered from the Legation’s despatch No. 1987 of the 17th
instant.60 It will be recalled that the wisdom or unwisdom of sending an
Austrian commission or representative to the United States in the near
future was alluded to recently in conversations which I had at the
Department with the Secretary, Assistant Secretary Castle and Dr. Young.
Minister Prochnik participated in an interview at the Department with the
Economic Adviser and myself where the same subject was broached.61 The
reasons for sending Dr. Schüller, as given by the Chancellor and himself,
may be thus summarized:
1. The political factor. The Chancellor, and especially Finance Minister Dr.
Kienböck (as I reported last spring), are anxious to have the record show
that every possible eventuality was anticipated. In the event of mishap—a
contingency which is regarded as remote—they want to avoid the reproach,
whether from political associates or adversaries, that something was left
undone which if done might have crowned the loan efforts with success.

Schüller has conducted all the negotiations with the Austrian Committee of
the League, with the Relief Credit Committee and with the Reparation
Commission. He has been to London, Paris and Geneva. He talked with
Mussolini in Rome many months ago. Why should he not go to
Washington?
2. It is recognized that some emergency may develop unexpectedly.
Schüller will have a plein pouvoir and will be empowered to deal with any
situation which may arise. Congress or a Committee of Congress may
desire certain information. Prochnik may not have it at his finger tips.
Schüller will and he will be, for several weeks any way, within reach—in
the background always and making all communications through his
Legation, unless the wish should be expressed to see or talk with him
personally. If a formula should be desired to satisfy the United States in the
event that Italy should ultimately get a more favorable relief debt settlement
than the other relief creditor States, Schüller, with his pleins pouvoirs, can
give it. The possibility that Italy will or can get more favorable terms is,
however, scouted. The 1929 budget will carry a 10,000,000 schillings item,
as I understand, to provide for the first of the forty annual installments for
the liquidation of all the relief debts, providing the assent of all the relief
creditor States be first attained. As is well known, it remains for the United
States and Italy to act.
Schüller will be in a position to explain all these and other relevant matters
to the Department, if desired. I recall, for example, that some natural
curiosity was expressed at the Department about the conditions surrounding
the issue of the Austrian renewal bonds of January 1st, 1925. These bonds
consolidated, with the principal due, the unpaid interests which had accrued
up to this date, but reduced the rate of interest from 6 to 5½ per cent. These
renewal bonds were issued as the result of negotiations with the Relief
Credit Committee, of which the United States is not a member. The
European creditor powers, so Schüller says, were not, as a result of this
action, put in a more favorable position than the United States. The renewal
bonds, even with the consolidation of principal and interest, are, because of
the interest reduction, slightly less desirable than the original 6 per cent
bonds which have never been exchanged by the United States.

3. Schüller has never been in the United States. He has long wanted to go
there and the Government, as Seipel intimated, has for some time been
quite willing to avail itself of an opportunity to send him there. “As its
leading economic expert, it is thought that an American visit might be a
useful asset for him in the future. He plans to visit New York, Chicago and
other places. He will not hang around Washington any more than may be
necessary, but he will always be within reach. He will not go to the United
States with a brass band and will discourage any dinner or other
exploitation. He will remain, unless I am greatly mistaken, very much in the
background. This is quite in accord with his own personal preference, for he
is a modest man and senses himself the danger of any undesirable publicity.
I have always found him to be a man of superior tact and he does not, I may
say in passing, lack finesse.
I can quite understand Minister Prochnik’s motive in recommending
originally that Schüller be sent. The Minister did not conceal from me his
desire to have someone to share the responsibility with him nor his desire to
have an alibi if anything should go wrong. Schüller’s oral report will help
the Austrian Government to understand some aspects of American
conditions more clearly than would be possible through written despatches.
4. There is the possibility, and indeed the hope, that Schüller may, before
his return, conduct some negotiations with the Morgan firm. Schüller tells
me that there has been no interchange of communications with this firm for
many months. He says quite plausibly that there has been no reason to
negotiate, and had the Austrian Government taken any steps in this
direction it would probably have been met with the reply that such a
proposal was premature. If Congress should act favorably while Schüller is
in the United States he would be useful in discussing the details of the
securities to be pledged. The Reparation Commission and the underwriting
bankers, whoever they may be, must meet on common ground here. A
formula must be found which both will accept. It is Schüller’s idea that with
some slight modifications perhaps, the formula which was adopted in 1922
will again serve in 1929. In other words, the new loan will be on about the
same terms as the old one—with this difference, that there will be in 1929
no guarantor powers as there were in 1922.

Asert H. W asupurn

69 Not printed.
61 See memorandum, supra.

[Document 780]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 14, 1928.
No. 158/R
EXCELLENCY: As Your Excellency is aware, a proposal for the final settlement of
the indebtedness in respect of Relief Bonds of the series “Relief Bonds
by Austria, was on June 15th, 1928, offered by the Federal Government of
Austria, through the Austrian Minister in London, to the International
Relief Bond Committee and accepted by said body in the name of the
Governments of Denmark, France, Great Britain, Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden and Switzerland. I am submitting herewith as enclosure marked A
International Relief Bond Committee and the Austrian Legation in London.
Negotiations are pending with Italy for her adherence to said agreement,
and in this connection I am authorized to state on behalf of my Government
that Italy shall not receive a more favorable settlement than that offered to
the United States of America and the other aforementioned creditor
Governments and that the Federal Government of Austria is ready to
reserve to the United States of America full equality in regard to terms
ultimately to be agreed upon with the Italian Kingdom.
As Your Excellency is also aware, the aforesaid negotiations dealt with
“Renewal Bonds” bearing five per cent interest issued by Austria in place
of the original six per cent Relief Bonds of Series B of 1920 which by their
terms matured January 1st, 1925, but the payment of which was postponed
to June 1, 1943, in connection with the international cooperation in aid of
the flotation of the “Austrian Government Guaranteed Loan of 1923–1943”.
The new settlement of the relief debt with the European creditor Power
takes the form of an endorsement which has to be signed by Austria and the
respective creditor State on the back of the Renewal Bonds. This

endorsement simply contains the new plan of payment, while, as for the
rest, it provides that the other former provisions of the bond shall remain in
force. As the United States Treasury has not taken a Renewal Bond as of
January 1st, 1925, and has not taken bonds in representation of annual
interest accrued since January 1st, 1925, as the European creditor Powers
have done, but still retains the original relief bond of 1920 in the amount of
$24,055,708.92, I presume that the terms of settlement set forth in the
enclosed correspondence of 15th June 1928 are not textually applicable in a
proposal for the settlement of the Austrian relief indebtedness to the United
States.
With this explanation of the lack of verbal identity with the terms of
settlement with the European creditor Powers, I have the honor, on behalf
of the Federal Government of the Republic of Austria, to submit to Your
Excellency the following proposal for the final settlement of the
indebtedness in respect of the relief bond of the series “Relief Bond Series
B of 1920” held by the United States Treasury in the principal amount of
Calculated in conformity with the provisions of the settlement with the
abovenamed European Governments, with interest at the rate of 6 per cent,
the debt owed to the United States increased up to December 31, 1924, to
decrease to a final amount of $33,428,500 when the same reduction as
agreed upon with other creditor States such as Denmark, France, Great
Britain, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland is proportionately applied to the
said indebtedness.
The Federal Government of Austria now offers to pay the sum of
$33,428,500 (Thirty three million Four Hundred Twenty-eight Thousand
Five Hundred Dollars) in full and final settlement of this debt, in 25
annuities of $1,337, 140 (One Million Three Hundred Thirty-seven
Thousand One Hundred-Forty Dollars) each on the 1st January 1943 and on
the 1st January of each subsequent year to 1967 inclusive. Austria shall,
however, have the option of paying, instead of the aforesaid annuities, the
following instalments:

On January 1st 1929 and on the same date of the following
four years five annuities of $287,556 each, total
$1,437,780
On January 1st 1934 and on the same date of the following
nine years ten annuities of $460,093 each, total
$4,600,930
years twenty-five annuities of $743,047 each, total
$18,576,175
Grand Total
$24,614,885
Provided, however, that if Austria shall exercise this option the obligation
of Austria to pay annuities during the years 1929 to 1943 will in the case of
each annuity not arise if the trustees of the Austrian Government
raised objection to the payment of the annuity in question on the date due.
To the extent, if any, that any such annuity is not paid by reason of such
objection on the part of the trustees, the amount thereof, together with
each of the years 1944 to 1968, inclusive.
Except in so far as the terms of payment contained in this proposal involve
modification of the terms of the Relief Bonds Series B of 1920, these shall
remain in force as regards all the terms and conditions set forth therein,
including in particular those relating to the method, place, and currency of
payment, the exemption from Austrian taxation, the similar treatment for all
creditor Governments, the charge on Austrian assets and revenues and the
priority over reparation, and in particular if the Government of Austria
should at any time without the assent of the creditor Governments pay or
attempt to pay any sum whether in respect of reparations or by way of
compensation for any non-fulfillment of the obligations of Austria under
Article 184 of the Treaty of St. Germain, the amount owing under the
original terms of the aforesaid bond as expressed on the face thereof for
and at 5% thereafter shall forthwith be paid in cash by Austria in priority to
any such payments under the said treaty.
On the acceptance of the proposal Austria agrees that the Government of
the United States shall communicate the proposal and its acceptance to the

Reparation Commission in order that the Commission may take note
thereof.
I am furthermore authorized to state that the Austrian Government have
decided to exercise the option under the terms of the above proposal
regarding the funding of the relief bond of Austria held by the Government
of the United States, subject to the reservation set forth above in case
objection be raised by the trustees of the Austrian Government Guaranteed
In this connection, Your Excellency will recall that, because an obligation
on the part of Austria to make amortization payments prior to 1943 would
have been contrary to the arrangements made when the “Austrian
Government Guaranteed Loan 1923–1943” was concluded, the right was
reserved to Austria in the arrangements of June 15, 1928, to make use of an
option to the effect that in place of the method of paying in twenty-five
annuities beginning in 1943, Austria may pay off her relief debts in forty
International Relief Debt Commission, the Austrian Minister at London
stated that he had indeed no reason to believe that, in fact, the trustees of the
Austrian Government Guaranteed Loan 1923–1943, will wish to veto any
of the anticipatory payments on account of the relief debt unless such
payment is in their opinion against the interest of the bondholders of that
loan.
The Federal Government of Austria believes that with the above stipulated
proposal for the settlement of relief debts, they have reached a fair and
reasonable limit of the country’s paying capacity. The total principal
amount of the Austrian relief debts of Series B of 1920, in representation of
which bonds in the respective foreign currencies carrying interest at the rate
equivalent to approximately 848,500,000 Austrian schillings. With interest
equivalent of 1,250,759,390 Austrian schillings. If the basis of settlement
accepted in the arrangements of June 15, 1928, is accepted by the United
States and Italy, Austria would have to repay this debt in twenty-five equal

be a total payment of 1, 162,500,000 schillings, representing a reduction of
approximately 7 per cent from the indebtedness stated above as of January
1944 to 1968, these payments representing the same present value as the
payments of twenty-five annuities of 46,500,000 schillings each from 1943
to 1968.
A statement of Austria’s economic and financial situation is submitted to
Your Excellency with this note, as an enclosure, marked B.63
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
62 Enclosures not printed.
63 Not printed.

[Document 781]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] November 20, 1928.
The Austrian Minister called by appointment to present Dr. Schüller to the
Secretary of State. Dr. Schüller conveyed to the Secretary of State the
greetings of the Austrian Premier, which the Secretary asked Dr. Schüller to
reciprocate.
In the course of a brief conversation, the Secretary stated that both the
President and himself are strongly in favor of taking suitable action on the
lines already commenced, and that every effort would be made to obtain
appropriate legislation as to the questions of the Austrian debt and loan.
The Secretary stated it had been decided that conversations with the
Minister and Dr. Schüller would be carried on by the Under Secretary of the
Treasury and the Economic Adviser, and that the matter would be referred
to Secretary Mellon and himself as occasion required.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]

[Document 782]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] November 20, 1928.
Dr. Schüller said that this was his first visit to the United States. He had
come prepared to be at the call of the Austrian Minister as technical adviser
in respect of the relief debt settlement but he would be glad if circumstances
proved such that he was not called on. He proposes to visit Pittsburg,
Chicago, Minneapolis, etc. but always subject to the call of the Legation
and always gladly at the disposition of American officials who might call
on him for information. He had come very quietly, had seen no one in New
York and had escaped the notice of the ship reporters.
One purpose of his coming was to quiet political comment in Austria. The
Austrian public does not understand the debt situation. They hear that
reparations are a first charge on Austrian assets, that the relief debts of 1920
are also a first charge on Austrian assets, and that the reconstruction loan of
1923 is a first charge also and with priority over the other first charges. An
Austrian province wishes to borrow and has no trouble in floating a loan.
Vienna has no trouble in floating a loan on favorable terms. The Austrian
Government has for two years been trying to float a loan and Dr. Schüller
has been running around Europe in circles but no loan is forthcoming and
the Austrian public is told that the American Congress must act on the
matter. The public knows that Dr. Schüller has come to the United States
and this fact will keep them quiet for a few weeks at least. The Austrian
Government understands the American situation but the people do not. In
Austria the Government would present a matter of this kind to the
legislature in the morning and have its law by noon. The Government of
course recognized that this could not be done in the United States and was
very thankful for the attitude which the American Government had shown
in the matter.

In discussion of the present status of the Enabling Act, Dr. Schüller said that
he would be glad if his technical knowledge could be of service in the
drafting of an agreement which might be of possible use now and which
would at least be necessary sometime. He would also draft a simple and
comprehensive statement of the whole matter for the use of officials
considering the matter.
During the conversation it developed that Austria considers the agreement
negotiated June 15 with the Governments of Denmark, France, Great
Britain, Holland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland64 to be now in force.
Accordingly on January 1, 1929, it will make the payments provided for in
the optional schedule of payments set forth in Annex 2 of the letter of the
Austrian Minister at London to the International Relief Bonds Committee,
dated June 15, 1928,64 At the same time it will make corresponding
payments to the United States and to Italy as required by the following
paragraph of the Relief Bonds of 1920:
“The Government of Austria agrees that no payment will be made
upon or in respect of any of the obligations of said series issued
by the Government of Austria before, at or after, maturity,
whether for principal or for interest, unless a similar payment
shall simultaneously be made upon all obligations of the said
series issued by the Government of Austria in proportion to the
respective obligations of said series.”
There was nothing in the Relief Bonds of 1920 which required that
simultaneous settlements of the relief debt be made with the various
creditor Governments. The obligation for equality of treatment was that
quoted in the above-mentioned paragraph and Austria could meet the
obligation by making simultaneous and similar payments to all the
creditors. In the case of a Government which had not concluded a
settlement with Austria, the payment would simply be a payment on
account. He considered, however, that Austria is now in a position to make
a definite settlement with the United States, including a clause reserving to
the United States equality of treatment with any superior terms which might
later be granted to Italy. It was of course possible that Austria might not
obtain the subordination of the relief liens in favor of the proposed

investment loan. The relief debt settlement was not offered in consideration
of the subordination of the lien as Austria desired in any event to simplify
its debt structure.
A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]
64 Not printed.
64 Not printed.

[Document 783]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
40. Before the Ways and Means Committee December 7 the Under
Secretary of the Treasury submitted the proposed Austrian debt
agreement.65 Committee will consider amended joint resolution authorizing
the subordination of the lien in favor of the proposed investment loan and
the conclusion of a debt agreement set forth in general terms in the
resolution.
KELLOGG
65 Printed in Austrian Debt Settlement: Hearings before the Committee on
Ways and Means, House of Representatives, 70th Cong., 2d sess., on H. J.

[Document 784]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, December 12, 1928—noon.
amended resolution December 11.66
KELLOGG
France, the Acting Secretary of State (Clark) said in part: “House Joint
Resolution 340 … passed Congress and was approved by the President
the agreement will be required. Austria has made payment due January 1,
1929, under agreement. It is not contemplated that agreement will be signed
until the Reparation Commission has taken action indicated in paragraph
six of the agreement and until the Secretary of the Treasury is satisfied that
such action is adequate to guarantee to the bonds to be issued thereunder the
same security as the relief bonds of 1920 and priority over costs of
reparation. This government would be glad to see an early settlement of this

Treaty of friendship, commerce and
consular rights between the United
States and Austria, signed June 19,
ff.
[785] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, May 12, 1926.
[786] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[787] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, December 1, 1926.
[788] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, February 11, 1927.

[789] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
Washington, February 24, 1927.
[790] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, April 2, 1927.
[791] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[792] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, June 23, 1927.
[793] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, June 30, 1927.
[794] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[795] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[796] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[797] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
[798] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[799] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[800] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)

[801] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[802] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[803] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[804] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[805] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[806] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)

[807] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[808] Treaty Between the United States of America and Austria, Signed
at Vienna, June 19, 1928
Done in duplicate in the English and German languages at Vienna, this 19th
day of June 1928.
Treaty Series No. 838
[809] The American Minister in Austria (Stockton) to the Austrian
Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs (Schober)
Vienna, January 20, 1931.
Treaty Series No. 838
[810] The Austrian Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Schober) to the American Minister in Austria (Stockton)
Vienna, January 20, 1931.
Treaty Series No. 838
[811] Supplementary Agreement Between the United States of America
and Austria, Signed at Vienna, January 20, 1931
Done in duplicate, in the English and German languages, at Vienna, this
20th day of January One Thousand Nine Hundred and Thirtyone.

Treaty Series No. 839

[Document 785]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1926.
No. 459
SIR: The Department has given attentive consideration to the suggestions
made by the Austrian Government in relation to the proposed Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights between the United States and
Austria, which were communicated and discussed in your despatches No.
that you renew the Treaty negotiations with the Austrian Government and
bring to the attention of that Government the views of this Government in
regard to its proposals as they are hereinafter stated.
In the progress of the negotiation of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce
and Consular Eights with Germany which was signed December 8, 1923,70
some seven or eight suggestions were made by the German negotiators
which resulted in minor changes in the text of articles which also are in the
draft which you submitted to the Austrian Government. As this Government
considers that uniformity in every particular in which it is possible is
essential in all the treaties of the series which it is negotiating, it is hopeful
that these changes will be acceptable to the Austrian Government. They are
hereinafter referred to in the regular order of the Articles of the draft along
with this Government’s comments on the Austrian counter proposals.
Preamble. It is desired that the title of the Treaty as stated in the Preamble,
shall be “Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Eights”. This title
is used in the Treaty with Germany (Treaty Series No. 725) and in treaties
of the same type which have been signed by the United States with
Hungary, Esthonia and Salvador.71
Article I. With reference to Article I, the Austrian Government proposed:

1. That the word “agricultural” be included in the first paragraph
of Article I, so as to provide for the leasing of lands for
agricultural purposes as well as for residential, scientific,
religious, philanthropic, manufacturing, commercial and mortuary
purposes.
2. That provision be made in Article I, for the acquisition of land
by the nationals of the High Contracting Parties on the same
terms as nationals of the most favored nation.
3. That the following provisions be incorporated in Article I of
the treaty:
(A) “The nationals of each High Contracting
Party, who have their residence in the
territories of the other and who should come
to be expelled by judgment at law, by police
measures legally applied and executed, or by
virtue of the police regulations concerning
public morals and paupers, shall be received
with their families in any case by their native
country.
(B) “The High Contracting Parties engage
themselves reciprocally to give to indigent
nationals of the other who fall ill, become
mentally deranged or meet with an accident
within their territories the same care and the
same treatment accorded to their own
nationals until the deportation can be effected
without prejudice for the person concerned or
for others.
(C) “For the costs incurred in such cases and
for the burial of dead paupers, no reciprocal
compensation shall take place at the charge of
State, Province, Municipality or other public
funds; merely a private redress being reserved

against the person concerned or others who
may be under such obligation.”
With respect to the first amendment proposed by Austria it may be said that
there is a very practical reason why it would not be advisable for the
Government of the United States to confer upon aliens by treaty the right to
lease lands for agricultural purposes. The owning and leasing of agricultural
lands by Japanese have been regarded as a menace in California and
possibly one other Pacific Coast State, and the Treaty of Commerce and
Conventions, etc., page 2712, Article I), was carefully worded so as to
avoid conferring upon Japanese the right to own land in the United States or
to lease it for agricultural purposes. If the United States were to conclude a
treaty with Austria conferring upon Austrian nationals the right to lease
land in the United States for agricultural purposes, the Government of the
United States would be in the position of discriminating in this respect, in
behalf of Austrian nationals and thus against Japanese, and of creating by
treaty with Austria such a discrimination against Japanese as Japan
complained had been made by the Alien Land Law of California.73 ) The
leasing of lands for agricultural purposes in the United States is regarded as
a matter peculiarly of local concern to be regulated by the legislatures of the
several states in which it is deemed inadvisable for the Federal Government
to intervene. The first paragraph of Article I, as submitted in the draft, is
identical with the corresponding provisions of the Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Consular Rights between the United States and Germany,
signed December 8, 1923, and no controlling reason is perceived for
modifying that paragraph.
What has been said above with respect to discrimination is applicable also
to the second amendment proposed by Austria. It appears, however, that the
right of nationals of foreign countries to own land in Austria is conditional
upon the reciprocal right of Austrian nationals to own land in the country of
the foreign national concerned.
A strong reason why it is undesirable for the United States to conclude a
treaty with a provision granting a most favored nation right to own real
estate is that the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation of 1853

between the United States and the Argentine Republic (1 Treaties,
Conventions, etc. page 20), contains a provision in Article IX that may be
regarded as conferring upon Argentine nationals the right to acquire real
property in the United States. This right would, by virtue of that Treaty,
become available to the nationals of any country with which the United
States concludes a treaty containing a provision securing most favored
nation treatment with respect to acquiring real property. It is the policy of
this Government to avoid including a most favored nation clause in the
treaties which it concludes until the Treaty of 1853 with the Argentine
Republic shall have been amended so as to eliminate the provision
hereinabove referred to, abrogated, or replaced by a new treaty which does
not contain that provision.)
exclusion of Austrian citizens from the privilege of owning land in some of
the states of the United States would have the effect, in the absence of a
treaty provision on the subject, of depriving all American citizens of the
privilege of acquiring land in Austria. In view of the existing state of
Austrian law on the subject of the acquisition of landed property by aliens,
a provision could be inserted in the treaty between the United States and
Austria similar to the provision on the subject included in the Treaty of
Amity and General Relations between the United States and Turkey, signed
at Lausanne, August 6, 1923,75 which was as follows:
“As regards the acquisition, possession, and disposition of
immovable property the nationals of each of the High Contracting
Parties shall enjoy in the territory of the other, subject to
reciprocity, the treatment generally accorded to foreigners by the
laws of the place where the property is situated; accordingly, they
may own, lease, and construct buildings and appurtenances for
residential purposes or for any other purpose permitted by the
present Treaty.”
The provision in the Treaty with Turkey on the subject of immovable
property was accepted by the Department reluctantly after a diligent effort
had been made to have the Turks agree to omit it. It is believed that it would
be preferable to endeavor to induce the Austrian Government to accept the

first Article of the Treaty as it stands in the original draft rather than to
amend it as contemplated by this suggestion regarding the ownership of
land.
If, however, the Austrian Government will not agree to accept the first
paragraph of Article I, in the original form you are authorized to propose
the three following paragraphs in lieu thereof. The first of them contains the
provisions of paragraph 1 of Article I, except those relating to property; the
second contains the provisions so withdrawn from the first paragraph; and
the third contains the provisions of the paragraph quoted above from the
Treaty with Turkey, the last clause thereof having been stricken out to avoid
repetition of provisions in the preceding paragraph.
“The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be
permitted to enter, travel and reside in the territories of the other;
to exercise liberty of conscience and freedom of worship; to
engage in professional, scientific, religious, philanthropic,
manufacturing and commercial work of every kind without
interference; to carry on every form of commercial activity which
is not forbidden by the local law; to employ agents of their
choice, and generally to do anything incidental to or necessary for
the enjoyment of any of the foregoing privileges upon the same
terms as nationals of the state of residence or as nationals of the
nation hereafter to be most favored by it, submitting themselves
to all local laws and regulations duly established.”
“The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties within the
territories of the other shall be permitted to own, erect or lease
and occupy appropriate buildings and to lease lands for
residential, scientific, religious, philanthropic, manufacturing,
commercial and mortuary purposes upon the same terms as
nationals of the country.”
“As regards the acquisition, possession, and disposition of
immovable property, except as regards the leasing of lands for
specified purposes provided for in the foregoing paragraph, the
nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall enjoy in
the territory of the other, subject to reciprocity, the treatment

generally accorded to foreigners by the laws of the place where
the property is situated.”
The Department has noted the discussion reported on pages two and three
Austrian experts, in regard to the application of the closing words of the
first of the foregoing three paragraphs, namely:
“… and generally to do anything incidental to or necessary for the
enjoyment of any of the foregoing privileges upon the same terms
as nationals of the state of residence or as nationals of the nation
hereafter to be most favored by it, submitting themselves to all
local laws and regulations duly established”.
and confirms your explanation made to them that the condition relates to all
matters dealt with in the paragraph. A similar condition in more condensed
form, namely;
“… upon the same terms as nationals of the country”.
is included in the second of the foregoing paragraphs.
This Government understands the condition of reciprocity required in the
last of the foregoing paragraphs to relate to the laws of the political division
by which the acquisition, possession and disposition of immovable property
are governed. The Department infers from the discussion in your despatch
that in Austria the matter is governed by national legislation and that the
law is uniform throughout the Republic. In the United States these matters
are governed by State law. Therefore, nationals of the United States who are
citizens of states which grant to citizens of foreign countries the right to
acquire, possess and dispose of real property would have the right under the
provision here proposed to the treatment generally accorded by the laws of
Austria to nationals of foreign countries on condition of reciprocity.
Nationals of the United States, citizens of States which deny to citizens of
foreign countries the right to acquire, possess and dispose of immovable
property would obtain no rights in Austria under the paragraph. The right of
citizens of Austria in the United States to acquire, possess and dispose of
immovable property, would be recognized in States in which such rights are

accorded to citizens of foreign countries on condition of reciprocity upon a
showing in the particular case that such reciprocity is furnished by Austria.
There are States of the United States in which such rights are extended to
aliens without reference to reciprocity and probably others in which the
rights are restricted or wholly denied.
It is not believed that this Government should consent to add to Article I, of
the Treaty, the paragraphs proposed by Austria obliging the respective
countries to receive their nationals deported from the other country, and
agreeing to accord indigent nationals of the other, the same care and
treatment as is accorded their own nationals.
The Government of the United States has not experienced any difficulty in
having deported aliens received in the countries of which they are nationals.
The difficulties experienced by this Government in deporting aliens grow
out of disputed nationality. It is believed that all governments receive their
nationals who are deported from another country. There have been cases in
which governments refused to receive deportees because they were not
regarded as nationals. The proposed addition to Article I, on this subject,
would not cure this situation, and it is not believed that the proposed
addition would serve any useful purpose so far as the United States is
concerned.
It is not believed that discrimination is practiced to any considerable extent
in the United States in caring for indigent aliens as compared with
nationals. In the United States this matter is given attention by the local
State or Municipal authorities, or by private charitable organizations, and
this Government would find it difficult to agree to include a provision in
regard to it in a treaty.
The Department concurs in your view that difficulties might arise with
respect to the observance of the provisions of the last of the three additional
paragraphs (paragraph C) proposed to Article I, because of the distribution
of jurisdiction over the matters dealt with between the Federal and State
Governments in the United States. For this reason the paragraph is
unacceptable to this Government. The Department agrees also that the
revised form suggested by you is merely declaratory of existing practice.

For this reason it believes that it is unnecessary and undesirable to include a
provision of the kind in the Treaty.
In the negotiation of the Treaty of December 8, 1923, between the United
States and Germany, an agreement was reached to insert in the fifth line of
the second paragraph of Article I, after the word “taxes”, the words “other
or” so that the expression shall read “taxes other or higher” and the entire
paragraph will read—
“The nationals of either High Contracting Party within the
territories of the other shall not be subjected to the payment of
any internal charges or taxes other or higher than those that are
exacted of and paid by its nationals.”
This Government desires that this amendment be made in the Treaty under
negotiation with Austria.
The Senate of the United States in giving its advice and consent to the
ratification of the Treaty signed with Germany on December 8, 1923, made
a reservation to the effect that there should be added to Article I, of the
Treaty the following:
“Nothing contained in this Treaty shall be construed to affect
existing statutes of either of the High Contracting Parties in
relation to the immigration of aliens or the right of either of the
High Contracting Parties to enact such statutes.
This reservation was accepted by Germany. From the point of view of this
Government the views of the Senate in regard to this matter must be
recognized in all treaties concluded by the United States containing
provisions relating to the rights of aliens to enter the United States. You are,
therefore, instructed to propose to the Austrian Government that such a
paragraph be added as the last paragraph of Article I, of the Treaty under
negotiation.
Article III. This Government asks that the words “and other places of
business” be inserted in the second line of Article III after “shops”. The
word “and” before “shops” will as a consequence be omitted. It also asks

that the words “and all premises thereto appertaining” in the fifth line of the
Article in the draft be placed immediately after the newly inserted words.
Article III will then read as follows:
“The dwellings, warehouses, manufacturies, shops, and other
places of business, and all premises thereto appertaining of the
nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties in the territories
of the other, used for any purposes set forth in Article I, shall be
respected. It shall not be allowable to make a domiciliary visit to,
or search of any such buildings and premises, or there to examine
and inspect books, papers or accounts, except under the
conditions and in conformity with the forms prescribed by the
laws, ordinances and regulations for nationals.”
This is one of the changes introduced in the negotiation of the Treaty with
Germany.
Article IV. This Government desires that there be inserted in the tenth line
of the first paragraph of Article IV after the word “Party”, the words
“whether resident or nonresident”, the rest of the paragraph and article to
remain unchanged. This also is a change resulting from the negotiations
with Germany. The words “whether resident or nonresident” appear in the
second paragraph of this Article, and expressing them in the first paragraph
has the advantage of giving uniformity of phraseology where difference
might give rise to a question whether a difference of meaning is intended.
Article V. Austria proposes to modify the provisions in this Article
regarding the right to conduct religious services by the proviso that the
teachings and practices are not inconsistent with public order or public
morals, and that they conform to all laws or regulations duly established,
and to replace the word “reasonable”, as used with reference to mortuary
and sanitary laws and regulations, with the word “established”.
The proposed amendments of Article V appear to the Department to entail
no substantial modification in the meaning of the Article and very little
change in form. In view of your report that Austria attaches considerable
importance to the suggestions with respect to the modification of Article V
because it is desired to bring that Article into close harmony with

provisions in the Treaty of St. Germain,76 and Austrian legislation, and the
further fact that the adoption of these changes would not effect any material
change in the meaning of the Article, the Department authorizes you to
accept the proposed changes.
Article VI. Article VI of the treaty provides that in the event of war between
either High Contracting Party and a third state, such Party may draft for
compulsory military service the nationals of the other having a permanent
residence within its territories who have declared an intention to adopt its
nationality by naturalization, unless such individuals depart from the
territory of the belligerent within sixty days after the declaration of war.
Austria expressed a desire to have Article VI omitted. It expressed a
willingness, however, to waive, by a protocol or by notes to be exchanged
at the time of signing the treaty, the right to object to the drafting of
Austrian nationals within the limitations of Article VI.
It appears from your report that the Austrian Government fears that if it
concludes a treaty containing such a provision, Austria may be regarded as
unneutral in its attitude toward friendly nations with which the United
States might be at war. It is not believed by this Government that such a
provision in a treaty could be regarded as placing either Party to the treaty
in the position of disregarding its obligations of neutrality in the event of
one of the parties to the treaty becoming a belligerent.
In view of the large alien population in the United States and the effect
which the abandonment of the Article in the negotiations with Austria
would have on other treaty negotiations in which this Government is
engaged, the Department would regard the omission of the Article from the
Treaty with Austria or the relegation of the provision to a supplemental
protocol or exchange of notes as distinctly prejudicial to the interests of the
United States. This Article is included in the Treaty of the United States
with Germany signed December 8, 1923, and in the Treaty signed with
Hungary June 24, 1925. The German and Hungarian negotiators both
expressed the doubts of their Governments in regard to the acceptance of
the provision but after discussion it was accepted by both Governments. It
is probable that Austria may not be inclined to insist upon the omission of

Article VI inasmuch as it is contained in the treaties of the United States
with these two countries.
The Department’s views and instructions in regard to the succeeding
Articles of the Treaty will be transmitted promptly in subsequent
instructions. You are authorized in your discretion and at the option of the
Austrian Foreign Office to renew the negotiations with respect to the
Articles discussed in this instruction without awaiting the receipt of
instructions in regard to the remaining articles.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
69 Not printed.
Foreign Relations, 1925, vol.  II, p. 341; between the United States and
74 Not printed.

[Document 786]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, July 20, 1926.
[Received August 9.]
No. 1106
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Department Instruction
No. 459 of May 12 last, incorporating instructions with respect to the first
six articles (excepting Article II) of the proposed Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Consular Rights between the United States and Austria. I
was authorized in my discretion and at the option of the Austrian Foreign
Office, to renew negotiations with respect to the articles discussed without
awaiting the receipt of instructions in regard to the remaining articles.
Since the end of May when the instruction under reference was received,
most of the Austrian officials who were consulted in connection with and
who constitute a sort of committee upon this treaty, have been absent on
leaves of six weeks or two months. This is especially true of Minister
Plenipotentiary Dr. Wildner and Ministerialrat Sammaruga [Sommaruga].
The former has only just returned and the latter is still absent. Sektionschef
Dr. Richard Schüller, mentioned in my despatch No. 374 of December 8
[18], 1923, dealing with this same subject-matter, the most influential and
prominent of all Austrian treaty negotiators, is much absent on official
missions. During recent between visits in Vienna as opportunity offered, I
have had several highly satisfactory interviews with him, the last one being
on the 14th instant, the day of his departure on two months’ vacation leave.
We have reached an understanding on practically all the matters in
controversy, one provision only remaining unsettled. This understanding
was, however, not reduced to writing and confirmed. It would have been an
obvious breach of official etiquette to have taken such action in the absence
of Dr. Schüller’s colleagues. He is, however, to all intents and purposes,
paramount in such matters, and I have not had occasion to complain of any

breach of oral understandings with him. It is true that upon one or two
occasions after a long lapse I have found that his recollection of a
conversation did not in every detail agree with the memoranda made by me
at the time, when the matter was still fresh in my mind. It is always possible
that some of Dr. Schüller’s colleagues may subsequently raise objections to
which he will feel bound to give heed. Subject to this reservation, which I
do not regard as likely for he did not seriously raise it himself, the following
understanding was reached:
Preamble. The suggestion that the title of the treaty shall be “Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights” was accepted.
Article I. I will pass this article for the moment because it presents
some difficulties not yet wholly resolved which will require some
detailed explanation.
Article III. The suggestions of the United States that the words
“and other places of business” be inserted in the second line of
this article after the word “shops”; that the word “and” before
“shops” be in consequence omitted; that the words “and all
premises thereto appertaining” in the fifth line of the article in the
draft be placed immediately after the newly inserted words, were
accepted. Article III will then read as stated on page 10 of the
instruction under reference.
Article IV. The suggestion of the United States that there be
inserted in the tenth line of the first paragraph of this article, after
the word “Party”, the words “whether resident or non-resident”,
was accepted.
Article V. In conformity with the changes desired by the Austrian
Government, approved by the Department on page 11 of the
instruction under reference, this article will read as follows:
[Here follows text of article V, same as in the signed treaty,

Article VI. As intimated on page 11 of my despatch No. 374 of
December 18, 1923, I have always regarded the fate of this article
as more or less turning on the final wording of Article V. Dr.
Schüller feels none too happy about Article VI, but he was visibly
affected by my assurance that Germany and Hungary had
accepted it. I was able to show him this provision, chapter and
verse, as printed in Treaty Series No. 725 containing the treaty
between the United States and Germany. He agrees that the article
as proposed by the United States may be incorporated in the
instant treaty. This I regarded as most gratifying because it
obviates any exchange of notes which the Government of the
United States regards as distinctly prejudicial to its interests.
Recurring now to Article I. Dr. Schüller finally agreed to waive the request
that paragraphs (A), (B) and (C) as set forth on page 2 of Department
instruction under reference, be incorporated in Article I. I do not think that
he attaches as much importance to provisions of this character as do some
relation to the repatriation of one Oscar Rosenfeld. This is one of several
cases which have been the subject of correspondence between the Foreign
Office and this Legation in recent months, and is typical.) Dr. Schüller
seemed to be more anxious to cut off possibility of the Austrian
Government being confronted with a demand of costs incurred on behalf of
indigent and mentally deranged Austrian nationals, and also for costs
incurred for the burial of dead paupers. I gather that this has been a rather
fruitful source of controversy between Austria and some of the Succession
States. In some cases I am informed, understandings exist under which the
states affected assume charge of their indigent and deranged nationals at the
frontier. I felt at liberty to assure Dr. Schüller that the Austrian Government
was not likely to be confronted with demands of this precise character from
the Government of the United States; that it was contrary to its practice to
insist upon the deportation of indigent and deranged nationals of other
Powers found within its borders, unless such nationals came within the
purview of the deportation provisions of the immigration law. It is possible
that Dr. Schüller’s agreement to drop the provisions (A), (B) and (C) may

be challenged by some of his associates, but I apprehend no serious
difficulty on this score.
The suggestion to insert in the fifth line of the second paragraph of Article
I, after the word “taxes”, the words “other or” so that the expression shall
read “taxes other or higher”, was accepted. The second paragraph of Article
I will therefore read:
“The nationals of either High Contracting Party within the
territories of the other shall not be subjected to the payment of
any internal charges or taxes other or higher than those that are
exacted of and paid by its nationals.”
The suggestion that a final paragraph be added to Article I reading:
“Nothing contained in this Treaty shall be construed to affect
existing statutes of either of the High Contracting Parties in
relation to the immigration of aliens or the right of either of the
High Contracting Parties to enact such statutes.”
was accepted.
I come now to deal with the first two amendments proposed by the Austrian
Government to Article I as recited by the Department on page 2 of
instruction No. 459 under reference, to wit.:
1. That the word “agricultural” be included in the first paragraph
of Article I, so as to provide for the leasing of lands for
agricultural purposes as well as for residential, scientific,
religious, philanthropic, manufacturing, commercial and mortuary
purposes.
2. That provision be made in Article I, for the acquisition of land
by the nationals of the High Contracting Parties on the same
terms as nationals of the most favored nation.
Dr. Schüller showed a disposition to link these proposals up. I therefore
consider them together. He quite understands that the owning and leasing of

agricultural lands by Asiatics is regarded as a menace in some parts of the
United States and that land laws have been framed by some states designed
to cope with this situation. He anticipated this point. I did not have even to
hint at it. I think he regards the number of Austrian nationals likely to seek
to lease land in the United States for agricultural purposes as negligible.
This does not worry him. On the other hand, he does not understand why
the United States cannot safely incorporate in the treaty a provision granting
a most favored nation right to own real property and perhaps lease it for
agricultural purposes. He seemed to proceed on the theory that as the
United States had not conferred upon the nationals of any country by treaty
the right to own real property and lease it for agricultural purposes, we
could not be embarrassed. The recognition of favored nation treatment in
this respect would therefore be an empty one but it would satisfy the
Austrian Government. I did not feel at liberty at this stage, in view of the
confidential nature of my instructions in this particular, to explain to him
the embarrassment arising out of Article IX of the Treaty of 1853 with the
Argentine Republic. Dr. Schüller seemed quite concerned about the
privileges of Austrian nationals to acquire land in the United States and
seemed anxious lest they should be put in some relatively unfavorable
position. He also seemed to think that it was in the interest of the United
States as well to have some concrete understanding in view of the state of
the Austrian law which makes the right of nationals of foreign countries to
own land in Austria conditional upon the reciprocal right of Austrian
nationals to own land in the country of the foreign national concerned. I
finally read to him the third clause of the three paragraphs I was authorized
to propose, as set forth on page 6 of Department instruction 459, to wit.:
“As regards the acquisition, possession, and disposition of
immovable property, except as regards the leasing of lands for
specified purposes provided for in the foregoing paragraph, the
nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall enjoy in
the territory of the other, subject to reciprocity, the treatment
generally accorded to foreigners by the laws of the place where
the property is situated.”
The first impression was that this clause might prove troublesome. He was
inclined to question the construction that might be placed upon the phrase

“treatment generally accorded to foreigners”, and he thought the phrase
“subject to reciprocity” might lead the Austrian courts to require reciprocity
to be proved in each instance and that such a tedious legal formality might
defeat the object sought to be attained. This, as just stated, was a matter of
first impressions, and he wanted to think it over. He was inclined to think
that the best way out would be to allow the first paragraph of Article I to
stand as originally drafted, and for the Government of the United States to
submit a memorandum to the Austrian Government embodying a general
statement or resume explaining that such matters come within the
competence of the several states and reciting the general trend of the state
laws so far as the Department is familiar with them. If such a memorandum
could be prepared in the State Department and embodied by me in a note,
the Austrian Government would say in substance, by way of a reply (Dr.
Schüller was giving me the idea and not the phraseology), that having gone
in the situation it was satisfied that reciprocity to all intents and purposes
existed, but that if such reciprocity should be hereafter wiped out, a new
declaration in this respect could be made by either party. This solution
contemplates, it will be perceived, an exchange of notes, but Schüller
seemed to be of the opinion that it would obviate all difficulties and restrain
the Austrian courts from taking the stand that reciprocity should be
judicially proved in each instance when an American should seek to acquire
land in Austria.
To sum up this branch of the discussion, (first), I feel reasonably certain that
Dr. Schüller will not insist upon the insertion of the word “agricultural” in
the first paragraph of Article I. He distinctly said so in the first instance, and
only at a later stage did it occur to him that from his point of view there was
no reason why most favored nation treatment should not be accorded
Austrian nationals in the matter of leasing lands for agricultural purposes as
well as for acquiring and owning land.
(Second), the matter of the acquisition of land can probably be regulated by
an exchange of notes in the way above suggested. This is the only matter
dealt with in the instruction under reference which I regard as really
unsettled. Dr. Schüller said that there was a juridical question involved and
he would want to consult some of his associates before speaking definitely
upon this point. If this solution should prove acceptable, it would have the

advantage of leaving the first paragraph of Article I as originally drafted,
and would enable either party subsequently to make a new declaration with
respect to reciprocal rights if it should become satisfied that discrimination
was being practised. It is my impression that in the last analysis it will be
for the Department to consider whether it prefers to meet the existing
difficulty by an exchange of notes in the manner suggested, or by the
incorporation of a provision corresponding to that found in the Treaty with
Turkey, more particularly the provision hereinbefore quoted as set forth on
page 6 of the instruction under reference.
Upon the occasion of my last interview with Dr. Schüller, I mentioned to
him that I was assuming that the reciprocal application of the most favored
nation treatment would continue until the treaty now being concluded had
been negotiated and became effective. (See in this connection my telegram
easily on this score, that he very well remembered that he had taken this
matter into his own hands a year ago without consulting anybody but that
he assumed full responsibility for it and that he was certain that there would
be no disposition on the part of the Government to question the existing
informal understanding. He did intimate, however, that he hoped we would
be able to close the whole matter up by the end of the year. He will be away
probably until the end of September and he knows that I am presently to go
to the United States on leave. In this connection I note with satisfaction that,
“The Department’s views and instructions in regard to the succeeding
Articles of the Treaty will be transmitted promptly in subsequent
instructions.” I have a feeling that I can make rapid progress in dealing
directly with Schüller when the final instructions have been received, and
that thereafter he will know how to secure the speedy acquiescence of his
associates who must be consulted.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
77 Neither printed.

[Document 787]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1926.
No. 527
SIR: The following instructions in regard to the provisions of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights, which you are engaged in
negotiating with Austria, are in continuation of the Department’s instruction
Article VII. With reference to the request of Austria that special advantages
with respect to customs duties which Austria might grant to Hungary or
Czechoslovakia pursuant to Article 222 of the Treaty of St. Germain should
be exempted from the most favored nation assurances given in Article VII
in the same way that the special treatment accorded by the United States to
Cuba is exempted, the Department notes that the duration of arrangements
contemplated by Article 222 was limited by the terms of the Article to five
years from the coming into force of the Treaty of St. Germain. The
Department understands that this period expired on July 16, 1925, five
years after the date of the deposit of the first proces-verbal of ratification on
July 16, 1920. It would appear therefore that such special advantages with
respect to customs duties as Austria may have extended or may extend to
Hungary or Czechoslovakia after July 16, 1925, are not within the scope of
Article 222. You are instructed to bring the Department’s understanding of
this situation to the attention of the Austrian Foreign Office for the purpose
of ascertaining whether Austria desires to abandon the request for such
exemptions. The Department does not desire that you suggest that an
exception in respect of advantages in regard to customs duties granted by
Austria to Czechoslovakia or Hungary beyond the period contemplated by
Article 222 of the Treaty of St. Germain would be acceptable to the United
States. If, however, it should develop in the course of the negotiations that
Austria desires such an exception to be made, you are authorized to agree to

it by adding at the end of the last paragraph of Article VII a provision
somewhat as follows:
“or to any special advantages with respect to customs duties
which may be granted by Austria to certain natural or
manufactured products of Czechoslovakia and/or Hungary in
agreements in which such products are specified, so long as such
special advantages are not accorded to the products of any other
country.”
Your attention is invited to paragraph five of Article VII of the Treaty with
Germany which is as follows:
“All the articles which are or may be legally imported from
foreign countries into ports of the United States, in United States
vessels, may likewise be imported into those ports in German
vessels, without being liable to any other or higher duties or
charges whatsoever than if such articles were imported in United
States vessels; and, reciprocally, all articles which are or may be
legally imported from foreign countries into the ports of
Germany, in German vessels, may likewise be imported into these
ports in United States vessels without being liable to any other or
higher duties or charges whatsoever than it such were imported
from foreign countries in German vessels.”
No corresponding paragraph was included in the draft treaty submitted by
the United States to non-maritime States such as Hungary and Austria. Such
a paragraph was, however, agreed upon in the negotiations with Hungary
and is included in the Treaty signed with Hungary as paragraph 6 of Article
VII. (Treaty Series No. 748)
The same provision enlarged so as to relate to exportations as well as
importations is included as paragraph 5 of Article VII in the treaties signed
by the United States with Esthonia and Salvador as follows:
“All articles which are or may be legally imported from foreign
countries into ports of the United States or are or may be legally
exported therefrom in vessels of the United States may likewise

be imported into those ports or exported therefrom in Esthonian
(Salvadorean) vessels, without being liable to any other or higher
duties or charges whatsoever than if such articles were imported
or exported in vessels of the United States; and, reciprocally, all
articles which are or may be legally imported from foreign
countries into the ports of Esthonia (Salvador) or are or may be
legally exported therefrom in Esthonian (Salvadorean) vessels
may likewise be imported into these ports or exported therefrom
in vessels of the United States without being liable to any other or
higher duties or charges whatsoever than if such articles were
imported or exported in Esthonian (Salvadorean) vessels.”
While this Government does not ask the Austrian Government to agree to
insert the foregoing paragraph in the Treaty, it will be entirely agreeable to
this Government to have it inserted in the form in which it is included in the
treaties with Esthonia and Salvador, if the Austrian Government so desires.
The provision in the Treaty with Germany is terminable at the expiration of
one year from the date of coming into force of the Treaty on conditions
stated in the Resolution by which the Senate gave its advice and consent to
the ratification of that Treaty, which were accepted by Germany. The
method of incorporating these conditions in the text of the Treaty is
illustrated by Article XXIX of the Treaty with Esthonia. (Treaty Series No.
736.) The exact language which the Department will suggest for use in
Article XXV of the Treaty with Austria in the event that the paragraph
under consideration is included in Article VII will be furnished below when
Article XXV is considered in these instructions.
The Department has under consideration whether it may be necessary or
advisable to raise in the negotiations with Austria questions relating to the
treatment of American Commerce in relation to quotas, contingents or
licenses for the importation or exportation of articles the importation or
exportation of which is restricted or prohibited, shipments in indirect trade,
and certain questions of customs procedure.
The consideration which the Department is giving to these questions may
lead to proposals of additional paragraphs to Article VII, or of amendments

to certain of the paragraphs in the Article as originally drafted or to a
proposal for the signing of a Protocol or Exchange of notes dealing with
these matters at the same time that the Treaty is signed. The Department
hopes to be able to instruct you definitely in regard to this matter at an early
date. Pending the receipt of further instructions in regard to Article VII you
may, in your discretion, either renew the negotiations in regard to that
Article in respect of the two paragraphs which are hereinabove considered,
reserving a right to make suggestions in regard to the above-mentioned
matters after the receipt of further instructions, or, entirely suspend
negotiations in regard to Article VII, in either event explaining to the
Austrian negotiators in so far as you may deem it to be advisable the reason
for your action.
Article VIII. This Government desires that the words “internal taxes,” be
inserted in the seventh line of Article VIII, after the word “to.” This
amendment also was made during the negotiations with Germany. The
Article will then read:
“The nationals and merchandise of each High Contracting Party
within the territories of the other shall receive the same treatment
as nationals and merchandise of the country with regard to
internal taxes, transit duties, charges in respect to warehousing
and other facilities and the amount of drawbacks and bounties.”
The Article as herein amended is included in the treaties signed with
Hungary, Salvador and Esthonia as well as in the Treaty with Germany.
Articles VIII and XIII. The Austrian experts seem to be under the
impression that Article VIII is inconsistent with Article XIII in that the
former provides for national treatment with respect to transit duties and the
latter provides that persons and goods in transit shall not be subjected to any
transit duties. This apparent inconsistency will doubtless disappear when it
is explained to the Austrian experts that Article VIII relates to goods
imported into the United States or Austria and Article XIII relates to goods
or persons moving through the territory of either High Contracting Party to
territory beyond.

This Government accepts the interpretation by the Austrian Government of
the words “transit duty” as not comprising charges for visa certificates for
persons in transit. The reference to transit duties upon merchandise which is
the subject of monopolies, as tobacco, salt and explosives is not clear to the
Department. If the Austrian Government would understand that the
provisions of Articles VIII and XIII apply to articles the subject of
monopoly in a different manner or to a less degree than to other articles of
merchandise, this Government would desire to receive and consider the
views of the Austrian Government in regard to the matter.
Article X. (Article XIII of the Treaty with Germany). At the request of the
German negotiators the following sentence was added at the end of the first
paragraph of this Article: “The foregoing stipulations do not apply to the
organization of and participation in political associations”. The sentence is
also included in the treaties signed with Hungary (Article X) and Esthonia
(Article XIII). It is not included in the treaty signed with Salvador. This
Government does not propose it for inclusion in the Treaty with Austria. It
desires, however, that you should bring the sentence and the fact that it is
included in the treaties signed by the United States with Germany, Hungary
and Esthonia to the attention of the Austrian negotiators and state to them
that if Austria desires to have the sentence inserted at the end of the first
paragraph of Article X of the Treaty under negotiation, this Government
will be glad to agree to it.
Article XI. Apparently Austrian law forbids commercial travelers to take
orders for merchandise from the consumer but allows them to sell their
merchandise only to merchants, industrials and tradesmen. In view of the
provisions of Austrian law on the subject, the Austrian negotiators
suggested the omission of paragraph (c) of Article XI, which provides that a
commercial traveler may sell his samples without obtaining a special
license as an importer. They suggested also that paragraph (g) of Article XI,
which provides that peddlers and other salesmen who vend directly to the
consumer, shall not be considered as commercial travelers, but shall be
subject to the license fees levied on business of the kind in which they are
engaged, should be modified so as to provide merely that salesmen who
vend directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travelers.
You reported that under the Austrian Constitution the provincial

governments may regulate and prohibit peddlers, and that as a matter of
policy foreigners are not given concessions to peddle. For these reasons the
Austrian negotiators desire to have the reference to peddlers omitted from
paragraph (g) of the Article. They desire to avoid according by treaty
favored nation treatment with respect to peddling, or to enter into any treaty
obligation touching peddlers.
It is not believed that the explanations offered justify the omission of the
provisions which the Austrian experts desire to have omitted. Paragraph (c)
does not give commercial travelers the right to sell their samples to persons
other than merchants, industrials or tradesmen. If commercial travelers
representing American concerns are permitted to sell their samples to
merchants, industrials or tradesmen, the privilege granted by paragraph (c)
would be fulfilled. The Austrian law referred to in your despatch does not,
therefore, justify the omission of paragraph (c).
You stated that it is not the policy of the provincial governments to permit
foreigners to peddle, and that, therefore, Austrians cannot grant favored
nation privileges with respect to peddling. If the nationals of other countries
are not granted permission to peddle, a favored nation clause of a treaty
between the United States and Austria could not be made the basis of a
demand for that privilege on behalf of American citizens. There is not
perceived in the explanation conveyed in your despatch a reason for making
the modification in paragraph (g) proposed by the Austrian negotiators.
However, as it is not believed that the business of peddling is of much
consequence to American citizens, the Department is not indisposed to meet
the viewpoint of the Austrian negotiators with respect to peddlers in the
event that they adhere to that viewpoint after you have discussed the
Department’s views as set forth above with them.
It is suggested that if the view of the Austrians be adopted, with respect to
peddlers, paragraph (g) be omitted and paragraph (c) be made to read as
follows:
“A commercial traveler may sell his samples without obtaining a
special license as an importer. Salesmen who vend directly to the
consumer shall not be considered commercial travelers.”

Such a provision would secure to American commercial travelers the right
to dispose of their samples to a class of purchasers to whom they are
permitted to sell under Austrian law and would not in any way contemplate
traffic forbidden by Austrian law. At the same time peddlers would be
excluded from the scope of the Treaty and the policy which the provinces of
Austria are said to follow with respect to peddling could be maintained.
If this suggestion for the consolidation of paragraph (c) and paragraph (g)
be adopted, paragraph (h) and paragraph (i) will of course be re-numbered
paragraph (g) and paragraph (h) respectively.
Article XII. You stated that the Austrian experts have no objection to
paragraph (b) of Article XII, provided it is understood that upon departure
from the country the cancellation of the bond is to be effected in an
Austrian port. The Austrian experts propose also with respect to Article XII,
that paragraph (c) of that Article be amended by striking out everything
after the semicolon in line 5, so that the paragraph will read as follows:
“It is understood that the traveler will not engage in the sale of
other articles than those embraced by his line of business.”
The Department does not understand that a requirement by Austria that the
cancellation of the bond for the payment of customs duties on samples not
re-exported should be effected at an Austrian port of departure would be in
any way inconsistent with the provision in regard to the cancellation of such
bonds contained in paragraph (b) of Article XII. You are authorized to
accept the amendment proposed by Austria to paragraph (c) of Article XII.
This Government desires to have the words “or other competent
authorities” inserted in the third line of the second paragraph of subdivision
(b) of Article XII, after the word “officials”. This also is an amendment
arising out of the negotiations with Germany. As a consequence of the
insertion of these words the word “customs” in the ninth line of this
paragraph will be stricken out so that the second sentence of the paragraph
will begin with the words “The said officials”. The paragraph as amended
will read:

(b) It is the citizenship of the firm that the commercial traveler
represents, and not his own, that governs the issuance to him of a
certificate of identification.
The High Contracting Parties agree to empower the local customs
officials or other competent authorities to issue the said licenses
upon surrender of the certificate of identification and
authenticated list of samples, acting as deputies of the central
office constituted for the issuance and regulation of licenses. The
said officials shall immediately transmit the appropriate
documentation to the central office, to which the licensee shall
thereafter give due notice of his intention to ask for the renewal or
transfer of his license, if these acts be allowable, or cancellation
of his bond, upon his departure from the country. Due notice in
this connection will be regarded as the time required for the
exchange of correspondence in the normal mail schedules, plus
five business days for purposes of official verification and
registration.
The paragraph as herein amended is included in the Treaty signed with
Hungary (Article XII) as well as in the Treaty with Germany (Article XV).
In the Treaty with Esthonia a most favored nation clause relating to
commercial travelers (Article XIV) was agreed upon in lieu of articles
corresponding to Articles XI and XII of the draft submitted to Austria. The
United States and Salvador are parties to a special convention relating to
included in regard to them in the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Consular Rights signed February 22, 1926.
No question has been raised in regard to Article XIII other than that
considered above in connection with Article VIII and none has arisen in
relation to Article XIV. The Department’s views in regard to the questions
that have been raised by Austria in regard to Articles XV and following, as
well as in regard to such further questions as it may decide to ask to have
considered in relation to Article VII and its views concerning the results of
your negotiations on Articles I to VI inclusive, as reported in despatch No.

instructions.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 788]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, February 11, 1927.
No. 552
SIR: The following instructions in regard to the provisions of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights, which you are engaged in
negotiating with Austria are in continuation of the Department’s
Article XV. Criminal and civil jurisdiction over consular officers
Three suggestions were made by Austria in regard to Article XV:
(1) That in the first paragraph the words “felonious crimes” be
substituted for the word “crimes” in line 6 and the word “felon”
be substituted for “criminal” in line 8.
(2) That the provisions of the third paragraph that consular
officers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts in the
State which receives them in civil cases will be understood to
mean that Austrian consular officers in the United States can be
sued in the federal courts and not in the State courts. It is
understood that in Austria all courts are federal courts.
(3) That when in attendance at a trial as a witness in a criminal
case, a consular officer may be required to testify only as to facts
and shall not be required to testify as an expert. The Austrians
proposed the following as a substitute for the first sentence of the
second paragraph of Article XV:
“In cases of felonies the attendance at the trial by a
consular officer as a witness as to fact may be

demanded by the prosecution or defense.”
With reference to the first suggestion you state that the Austrian experts
understand that the term, “offenses locally designated as crimes” in the
United States, which was used in the draft submitted to the Austrian
Government by you, is sufficiently broad to include misdemeanors
punishable by imprisonment, whereas the German term corresponding to
the word “crimes”, which would be used in the Austrian text, has a
narrower meaning and includes only serious offenses such as are regarded
as felonies in the United States. The Austrian negotiators fear that the
provision as originally drafted would operate unequally on American
consular officers in Austria and Austrian consular officers in the United
States to the disadvantage of the latter in that by reason of the breadth of
meaning of the word “crimes”, Austrian consular officers in the United
States would be subject to prosecution not only for offenses of the gravity
of a felony, but also for misdemeanors, while American consular officers in
Austria, by reason of the narrower meaning of the German term would be
subject to prosecution for serious offenses only and not for misdemeanors.
The same question came up in the negotiation of the treaty with Germany,
and the American draft of that treaty which was in the same language as the
original draft submitted to Austria, was modified before signing so as to
subject consular officers to prosecution for “offenses locally designated as
crimes other than misdemeanors”. The first paragraph of Article XVIII of
the Treaty with Germany, which corresponds to Article XV of the draft
under negotiation with Austria, reads as follows:
“Consular officers, nationals of the state by which they are
appointed, shall be exempt from arrest except when charged with
the commission of offenses locally designated as crimes other
than misdemeanors and subjecting the individual guilty thereof to
punishment. Such officers shall be exempt from military
billetings, and from service of any military or naval,
administrative or police character whatsoever.”
The paragraph in this form is included in the Treaties of the United States
with Hungary (Article XV) and Estonia (Article XVII) as well as in the
Treaty with Germany (Article XVIII).

You are instructed to propose to the Austrian Foreign Office that the above
quoted paragraph be substituted for the first paragraph of Article XV of the
draft. In the interest of uniformity in the treaties of the United States, this
Government would be glad if Austria would accept it in lieu of the
suggestion made by that Government. It is believed that it meets the
criticisms of the original paragraph made by the Austrian negotiators.
With respect to the second suggestion of the Austrian experts relating to the
courts in the United States having jurisdiction over consular officers,
Article III, Section 2, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the United States,
to which reference was made in your despatch No. 374 of December 18,
1923, is of course applicable. The Department confirms your explanation to
the Austrian experts that the Supreme Court of the United States has
original but not exclusive jurisdiction over consular officers and that a
consular officer cannot be impleaded in a State court. Section 256 of the
and is still in force reads as follows:
“The jurisdiction vested in the courts of the United States in the
cases and proceedings hereinafter mentioned, shall be exclusive
of the courts of the several states: …
Eighth. Of all suits and proceedings against ambassadors, or other
public ministers, or their domestics, or domestic servants, or
against consuls or vice consuls.”
Your assurance to the Austrian negotiator that the proposed treaty provision
will effect no change in existing judicial procedure as respects courts in
which Austrian consular officers in the United States may be impleaded
was entirely correct.
With respect to the suggestion made by the Austrian negotiators that in
criminal cases consular officers may be required to testify only as to matters
of fact and not as experts, it may be stated that this Government does not
perceive any particular merit in this suggestion. There would be little
occasion for a consular officer to testify in criminal proceedings as an
expert witness, and since the second paragraph of Article XV of the draft, to
which this suggestion relates provides that the demand for the attendance of

a consular officer at trials shall be made with all possible regard for the
consular dignity and the duties of the office, it would seem that he is
adequately safeguarded.
This Government considers that the right to demand the attendance of a
consular officer as a witness in criminal cases should relate to cases of
misdemeanors as well as of felonies. It has no desire to have its consular
officers in Austria exempt from attendance as witnesses in cases of
misdemeanors when the ends of justice would be advanced by their
attendance; and under the treaties concluded by this country with Germany,
Hungary, and Estonia consuls do not enjoy such an exemption. This
Government, therefore, does not agree to the substitution of the words “In
cases of felonies” for “In criminal cases” at the beginning of the second
paragraph of Article XV. It would be agreeable to this Government to
consider a suggestion as to the German text which would correspond
exactly to the expression “In criminal cases”, the latter being understood to
include misdemeanors as well as felonies. The provision as contained in the
original draft submitted to Austria was adopted in the treaties of the United
States with Germany, (Article XVIII), Hungary (Article XV), and Estonia
(Article XVII). In view of the foregoing explanation it is hoped that the
Austrian Government will find the paragraph in its original form
acceptable.
Article XVI. Exemptions of consular officers and government property from
taxation
The first paragraph of this Article provides that consular officers including
employees in a consulate nationals of the State by which they are appointed
other than those engaged in private occupations for gain within the State
where they exercise their functions shall be exempt from taxation with
certain exceptions. The provision of the Article establishing exceptions
from the exemption, namely the taxation to which a consular officer is
subject, reads as follows:
“… except taxes levied on account of the possession or ownership
of immovable property situated in, or income derived from
property of any kind situated or belonging within the territories of
the State within which they exercise their functions.”

The Austrian experts proposed that this provision be amended to read as
follows:
“… except taxes levied on account of income derived from any
property situated within the territories of the State within which
they exercise their functions, according to the laws of that State,
upon all foreigners, who have no domicile or residence within
that State.”
It is noted (1) that taxes levied on account of the possession or ownership of
immovable property situated in the country of the official residence of the
consular officer, which constituted one of the exceptions to the exemptions
from taxation as contained in the American draft, and which consular
officers therefore, would be liable to pay thereunder, are omitted from the
exceptions as stated in the Austrian counter proposal and (2) that in the
Austrian draft the taxability of the income of a consular officer from
property is made to depend on a test of domicile or residence applied to all
foreigners instead of merely on the situs of the property from which the
income is derived as was provided in the American draft.
The effect of the omission of the exception in respect of immovable
property would be to accord consular officers exemption from the payment
of taxes levied on account of the possession or ownership of such property
situated in the country of their official residence, an exemption which this
Government does not believe there is sufficient reason for according. From
the point of view of this Government it is undesirable to introduce into the
treaty in the matter of exemption of income from taxation, the test of
domicile or residence involved in the provision of the Austrian draft.
Confusion might arise in the application of such a provision in the United
States because under the American doctrine consular officers of a foreign
country in the United States are considered to have their residence here,
although they may retain their domicile in another country.
As indicated above, among the exceptions to the exemption from taxation
included in the American draft was income derived from property of any
kind situated or belonging within the territories of the State in which the
consular officer exercises his functions. The Austrian experts referred to
this provision as being too general and vague.

This Government is prepared to admit that the expression “belonging
within” as used to describe property, may be somewhat vague. It is not
believed, however, that the use of the expression will give rise to any
difficulties of interpretation in the United States and this Government would
be glad if Austria would accept it. If, however, the Austrian negotiators
insist on a more precise expression, you are authorized to suggest that the
words “from sources within” be substituted for the words “from property of
any kind situated or belonging within”. For the reasons already stated, this
Government does not desire to accept the counter-draft of the first
paragraph of Article XVI submitted by Austria. The provision in regard to
the taxation of consuls in the language of the draft which was submitted to
Austria was accepted in the treaties concluded by the United States with
Germany (Article XIX), Hungary (Article XVI) and Estonia (Article
XVIII). This Government would be glad if Austria would accept this
paragraph of the original draft without change, or at least without other
modification than the substitution of the words “from sources within” in
place of “from property of any kind situated or belonging within”.
The second paragraph of Article XVI of the draft submitted to Austria
provides that lands and buildings situated in the territories of either Party of
which the other Party is the legal or equitable owner and which are used
exclusively for governmental purposes by the owner shall be exempt from
taxation. The Austrian negotiators desired to have the word “governmental”
omitted and the term “diplomatic or consular” substituted therefor. They
fear that the term “governmental” is too broad in that the Government
might use a building for purely commercial or industrial purposes and vet
be entitled to exemption from taxation thereon because those purposes
might be regarded as governmental. While this Government does not
understand the word “governmental” as used in the second paragraph of
Article XVI of the draft as embracing the meaning suggested by the
Austrian negotiators, it is willing to accept the suggestion that the words
“diplomatic or consular” be substituted therefor.
Article XVI as rewritten pursuant to the foregoing discussion is as follows:
“Consular officers, including employees in a consulate, nationals
of the State by which they are appointed other than those engaged

in private occupations for gain within the State where they
exercise their functions shall be exempt from all taxes, National,
State, Provincial and Municipal, levied upon their persons or
upon their property, except taxes levied on account of the
possession or ownership of immovable property situated in, or
income derived from sources within the territories of the State
within which they exercise their functions. All consular officers
and employees, nationals of the State appointing them shall be
exempt from the payment of taxes on the salary, fees or wages
received by them in compensation for their consular services.
“Lands and buildings situated in the territories of either High
Contracting Party, of which the other High Contracting Party is
the legal or equitable owner and which are used exclusively for
diplomatic or consular purposes by that owner, shall be exempt
from taxation of every kind, National, State, Provincial and
Municipal, other than assessments levied for services or local
public improvements by which the premises are benefited.”
Article XVII. Privileges of consular officers
The Austrian negotiators desire that there be included in this Article a
provision protecting consular titles, arms, and flags against illegal use,
stating that foreign consular officers in the United States have frequently
been obliged to apply to local authorities for assistance in preventing the
unauthorized use of consular insignia and that in some of the States there
are no laws under which assistance could be obtained.
This same suggestion was made by the German negotiators in the course of
the negotiation of the Treaty with Germany and the Department deemed it
inadvisable to accede to the wishes of the German Government because of
the inadequacy of existing legislative authority of the Federal Government
to meet the obligation which would be undertaken by such a provision. The
Department appears not to be in possession of information to confirm the
statement of the Austrian negotiators that the unauthorized use of foreign
consular emblems in the United States has been frequent. In the absence of
information to that effect the Department is not in a position to make the

recommendations necessary to obtain remedial legislation in regard to the
matter.
Article XVII of the American draft of the Treaty submitted to Austria
conforms precisely to Article XX of the Treaty of the United States with
Germany, Article XVII of the Treaty with Hungary, and Article XIX of the
Treaty with Estonia, The Department desires that you endeavor to have
Article XVII accepted by Austria without change.
Article XX. Competency of consular officer to take charge of property of
deceased national, qualify as administrator, etc.
The counter-draft of Article XX submitted by Austria as quoted in your
from the draft which you submitted to the Austrian Government.
(1) A paragraph is inserted between the first and second
paragraphs requiring local authorities of one country to inform the
nearest consular officer of the other of the mental incompetency
or insanity of nationals of his country when mental incompetency
or insanity is declared.
(2) The provision “so far as the laws of the country permit” in the
second paragraph of the American draft is omitted from the
Austrian counter-draft.
(3) The final sentence of the second paragraph of the American
draft is revised so as to confer on consular officers the paramount
and exclusive right to be appointed administrator in case of the
death of a national without will or testament, unless the laws of
the place where the estate is administered provide for
administration by a public officer; and the sentence as revised is
made a separate paragraph.
(4) Two new paragraphs are added to the Article, the first of
which would require any tribunal or other agency of either
country before which an estate is pending in which absent,
unknown, incompetent or minor nationals of the other country are

among the heirs, next of kin, legatees or devisees, to inform the
nearest consular officer of that country of such fact and the
second of which would give to such consular officer the right to
represent such nationals of his country personally or by delegate,
in all proceedings relating to the estate.
The German negotiators of the Treaty of the United States with that country
raised the same question that the Austrians have raised in regard to
notifying consular officers of mental incompetency and insanity of their
countrymen. The Department took the position with the German negotiators
that this Government would not be warranted in imposing the additional
obligation on the local authorities. The request was not pressed by Germany
and no such provision was included in the Treaty. Compliance with the
requirements of the provision proposed by Austria would necessarily rest
with the local State authorities in the United States and it would be difficult
for the Federal Government to see that such an obligation, if placed upon
them by Treaty, was carried out. Such a provision is not contained in any
treaty to which the United States is a party, and this Government deems it
inadvisable to enter into more extensive commitments with foreign
governments than have already been undertaken entailing duties on State
authorities. For these reasons the Department does not desire to accept the
Austrian proposal.
With reference to the omission of the clause “so far as the laws of the
country permit” from the second paragraph of Article XX of the Austrian
draft, the Department would be glad to have you bring to the attention of
the Austrian negotiators that in the United States the matter of
administration on the estates of deceased persons is subject to control by the
State Legislatures, and that a treaty provision qualifying consular officers of
a foreign country to take possession of property without regard to the
provisions of State laws would be an encroachment upon the recognized
jurisdiction of the State, which it is deemed inadvisable to make.
The provision of the last sentence of the second paragraph of Article XX of
the American draft relating to the right of consular officers to be appointed
as administrators of the estates of their deceased intestate nationals, as
modified and made a separate paragraph in the Austrian counter-draft,

would confer on consular officers a paramount and exclusive right to be
appointed administrators in such cases unless the laws of the place where
the estate is administered provide for administration by a public officer. If
the paragraph proposed by Austria were adopted, the courts in the United
States would be deprived of much of the discretion which they now have
and exercise in the appointment of administrators under the laws of the
several States, and which would still be permissible to them under the
provisions in the American draft. The establishment of such a situation
would disturb the procedure in many of the States, where, as has just been
mentioned, the appointment of administrators is largely in the discretion of
the local courts and where it may also be stated the laws authorize the
appointment of such persons as the next of kin and creditors. For these
reasons the Department considers it not to be desirable for this Government
to accept the proposed modification. The second paragraph of Article XX
of the American draft of the Treaty submitted to Austria is identical with
the corresponding paragraph of Article XXIV of the Treaty of the United
States with Germany, Article XX of the Treaty with Hungary, and Article
XXIII of the Treaty with Estonia, In the interest of uniformity in the treaties
of the United States and to avoid interference with State laws and judicial
procedure this Government is unwilling to agree to the two modifications to
paragraph 2 of Article XX proposed by Austria. The Department desires
that you endeavor to have the paragraph as in the American draft accepted.
With reference to the provisions of the first of the two paragraphs which
Austria proposed to add to Article XX the same objections apply on the part
of this Government as apply to the proposal for the giving of notice in
regard to cases of mental incompetency or insanity, as stated above. With
reference to the provision of the final paragraph of the Austrian counter-
draft of the Article, the same objections apply as apply to the proposed
omission of the provision “so far as the laws of the country permit” from
the second paragraph.
Under the second paragraph of the American draft of Article XX Austrian
consular officers in the United States will be qualified insofar as it is
permitted under State laws and pending the appointment of an administrator
to take charge of the property left by intestate nationals of their country for
its preservation and protection. They will also have the right to be appointed

as administrators of such estates within the discretion of the tribunal or
other agency controlling the administration of estates provided the laws of
the place where the estate is administered so permit,—namely, the State
laws. It would seem that estates affected by these provisions would include
most of those in which absent, unknown, incompetent or minor nationals of
Austria are among the heirs, next of kin, legatees or devisees. This
Government would avoid entering into any treaty stipulation which would
enlarge the scope of these provisions so as to qualify foreign consular
officers irrespective of State laws to act as representative of the distributees
of estates in the United States or would restrict the freedom of the States in
respect of recognizing other persons than consular officers in such
capacities.
The Department desires that you endeavor to have Article XX of the
American draft accepted by Austria without modification. It is identical
with the corresponding Articles of the Treaties of the United States with
Germany (Article XXIV), Hungary (Article XX) and Estonia (Article
XXIII), and of drafts which this Government has submitted to other
Governments. In the interest of uniformity in the treaties of the United
States and to avoid intruding any further than is warranted by precedent into
the realm of affairs over which the States exercise jurisdiction, the
Department considers it impracticable to accept the modifications of Article
XX proposed by Austria.
Article XXI. Competency of consular officer to receive funds, etc.
Article XXI of the American draft provides that a consular officer, may, in
behalf of his non-resident countrymen, receipt for their distributive shares
of estates in process of probate, or of amounts accruing under the provisions
of Workmen’s Compensation Laws or other like statutes, provided he remit
any funds so received through the appropriate agencies of his Government
to the proper distributees, and provided further that he furnish to the
authority or agency making distribution through him, evidence of remission
of such funds. The Austrian negotiators suggested that the proviso requiring
the consular officer to furnish evidence of remission be omitted, and that
there be substituted therefor a provision to the effect that a receipt given by
a consular officer under his official seal and signature shall be accepted as a

release in the country where he is accredited. They also suggested that the
words “collect and” be inserted in line 4 between the words “countrymen”
and “receipt”.
The Department recognizes that the principal suggestion is not without
merit. It can understand that the Austrian Government might consider it to
be unnecessary that the agency distributing proceeds of an estate in the
United States, and paying a portion thereof to an Austrian consular officer
as representative of his non-resident countrymen, should follow funds
beyond the hands of the consular officer, on the principle that the matter of
the funds reaching the proper distributee is one between such officer and his
Government. This Governmen assumes that it would be the official duty of
the foreign consular officer to make proper disposition of funds received by
him for the purposes mentioned in the Article, and that it would be the
function of his Government to see that he performed his duty in this regard.
The Department considers that the question of retaining or omitting the
proviso is not of great importance. The article with the proviso is identical
with Article XXV of the Treaty of the United States with Germany, Article
XXI of the Treaty with Hungary, and Article XXIV of the Treaty with
Estonia. In order to avoid a departure from these treaties the Department
desires that you endeavor to prevail upon the Austrian authorities to accept
Article XXI of the American draft without modification. You may inform
them that while this Government appreciates their viewpoint with respect to
the proviso, it would be glad if Austria would accept the article without
change in order that it may be uniform with the corresponding article of the
Treaties which are in force between the United States and Germany,
Hungary, and Estonia, respectively. You are authorized, however, to consent
to the omission of the proviso, if the Austrian authorities attach great
importance to their suggestion. This Government does not desire, however,
to substitute therefor the provision that a receipt of the consular officer
under his official seal and signature shall be accepted as a release. The
Department has no objection to the acceptance of the words “collect and”
after “countrymen” in the fourth line of the draft.
Article XXII. Exemptions from duty of importations of consular supplies
and belongings of consuls

The Department has considered the proposals made by the Austrian
negotiators for the modification of the first paragraph of Article XXII of the
draft and the counter-proposal made by you, as follows, which it is
understood is acceptable to the Austrian negotiators:
“Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees to permit the entry
free of all duty and without examination of any kind, of all
furniture, equipment and supplies intended for official use in the
consular offices of the other, and to extend to such consular
officers of the other and their families and suites as are its
nationals, the privilege of entry free of duty of their personal or
household effects actually in use which accompany such consular
officers, their families or suites, or which arrive shortly thereafter,
provided, nevertheless, that no article, the importation of which is
prohibited by the law of either of the High Contracting Parties,
may be brought into its territories.”
The Department understands that the effect of the proposed modification
would be to reduce the exemption from import duties accorded to consular
officers below the proposals of the American draft, in that under the
provisions of the American draft consular officers of each country in the
other would be entitled to free entry for their families and suites of their
baggage and all other personal property, either accompanying them to their
posts or imported at any time during the officer’s incumbency, while under
the provision as revised they would be entitled to free entry only of their
personal or household effects accompanying them, their families or suites,
or arriving shortly thereafter.
The draft of the treaty sent to you bore a notation opposite Article XXII that
under the customs regulations of the United States foreign consuls, their
families and servants are granted on a basis of reciprocity free entry of all
baggage and household goods which accompany them to the United States,
or which arrive shortly thereafter, that they are required to pay regular duty
on subsequent importations of personal property, and that official supplies
for consular offices are admitted free of duty. As the first paragraph of
Article XXII as modified by you and as acceptable to the Austrian
negotiators is in substantial conformity to the provisions of the customs

regulations of the United States, this Government has no serious objection
to accepting the modified draft. It was believed, however, that the broader
exceptions provided in the original draft would be of advantage to consular
officers of foreign countries in the United States as well as of American
consular officers in foreign countries, and that as the resulting loss of
revenue to Governments would be small, foreign Governments would
willingly accept the provision. It was accepted by Germany (Article
XXVII), and Hungary (Article XXII).
If the provision as revised by you is adopted in the Treaty with Austria,
consular officers of Austria in the United States will be required to pay
duties on the importation of all personal property not accompanying them
or arriving in the United States shortly after their arrival, whereas consular
officers of Germany and Hungary, their families and suites will receive free
of duty all personal property imported during the incumbency of the officer.
While this Government prefers that the first paragraph of Article XXII of
the original draft be accepted by Austria without change, yet if, after further
consideration in the light of the foregoing statement, the paragraph as
originally drawn is unacceptable to Austria, this Government will accept the
modified form drawn by you and quoted above from your despatch No. 374
of December 18, 1923. The Department understands that the second
paragraph of Article XXII of the original draft is acceptable to Austria
whether the first paragraph be modified or not.
Article XXIII. Definition of territories and nationals
This Government desires to withdraw the second paragraph of Article
XXIII of its draft. It would appear that cases might arise in which each
party to the Treaty would deem that the same person owed permanent
allegiance to it. The provision in the second paragraph would seem to
contribute nothing to the solution of such a question when it might arise and
would be unnecessary in other circumstances. This paragraph does not
appear in the treaties signed with Germany, Hungary or Estonia.
You are authorized to suggest that the words “or to Austria or its nationals”
be inserted after “nationals” at the end of the fifth line of Article XXIV of

the original draft. The Article then will read as follows:
“Nothing in the present Treaty shall be construed to limit or
restrict in any way the rights, privileges and advantages accorded
to the United States or its nationals or to Austria or its nationals,
by the Treaty between the United States and Austria establishing
friendly relations, concluded on August 24, 1921.”
A corresponding provision is contained in the Treaty with Germany (Article
XXX) and in the Treaty with Hungary (Article XXIV).
Article XXV. Duration and termination of treaty
Article XXV deals with the duration of the treaty and modes of terminating
it. It is deemed wise to fix the initial period of operation at ten years in
regard to all matters with respect to which the Contracting Parties have a
permanent policy and to require one year’s notice of termination.
The reservation made by the Senate when giving its advice and consent to
the ratification of the Treaty with Germany that the fifth paragraph of
Article VII and Articles IX and XI of that Treaty should be terminable at
the end of one year was referred to in instruction No. 527 of December 1,
1926. It is necessary that provisions in treaties which this Government may
conclude with other countries corresponding to that paragraph and those
Articles of the Treaty with Germany shall likewise be made terminable at
the end of one year. No provisions similar to the fifth paragraph of Article
VII or Articles IX and XI of the Treaty with Germany were contained in the
draft originally submitted to Austria. The new paragraph of Article VII
suggested on page 3 of instruction No. 527 is, as pointed out in that
instruction, the same as the fifth paragraph of Article VII of the Treaty with
Germany and the sixth paragraph of Article VII of the treaty with Hungary,
enlarged so as to relate to exportations as well as importations. In its
enlarged form it is contained in the Treaties with Estonia and Salvador as
the fifth paragraph of Article VII. In all of these treaties the provision is
terminable at the end of one year.
If the paragraph quoted on page 3 of instruction No. 527 be accepted by
Austria and included in Article VII, it should be made terminable at the end

of one year.
Article XXV of the draft under negotiation should then be replaced by the
following:
“ARTICLE XXV
“Except as provided in the third paragraph of this Article the
present Treaty shall remain in full force for the term of ten years
from the date of the exchange of ratifications, on which date it
shall begin to take effect in all of its provisions.
“If within one year before the expiration of the aforesaid period of
ten years neither High Contracting Party notifies to the other an
intention of modifying by change or omission, any of the
provisions of any of the articles in this Treaty or of terminating it
upon the expiration of the aforesaid period, the Treaty shall
remain in full force and effect after the aforesaid period and until
one year from such a time as either of the High Contracting
Parties shall have notified to the other an intention of modifying
or terminating the Treaty.
“The ——* paragraph of Article VII shall remain in force for
twelve months from the date of exchange of ratifications, and if
not then terminated on ninety days’ previous notice shall remain
in force until either of the High Contracting Parties shall enact
legislation
inconsistent
therewith
when
the
same
shall
automatically lapse at the end of sixty days from such enactment,
and on such lapse each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the
rights which it would have possessed had such paragraphs or
articles not been embraced in the Treaty.”
You will observe that the second paragraph of this Article is the same as the
second paragraph of Article XXV of the original draft and that the new
Article differs from the Article in the original draft by the addition of the
words “Except as provided in the third paragraph of this Article” at the
beginning of the first paragraph and by the addition of the third paragraph.
The third paragraph makes provision for the duration and termination of the

proposed new paragraph of Article VII on the conditions which, pursuant to
the reservation made by the Senate of the United States, apply to the fifth
paragraph of Article VII of the Treaty with Germany, and which also have
been made to apply to the corresponding provision in the Treaties with
Hungary, Estonia and Salvador.
If further questions arising in the course of the negotiations are not too
numerous or complicated the Department will with a view to expediting the
completion of the negotiations be glad to have you report by telegram in
regard to such points as you may desire further instructions.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
79 Not printed.
* Note: Insert fifth or sixth according to the position given the paragraph if
it is included in Article VII. [Footnote in the original.]

[Document 789]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
WASHINGTON, February 24, 1927.
No. 556
SIR: The Department has given consideration to your report, made in your
Sektionschef Doctor Richard Schüller in relation to the Preamble and
Articles I, III, IV, V, and VI of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Consular Rights under negotiation between the United States and Austria.
The Department has noted the tentative character of the results of your
discussions with Doctor Schüller but observes that in your opinion the
agreements reached with him will probably not be overturned by his
colleagues.
Preamble. The Department notes that this Government’s proposal that the
title of the Treaty as stated in the Preamble be “Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Consular Rights” was accepted.
Article I. Right to enter, engage in business, lease land, etc. The Department
notes that Doctor Schüller agreed to waive his request that there be
incorporated in Article I, paragraphs (A), (B), and (C), which were brought
to the Department’s attention on page 3 of your despatch No. 374 of
December 18, 1923, and were restated on page two of the Department’s
is not likely that the Austrian Government will be confronted with demands
on the part of the United States for repayment of costs incurred on behalf of
indigent and mentally deranged Austrian nationals in the United States and
for costs incurred for the burial of dead paupers is approved. Your further
statement to him that it is contrary to the practice of the United States to
insist upon the deportation of indigent and deranged nationals of other

Powers found within its borders unless such nationals come within the
purview of the deportation provisions of the immigration law is likewise
approved.
The Department notes that this Government’s proposal that there be
inserted in the fifth line of the second paragraph of Article I after the word
“taxes”, the words “other or”, so that the expression shall read “taxes other
or higher” was accepted. It is also noted that this Government’s proposal
that a final paragraph be added to Article I providing that nothing in the
Treaty shall be construed to affect existing immigration statutes or the right
of either Party to enact such statutes, was accepted by the Austrian
negotiator. The second paragraph and the final paragraph of Article I as
the Department.
As appears from despatch No. 1106 the points in Article I still unsettled in
the negotiations are the suggestions of the Austrian Government:
(1) That the word “agricultural” be included in the first paragraph
of Article I, so as to provide for the leasing of lands for
agricultural as well as for residential, scientific, religious,
philanthropic,
manufacturing,
commercial
and
mortuary
purposes;
(2) That provision be made in Article I for the acquisition of land
by the nationals of the High Contracting Parties on the same
terms as nationals of the most favored nation.
You state that Doctor Schüller at first waived the first suggestion, and that
though later in the discussions he considered the two suggestions together
with a view to the possibility of agreeing on most-favored nation treatment
in regard to the leasing of land for agricultural purposes as well as in regard
to the acquisition and ownership of land, you feel reasonably certain that he
will not insist upon the insertion of the word “agricultural” in the first
paragraph of the Article. Doctor Schüller suggested that if this Government
would submit a memorandum to the Austrian Government embodying a
general statement explaining that in the United States the regulation of the
ownership of land comes within the competence of the several States and

reciting the general trend of the State laws so far as the Department is
familiar with them, the Austrian Government might say in substance that
reciprocity existed; and that this would obtain for nationals of the United
States the right to acquire and hold land in Austria. It was suggested that
this arrangement might be made by an exchange of notes signed
simultaneously with the Treaty. The Department understands that this
suggestion by Doctor Schüller was tentative, requiring the approval of his
colleagues, and that if it is accepted by both Governments the first
paragraph of Article I as in this Government’s original draft will be
accepted.
The Department recognizes as intimated by Doctor Schüller that it might be
of advantage to the nationals of the United States to have the right to own
land in Austria. It does not believe, however, that the matter is of sufficient
importance to nationals of the United States in Austria or other foreign
countries, to warrant this Government to conclude treaty provisions which
would interfere with the independence of the several States in the regulation
of the matter.
The Department desires that you present the following considerations to the
Austrian Foreign Office as a basis for a possible finding that reciprocity
exists. Under the Federal System of the United States the control of real
property is a function of the States; and barring the granting of rights in
respect of the leasing of land such as are included in the first paragraph of
Article I of the draft under negotiation and of rights in respect of
inheritances and devises such as are provided in the first paragraph of
Article IV, it is the policy of the National Government to refrain from
interfering with that control. This Government’s policy in that respect
extends to the omission from treaties of the most-favored-nation clause as it
relates to the right to acquire or hold real property. It is believed that it
would be unwise for the United States to deviate from its established
course.
The States, generally speaking, have adopted a very liberal policy with
respect to the right of aliens to hold land. According to the information at
the disposal of the Department, the laws of twenty-two States permit aliens
of all nationalities, resident and non-resident, to own unlimited amounts of

land, the laws of five States permit aliens eligible to citizenship, resident or
non-resident, to own unlimited amounts of land, and the laws of one State
permit all aliens, resident or non-resident, with the exception of non-
resident Chinese, to own unlimited amounts of land. Five States permit
resident aliens but not non-resident aliens, to own unlimited amounts of
land, and four States permit resident and non-resident aliens to own limited
amounts of land ranging from 90,000 square feet to 5,000 acres. One State
permits aliens to own land on the basis of reciprocity. In no State do the
laws have the effect of placing Austrian nationals in a position relatively
less favorable than the nationals of any other country. The latest census of
the United States (1920) reveals the fact that approximately 88 per cent of
the aliens of Austrian birth resident in the United States at that time were in
States under whose laws aliens including Austrians may own land. In view
of these facts it would seem that the Austrian Government would be
warranted in saying that reciprocity in respect of the ownership of lands to
all intents and purposes exists in the United States so as to enable nationals
of the United States to enjoy the right to acquire and hold lands in Austria.
A tabulation giving a list of the States in each of the classifications
mentioned above is enclosed.81 You are authorized to give a copy of it to
the Austrian Foreign Office and to agree to an exchange of notes as
supplementary to the treaty under negotiation establishing the right of
nationals of the United States to own land in Austria. Drafts of notes are
enclosed.82 If material changes are made therein the notes should be
submitted to the Department for approval before they are agreed upon. It is
believed that they should not contain the names of the several States as
given in the enclosed tabulation, the summary of the classifications as set
forth in this instruction, or the percentage figure given above of Austrians
residing in States in which aliens may own land.
Should an agreement not be reached on the exchange of notes and the
Austrian Government should not accept the first paragraph of Article I of
the original draft without an accompanying exchange of notes, you are
instructed again to submit the proposal of this Government set out on pages
you on page seven of despatch No. 1106. The proposal was for the

substitution of the following three paragraphs for the present first paragraph
of Article I:
[Here follow the three paragraphs quoted on page 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc.
Article II. Right of recovery in case of injury or death. As no comments in
regard to Article II have been made in any of the despatches received from
the Legation, the Department infers that the Article contained in this
Government’s original draft is acceptable to the Austrian negotiators.
Article III. Respect for dwellings and other premises. The Department notes
that its proposals that the words “and other places of business” be inserted
in the second line of Article III after the word “shops”; that the word “and”
before “shops” be in consequence omitted; and that the words “and all
premises thereto appertaining” in the fifth line be placed immediately after
the newly inserted words, were accepted. Article III will then read as stated
Article IV. Rights of succession to real and personal property. The
Department notes that this Government’s proposal that there be inserted in
the tenth line of the first paragraph of Article IV, after the word “Party”, the
words “whether resident or non-resident”, was accepted.
Article V. Freedom of worship. The Department notes and approves the text
1926.
Article VI. Compulsory military service. The Department notes that Doctor
Schüller agreed to accept Article VI as contained in the draft. You will call
to his attention the fact that a similar Article is contained in the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Eights between the United States and
Treaty of December 8, 1923 between the United States and Germany which
you already have brought to his attention.

JOSEPH C. GREW
81 Not printed.
82 Not printed. The proposal for an exchange of notes was abandoned; see

[Document 790]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1927.
No. 566
SIR: The following instructions in regard to Article VII of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Eights which you are engaged in
negotiating with Austria are supplemental to the Department’s instructions
Article VII. Importations, exportations, most favored nation clause, etc. The
Department desires that you propose to the Austrian Government certain
further additions to the text of Article VII relating particularly to indirect
shipments, to quotas and licenses for the importation or exportation of
restricted goods and to customs formalities. As the United States does not
require certificates of origin to accompany imports from foreign countries
and maintains no prohibitions except for sanitary or other special reasons,
there is no such condition facing Austrian commerce in this country as
faces American commerce in a number of European countries.
Second paragraph. In view of the difficulties that have been encountered by
American merchandise in obtaining most favored nation treatment in
countries which import largely from warehouses in third countries, this
Government desires that the Treaty specifically stipulate that American
products shall enjoy equality of treatment from whatever place arriving. It
has been decided, therefore, to endeavor to have a provision designed to
protect indirect trade inserted in the treaties of friendship, commerce and
consular rights which the United States shall hereafter conclude. The
following paragraph which it is proposed to substitute for the second
paragraph of Article VII of the draft of the Treaty with Austria will also be
proposed in drafts submitted to other countries:

[Here follows the second paragraph of draft article VII quoted infra.]
Fourth paragraph. As you are aware a number of countries, particularly
countries in Central Europe, have established systems of licenses and of
rations or quotas for imports and exports. In some of these countries it has
developed that in practice American commerce has been discriminated
against. In this situation the Department deems it wise to make express
provision in Article VII of the treaty in regard to the treatment which shall
be accorded to American commerce in respect of licenses, quotas and
contingents. In thus attempting to assure for American commerce treatment
which shall be not less favorable than that accorded to other nations in the
matter of licenses and of rations or quotas, this Government is not
proposing to insert in its Treaty with Austria a provision which will be
unique. The same provision will be proposed in treaties of friendship,
commerce and consular rights which the United States will undertake to
negotiate with other countries.
The Department understands that Austria is a party to the International
Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs Formalities signed at
Geneva November 3, 1923,83 which contains stipulations in regard to
prohibitions, restrictions and licenses, and that the matter of prohibitions
and licenses is also dealt with in Article 9 of the Anglo-Austrian Treaty of
the draft under negotiation as interpreted by the Department, the obligations
of Austria under the two above mentioned agreements would be extended to
the United States. Accordingly, it is not desired by this Government to
incorporate in extenso in the Treaty of the United States with Austria the
stipulations of the convention and treaty referred to.
This Government desires, however, that you propose to the Austrian
Government that the following paragraph, which is an adaptation and
amplification of a provision contained in the second paragraph of
exchanges of notes signed by the United States with several countries

Article IX of the Anglo-Austrian Treaty, be inserted in Article VII of the
draft treaty under negotiation as the fourth paragraph thereof:
[Here follows the fourth paragraph of draft article VII quoted infra.]
Fifth paragraph. One further change in Article VII is suggested, It has
developed that in certain customs districts of some countries there is a
practice of affording to some favored nation privileges not accorded to
American commerce. It appears that as such practice is not the result of any
express provision of treaty, laws, or regulations, it may be claimed that it is
not within the most favored nation provisions of the fourth paragraph of the
draft as originally written, now the fifth paragraph. While this Government
has not concurred in such an interpretation of that paragraph, it proposes, in
order to avoid misunderstandings in regard to such practices, to insert in the
paragraph the phrase “by treaty, law, decree, regulation, practice or
otherwise.” As the proposed phrase only clarifies and does not alter the
meaning of the paragraph, it is hoped that the Austrian Government will
have no objection to its acceptance.
The complete text of Article VII revised in accordance with the foregoing
suggestions is as follows:
“ARTICLE VII
“Between the territories of the High Contracting Parties there
shall be freedom of commerce and navigation. The nationals of
each of the High Contracting Parties equally with those of the
most favored nation, shall have liberty freely to come with their
vessels and cargoes to all places, ports and waters of every kind
within the territorial limits of the other which are or may be open
to foreign commerce and navigation. Nothing in this treaty shall
be construed to restrict the right of either High Contracting Party
to impose, on such terms as it may see fit, prohibitions or
restrictions of a sanitary character designed to protect human,
animal or plant life, or regulations for the enforcement of police
or revenue laws.

“Each of the High Contracting Parties binds itself unconditionally
to impose no higher or other duties or charges or bases of such
duties or charges, and no conditions or prohibition on the
importation of any article, the growth, produce or manufacture of
the territories of the other Party, from whatever place arriving,
than are or shall be imposed on the importation of any like article,
the growth, produce or manufacture of any other foreign country;
nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on
importations be made effective retroactively on imports already
cleared through the customs, or on goods declared for entry into
consumption in the country.
“Each of the High Contracting Parties also binds itself
unconditionally to impose no higher or other charges or other
restrictions or prohibitions on goods exported to the territories of
the other High Contracting Party than are imposed on goods
exported to any other foreign country.
“In the event of licenses being issued by either of the High
Contracting Parties for the importation into or exportation from
its territories of articles the importation or exportation of which is
restricted or prohibited, the conditions under which such licenses
may be obtained shall be publicly announced and clearly stated in
such a manner as to enable traders interested to become
acquainted with them; the method of licensing shall be as simple
and unvarying as possible and applications for licenses shall be
dealt with as speedily as possible. Moreover, the conditions under
which such licenses are issued by either of the High Contracting
Parties for goods imported from or exported to the territories of
the other Party shall be as favorable with respect to commodities,
formalities and otherwise as the conditions under which licenses
are issued in respect of any other foreign country. In the event of
rations or quotas being established for the importation or
exportation of articles restricted or prohibited, each of the High
Contracting Parties agrees to grant for the importation from or
exportation to the territories of the other Party an equitable share,
in view of the normal volume of trade in the particular class of

goods between the two countries, in the allocation of the quantity
of restricted goods which may be authorized for importation or
exportation. In the application of the provisions of this paragraph
no distinction shall be made between direct and indirect
shipments. It is agreed, moreover, that in the event either High
Contracting Party shall be engaged in war, it may enforce such
import or export restrictions as may be required by the national
interest.
“Any advantage of whatsoever kind which either High
Contracting Party may extend, by treaty, law, decree, regulation,
practice or otherwise, to any article, the growth, produce or
manufacture of any other foreign country shall simultaneously
and unconditionally, without request and without compensation,
be extended to the like article the growth, produce or manufacture
of the other High Contracting Party.
“With respect to the amount and collection of duties on imports
and exports of every kind, each of the two High Contracting
Parties binds itself to give to the nationals, vessels and goods of
the other the advantage of every favor, privilege or immunity
which it shall have accorded to the nationals, vessels and goods of
a third State, whether such favored State shall have been accorded
such treatment gratuitously or in return for reciprocal
compensatory treatment. Every such favor, privilege or immunity
which shall hereafter be granted the nationals, vessels or goods of
a third State shall simultaneously and unconditionally, without
request and without compensation, be extended to the other High
Contracting Party, for the benefit of itself, its nationals and
vessels.
“The stipulations of this Article do not extend to the treatment
which is accorded by the United States to the commerce of Cuba
under the provisions of the Commercial Convention concluded by
the United States and Cuba on December 11, 1902,86 or any other
commercial convention which hereafter may be concluded by the
United States with Cuba, or to the commerce of the United States

with any of its dependencies and the Panama Canal Zone under
existing or future laws.”
You will note that in the above quoted draft of Article VII no exception in
favor of Austrian trade with Czechoslovakia or Hungary is included. Should
the Austrian Government insist on such an exception, you will recall that
you are authorized to agree to it in the terms set out on page 2 of instruction
It is believed that if Article VII as set out above is accepted by Austria a
sufficient assurance will have been given of equality of treatment for the
commerce of the United States with that of every other country. As equality
of treatment of Austrian commerce with that of other foreign countries in
the United States is secured by the Treaty, it is believed that the interests of
both parties will be conserved by the Article as re-drafted.
Article XXV. Duration and termination of Treaty. The inclusion of the new
paragraph proposed above as the fourth paragraph of Article VII may
necessitate a change in the provisions of the third paragraph of Article XXV
relating to the termination of the Treaty. You will recall that a suggested
new paragraph of Article VII was set out on page 3 of instruction No. 527
of December 1, 1926, and that a special mode of termination was provided
the insertion of the new fourth paragraph quoted above, it will be necessary
to reconsider Article XXV, so that the paragraph proposed on page 3 of
instruction No. 527, if included in the Treaty shall be referred to by its
proper number.
FRANK B. KELLOGG
83 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. XXX, p. 371.
85 For notes exchanged with Estonia, Finland, Lithuania, and Poland, see

692  ff.; for those with Haiti, Latvia, and Rumania, see ibid., 1926, vol.  II,

[Document 791]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, April 30, 1927.
[Received May 14.]
No. 1372
SIR: I have the honor formally to acknowledge the receipt of the
2nd, 1927, incorporating instructions in regard to the provisions of the
proposed Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights between the
United States and Austria. I have the honor further to acknowledge the
President’s full power authorizing me to sign such a treaty as finally
approved by the Department.
For the reason explained in the concluding sentence of my despatch No.
in the preliminary stages of the negotiations. When we have agreed upon
the text he will summon his associates for the final joint sessions and I do
not doubt but that he will be able to secure their adhesion without material
alteration. Schüller is much away from Vienna in connection with his
Foreign Office duties (he has recently spent much time in Prague in an
effort to reach an agreement with Czechoslovakia with regard to a new
commercial treaty) and he is leaving on Monday to attend the Economic
Conference at Geneva. He heads the Austrian delegation and expects to be
absent about a month. He has assured me that in the month between the
middle of June and the middle of July he will be able to work intensively
with me on our Treaty, and he hopes to have it concluded and signed before
he goes away on his summer vacation. I am confident that the final draft
can be in Washington in ample time for submission to the Senate when it
reassembles in December.

Meanwhile I have taken some forward steps and, subject to the reservation
mentioned on page 3 of my hereinbefore mentioned despatch No. 1106, I
herewith report progress:
Article VII. This has been passed for the present. Some fundamental and
far-reaching amendments to this Article have been suggested, as the
Department is aware, in before-mentioned Instruction No. 566 which the
Austrian Government desires to examine carefully. It is possible that
objections may be raised to some of the phraseology proposed but in
principle, if I understand Dr. Schüller correctly, he will not object to
affirmative provisions dealing with quotas and licences and customs
formalities.
Article VIII. The suggestion of the United States that the words “internal
taxes” be inserted in the seventh line after the word “to” so as to read “with
regard to internal taxes, transit duties,” etc., is accepted.
The Austrian Government is still of the opinion that there is a certain
inconsistency between Articles VIII and XIII (see page 5 of the
Department’s Instruction No. 527). Dr. Schüller is unable to see how
“transit duties” (Article VIII) could be imposed upon goods imported into
the United States or Austria. I pointed out however that some question of
transit duties might conceivably arise with respect to goods temporarily
warehoused, for example, in Vienna and ultimately destined for distribution
in the neighboring States. In view of this and inasmuch as the alleged
conflicting provisions in Articles VIII and XIII appear in our treaty with
Germany, Schüller is content to waive further objection.
The only modification of Article VIII is contained in the insertion of the
words “internal taxes” as above explained.
Article X. The Austrian Government desires to add at the end of the first
paragraph of this Article “The foregoing stipulations do not apply to the
organization of and participation in political organizations.” This is in
accordance with the understanding of the Austrian Government, but in the
interest of uniformity it is thought best to incorporate the proposal of the
German negotiators.

Article XI. There appears to be a misconception on the part of the
Department with respect to the interpretation to be placed upon the Austrian
Trade Law (Gewerbeordnung #59) quoted on page 15 of my despatch No.
pages 6 and 7, it is stated:
“Apparently Austrian law forbids commercial travelers to take
orders for merchandise from the consumer but allows them to sell
their merchandise only to merchants, industrials and tradesmen.
… If commercial travelers representing American concerns are
permitted to sell their samples to merchants, industrials or
tradesmen, the privilege granted by paragraph (c) would be
fulfilled. The Austrian law referred to in your despatch does not,
therefore, justify the omission of paragraph (c).”
Austrian municipal law does not in truth and in fact permit commercial
travelers to sell to anybody. They may only take orders for merchandise
from merchants, industrials and tradesmen. For this purpose they may carry
samples, but no merchandise is to be sold directly, and therefore samples
may not be sold. The law upon this matter is very stringent and is regarded
as almost fundamental and organic, as I have hitherto reported. The main
reason for this distinction appears to lie in the fact that commercial travelers
pay no taxes. Merchants and tradesmen do pay taxes upon their businesses
and upon their sales and to permit commercial travelers to sell, even if their
privilege of selling were restricted to samples only, would be deemed unfair
competition. It is pointed out that a commercial traveler might conceivably
have and legitimately require a large line of samples. Even under the
existing practice it is difficult to control the disposition of these samples and
it is possible that some of them find their way into domestic consumption
without the sanction of the law. Commercial travelers who are Austrian
nationals may not sell their samples. The Austrian Government could not
possibly grant a greater privilege to commercial travelers who are not
Austrian nationals.
Because of the settled policy of Austrian municipal law in this respect it is
insisted that section (c) must go out. In view of this explanation further
instructions upon this point become necessary and as the issue here

involved is not too complicated, I am disposed to telegraph for the desired
authority in accordance with the suggestion contained in the concluding
paragraph of Instruction No. 552 of February 11th last.
As to section (g), the Austrian Government adheres to the view that it
would be preferable to retain only so much of the text of the original draft
as is embraced in the following words, to wit:
“Salesmen who vend directly to the consumer shall not be
considered commercial travelers.”
Dr. Schüller does not himself, however, object seriously to retaining the
original phraseology of section (g) as proposed by the Department if the
United States especially wishes its retention, but he thinks that the provision
especially enumerating peddlers would be surplusage in view of the
Austrian policy with respect to peddlers explained on page 16 of my before-
mentioned despatch No. 374.
To sum up, section (c) is inacceptable to the Austrian Government. The
Austrian Government prefers that section (g) be modified in the interest of
clarity as hereinbefore explained, but will not stand out against the retention
of the original draft. If section (c) be omitted a relettering of some of the
sections of Article XI will, of course, become necessary as the Department
suggests in its before-mentioned Instruction No. 527.
Article XII. The Austrian Government takes note that the United States
accepts the amendment proposed by it to section (c), namely to strike out
everything after the semi-colon in line 5, so that the paragraph will read as
stated on page 9 of the Department’s Instruction No. 527. The proposal of
the United States to insert the words “or other competent authorities” in the
third line of the second paragraph of section (b) of Article XII after the
word “officials” and to strike out the word “customs” in the ninth line of
this same section, so that the section as amended will read as set forth on
page 10 of the Department’s Instruction No. 527, is accepted.
Article XV. As a result of considerable discussion and explanation and in
the interest of uniformity the proposal to substitute for the first paragraph of
Article XV the first paragraph of Article XVIII of the Treaty with Germany,

so as to subject Consular officers to prosecution for “offenses locally
designated as crimes other than misdemeanors”, is accepted. The amended
paragraph will therefore read as set forth on page 3 of the Department’s
Instruction No. 552. Dr. Schüller is inclined to agree that the paragraph as
amended does meet the criticisms of the original paragraph made by the
Austrian negotiators.
The Austrian Government notes that the Department confirms my
explanation to the Austrian experts that the proposed treaty provision will
effect no change in existing judicial procedure as respects courts in which
Austrian consular officers in the United States may be impleaded.
With respect to the suggestion made by the Austrian negotiators that in
criminal cases consular officers may be required to testify only as to matters
1924,88 I went over with Dr. Schüller the provision in the original draft, to
wit:
“In criminal cases the attendance at the trial by a consular officer
as a witness may be demanded by the prosecution or defense. The
demand shall be made with all possible regard for the consular
dignity and the duties of the office; and there shall be compliance
on the part of the consular officer.”
He seemed to regard it as satisfactory and did not press his objection. I
think we shall hear nothing further from the objection, but I did not judge it
advisable to discuss the matter at length in view of Schüller’s attitude. I
may say in this connection that Schüller was at first reluctant at this time to
discuss any of the consular provisions in the absence of Dr. Leitmaier, Chief
of the Bureau of Affairs of International Law, but he finally concluded that
some articles could be discussed, especially after summoning Baron
Sammaruga [Sommaruga] of this Bureau who participated in the latest
conference.
Article XVI. Neither Dr. Schüller nor Baron Sammaruga [Sammaruga], after
examining their memoranda, appeared to desire to press the objection raised
to the first paragraph of this Article as set forth on page 20 of my despatch
No. 374. I am assuming that the language of the original draft of the first

paragraph will therefore stand as proposed by the United States. It is, of
course, possible that in full conference the Austrian negotiators may come
back to this point, but I do not apprehend any difficulty with it.
The word “governmental” in line 7 of the second paragraph of Article XVI
has been stricken out and in lieu thereof the words “diplomatic or consular”
have been inserted in accordance with the Austrian proposal. This second
paragraph will therefore read as set forth on page 10 of the Department’s
Instruction No. 552.
Article XVII. The Austrian Government is not disposed to press its
suggestions with respect to this Article as set forth on page 22 of my
events, recognizes the inadequacy of legislative authority inherent in the
American Federal Government in enforcing the proposed penal provisions.
He noted that the proposed Article XVII conforms precisely with Article
XX of the Treaty of the United States with Germany and Article XVII of
the Treaty with Hungary.
At this point the discussions were adjourned. Dr. Schüller was especially
anxious to consult with Dr. Leitmaier, hereinbefore mentioned, with respect
to Article XX dealing with the competency of consular officers to take
charge of property of deceased nationals and to qualify as administrators.
I have [etc.]
[No signature]
87 Not printed.
88 Not printed.
89 Not printed.

[Document 792]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, June 23, 1927.
No. 602
relating to the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights under
negotiation between the United States and Austria. It has been noted that
you have preferred to deal with Dr. Schüller directly in the preliminary
stages of the negotiations and that the understandings reached with Dr.
Schüller on the articles reported upon in despatch No. 1372 are subject to
consideration by and approval of certain of his associates, although Baron
Sommaruga of the Bureau of Affairs of International Law participated in
the discussions on the consular articles.
Article VII. Importations, exportations, most favored nation clause, etc.
Note has been made of the fact that Article VII has been passed for the
present, the Austrian Government desiring to examine carefully the
amendments suggested by this Government in instruction No. 566 of April
Article VIII. Internal taxes, transit duties, etc. The Department has noted
that its suggestion that the words “internal taxes” be inserted in the seventh
line of Article VIII after the word “to” so as to read “with regard to internal
taxes, transit duties”, et cetera has been accepted by Dr. Schüller, and that
he has waived his objection to the term “transit duties” in this Article. The
Article therefore will read as set forth on page 5 of instruction No. 527 of
December 1, 1926.
Article X. Right to organize corporations. It has been noted that Dr.
Schüller desires the insertion of the sentence “The foregoing stipulations do
not apply to the organization of and participation in political associations”

at the end of the first paragraph of Article X to which the Department
indicated in instruction No. 527 it would be willing to agree. It is
understood, therefore, that the final draft of the Treaty will contain this
sentence.
Article XI. Commercial travelers. The Department has noted from your
explanation that the Austrian Trade Law does not permit commercial
travelers to sell to anyone and that the prohibition extends even to the sale
of samples by salesmen of Austrian nationality. You state that the law is
regarded as almost fundamental and organic. In view of your statements the
Department is disposed to accept the Austrian suggestion that section (c) of
article XI be stricken out. In agreeing to the omission of this section the
Department would like to receive the assurance of the Austrian negotiators
that if during the life of the Treaty the right stipulated in section (c) should
be conferred by law, treaty or otherwise upon commercial travelers of any
other country, the same right would be extended to American commercial
travelers in Austria by virtue of section (i) of Article XI. As noted in your
despatch under acknowledgment the omission of section (c) will necessitate
the relettering of all the sections of Article XI following section (b).
In the interest of uniformity in the treaties of the United States and of the
possibility of peddlers of Austrian nationality vending wares in the United
States, the Department would like to retain section (g) as it appears in the
original draft. Inasmuch, however, as it agreed on page 8 of instruction No.
directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travellers” as a
sufficient provision in regard to this matter, you are authorized to adopt that
provision in lieu of section (g) of the original draft.
Article XII. Commercial travelers. Note has been made of the fact that
Austrian negotiators have accepted this Government’s suggestion that the
words “or other competent authorities” be inserted in the third line of the
second paragraph of section (b) of Article XII after the word “officials” and
that accordingly the word “customs” in the ninth line of the same paragraph
should be stricken out. The section as amended will read as set forth on
page 10 of instruction No. 527.

Article XV. Criminal and civil jurisdiction over consular officers. The
Department notes that the Austrian negotiators agreed to substitute for the
first paragraph of Article XV of the original draft a paragraph similar to the
first paragraph of Article XVIII of the Treaty of 1923 between the United
States and Germany which is quoted on page 3 of instruction No. 552 of
February 11, 1927, so as to subject consular officers to prosecution for
“offenses locally designated as crimes other than misdemeanors.”
It is further noted that the Austrian negotiators apparently regarded the
second paragraph of Article XV as contained in the original draft as
satisfactory and did not press the suggestion first made that the paragraph
be altered to provide specifically that in criminal cases consular officers
may be required to testify only as to matters of fact. As pointed out in
instruction No. 552, the Department is of the opinion that the provision of
the original draft satisfactorily covers the situation, and it is therefore
pleased to note your opinion that the Austrian suggestion will be dropped.
Article XVI. Exemption of consular officers and Government property from
taxation. The Department notes your statement that the Austrian negotiators
apparently did not desire to press the objection originally raised to the first
paragraph of Article XVI relating to the taxation of income of consular
officers derived from other than immovable property as that objection was
that therefore you assume that the paragraph will stand as proposed by the
United States, but that it is possible that in full conference the Austrian
negotiators will return to it.
You state that in accordance with instruction No. 552 authorizing you to
accept the Austrian suggestion on the point, the word “governmental” in
line 7 of the second paragraph of Article XVI has been stricken out and
“diplomatic or consular” inserted in lieu thereof and that the paragraph will
therefore read as set forth on page 10 of Instruction No. 552.
Article XVII. Privileges of consular officers. The Department notes your
statement that the Austrian Government was not disposed to press its
suggestion as set forth on page 22 of your despatch No. 374 of December
provision be made in Article XVII for the protection of consular titles, arms

and flags against illegal use. It is presumed therefore that the Article will
remain as written in the original draft.
The Department is pleased with the manner in which you are conducting
the negotiations and with the success with which you are maintaining this
Government’s position. It is hoped that you will be able to make steady
progress in the further negotiations so that the Treaty may be signed in
ample time for submission to the Senate at the session which will convene
in December.
If further questions arising in the course of the negotiations are not too
numerous or complicated, the Department will with a view to expediting
the completion of negotiations be glad to have you report by telegram in
regard to such points as you may desire further instructions.
was not signed. I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
90 Latter not printed.

[Document 793]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, June 30, 1927.
No. 605
SIR: In further reference to Articles XI and XII of the Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Consular Rights, under negotiation between the United
States and Austria, you are instructed as follows:
You may call the attention of the Austrian negotiators to Article XIV of the
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights, between the United
States and Estonia, signed December 23, 1925, two copies of which are
enclosed,91 which contains a most favored nation clause in regard to the
treatment of commercial travelers, and to paragraph 2 of the Protocol of that
Treaty relating to certificates of identification of such travelers. (Treaty
Series No. 736).
If the Government of Austria should desire the substitution of an Article
stipulating generally for most favored nation treatment for commercial
travelers instead of Articles XI and XII of the draft under negotiation, this
Government would be willing to give consideration to agreeing thereto.
An article drafted by this Government combining the provisions of
paragraph 2 of the Protocol of the Treaty with Estonia, somewhat modified,
with Article XIV of that Treaty, has been included in drafts of treaties of
friendship, commerce and consular rights which this Government has
submitted to other countries. The Article reads:
“Commercial travelers representing manufacturers, merchants
and traders domiciled in the territories of either High Contracting
Party shall on their entry into and sojourn in the territories of the
other Party and on their departure therefrom be accorded the most

favored nation treatment in respect of customs and other
privileges and of all charges and taxes of whatever denomination
applicable to them or to their samples.
“If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an
authentic document establishing the identity and authority of a
commercial traveler, a signed statement by the concern or
concerns represented, certified by a consular officer of the
country of destination shall be accepted as satisfactory.”
You will observe that the first paragraph provides for the most favored
nation treatment of commercial travelers representing manufacturers,
merchants, or traders, domiciled in the territories of one of the Contracting
Parties upon their entrance into, sojourn within and departure from the
territories of the other. The second paragraph covers the cases where a
certificate of identity of the commercial traveler may be required. This
Government will be glad to agree to the inclusion of this Article in the
treaty under negotiation with Austria instead of Articles XI and XII of the
original draft, if after consideration of the facts in regard to the treatment
which would be accorded under such an Article to American commercial
travelers in Austria, it should decide that that treatment would be
satisfactory. Under the Article stipulating for most favored nation treatment,
Austrian commercial travelers in the United States would be entitled to the
benefit of the provisions of Articles XI and XII of the Treaty of 1925
between the United States and Hungary and of Articles XIV and XV of the
Treaty of 1923 between the United States and Germany, so long as those
treaties remain in force. It is to be noted, therefore, that Austrian
commercial travelers in the United States will enjoy the same treatment
under the most favored nation clause as they would enjoy under Articles XI
and XII as originally drafted. Before you agree to the insertion of this
Article in the Treaty with Austria the Department would be glad to receive
from you a report on the treatment which American commercial travelers in
Austria would be entitled to receive thereunder in order that further
instructions may be given you in regard to it. The Department is taking this
question up with the Department of Commerce which may already have
sufficient information in regard to the treatment accorded commercial
travelers under Austrian laws and regulations, to enable this Government to

reach a decision and telegraph instructions to you before receiving a report
from you.
The Department does not desire to introduce any new questions into the
negotiations with Austria which would cause delay in completing them. It
will be satisfactory to this Government if, before further instructions are
sent to you concerning the provisions relating to commercial travelers, the
Treaty is signed having Articles XI and XII of the original draft included
therein, modified pursuant to your despatches and the Department’s
instructions preceding this instruction. It is thought, however, that
consideration of the foregoing by the Legation and the Austrian Foreign
Office may be useful.
Two copies of the Article in regard to commercial travelers hereinabove
quoted are enclosed. If it is included in the Treaty, Articles XI and XII of
the draft should be dropped out, the new Article should be numbered
Article XI and Articles XIII and following of the draft should be
renumbered Articles XII and following.
FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 794]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, July 11, 1927.
[Received July 25.]
No. 1468
SIR: I have the honor to report the practical termination of the negotiations of
a treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights with Austria. I have
heretofore taken the precaution of pointing out to the Government that my
agreement with Dr. Schüller were necessarily tentative, but that I felt
confident that he would in the main be able to override his colleagues in
plenary session if the necessity therefor should arise. I am happy to be able
to now say that Dr. Schüller has stood loyally by his understanding with me.
He notified me in advance confidentially that there would be various
objections raised in the plenary sessions, but that he would do his best “to
kill them” so far as he consistently could.
I now review as concisely as possible the chief articles which were the
subject of the most controversy. Only Articles VII, XI and XII will require
further consideration by the Department:
Article I. Right to enter, engage in business, lease land etc. The Austrian
negotiators came back to paragraphs (A), (B) and (C) set forth on page 3 of
time reluctant to abandon these provisions, but finally did so upon a
rehearsal of the arguments I had hitherto employed with Dr. Schüller as
recapitulated briefly on page 2 of the Instruction last under reference.
The Austrian proposal providing for the leasing and owning of agricultural
lands caused more difficulty. In the initial sessions Schüller and his
colleagues were inclined to think that this difficulty might be cured by an

exchange of notes, as authorized on page 6 of Instruction 556, based on the
tabulation of State laws regarding alien ownership of real property
transmitted with this Instruction. There was a disposition to agree that
substantial reciprocity existed, but on further reflection the legal experts of
the Foreign Office reached the conclusion that under such an arrangement,
under Austrian judicial procedure the courts would insist upon examining
each case arising here on its merits, a procedure which would prove clumsy,
and perhaps embarrassing. In the end, therefore, it was decided to adopt the
proposal for the substitution of the three paragraphs set forth on pages 6 and
these three paragraphs appear in lieu of the former first paragraph of Article
I.
The main difficulty was, however, regarding the inclusion of the final
paragraph providing that nothing in the treaty shall be considered to affect
existing immigration statutes or the right of either party to enact such
statutes. There was a very strong preference expressed by Schüller’s
colleagues for the procedure followed in the cases of the treaties with
Germany and Hungary, namely for the omission of the paragraph, the
Senate reservation and the exchange of notes. I pointed out that the German
and Hungarian treaties were negotiated before the Senate acted, but it
having acted, the Department would feel that it was inviting adverse
criticism if it should submit a future treaty without such a corresponding
provision. The fact that such a provision was incorporated in the subsequent
treaty with Esthonia made no impression on the Austrian negotiators. They
cared nothing for Esthonia but attached much importance to the German
and Hungarian precedents; they finally receded however, but I was warned
that the inclusion of this final paragraph would lead to a parliamentary
attack when the treaty came up for ratification—perhaps from
representatives of all parties, inasmuch as the very small Austrian quota
affects this country adversely. The separation of families consequent upon
the operation of the immigration law is the subject of much complaint to
which cabinet ministers and deputies have constantly to pay heed. It was the
opinion of the negotiators that a Senatorial reservation and an exchange of
notes would not attract so much attention.
As to this Article, therefore, the American proposals are all accepted.

Article VI. Compulsory military service. This provision stands as originally
drawn, though Schüller’s colleagues came back to the original suggestion of
dropping the provision and taking care of the subject matter by an exchange
of notes.
Article VII. Importations, exportations, most favored nation clause, etc. The
consideration of this article, which has been greatly amplified, as the
Department is aware, by Instruction 566 of April 2 last, required numerous
conferences and sessions. I may say in this connection that the greatest
obstacles were interposed by the Department of Commerce, and the Foreign
Office felt that the desires of a coordinate branch of the Government, in
some cases strongly expressed, could not be lightly waved aside. The
argument which I had so often invoked with respect to other articles,
namely the desirability of uniformity so as to have the Austrian provisions
correspond with the German and Hungarian, was in this instance turned
against me. Nevertheless it was conceded that the Austrian Government had
been a party to the International Agreement concluded at Geneva on
aware, with import and export prohibitions and restrictions, and there was
no real objection to concluding a similar agreement with the United States. I
herewith submit a revised draft of Article VII (sometimes expressed in the
alternative) to conform to the Austrian views:
“Between the territories of the High Contracting Parties there
shall be freedom of commerce and navigation. The nationals of
each of the High Contracting Parties equally with those of the
most favored nation, shall have liberty freely to come with their
vessels and cargoes to all places, ports and waters of every kind
within the territorial limits of the other which are or may be open
to foreign commerce and navigation. Nothing in this treaty shall
be construed to restrict the right of either High Contracting Party
to impose, on such terms as it may see fit, prohibitions or
restrictions of a sanitary character designed to protect human,
animal or plant life, or regulations for the enforcement of police
or revenue laws.

“Each of the High Contracting Parties binds itself unconditionally
to impose no higher or other duties or charges or bases of such
duties or charges, and no conditions or prohibition on the
importation of any article, the growth, produce or manufacture of
the territories of the other Party, from whatever place arriving,
than are or shall be imposed on the importation of any like article,
the growth, produce or manufacture of any other foreign country;
nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on
importations be made effective retroactively. (Or the last clause
may read: ‘nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions, or
prohibitions on importations be made effective retroactively on
imports already cleared through the customs, or on goods
declared for entry into consumption in the country, but it is
understood that prohibitions on importations existing at the time
the imports are cleared through the customs may nevertheless be
applied’)
“Each of the High Contracting Parties also binds itself
unconditionally to impose no higher or other charges or other
restrictions or prohibitions on goods exported to the territories of
the other High Contracting Party than are imposed on goods
exported to any other foreign country.
“In the event of licenses being issued by either of the High
Contracting Parties for the importation into or exportation from
its territories of articles the importation or exportation of which is
restricted or prohibited, the conditions under which such licenses
may be obtained shall be publicly announced and clearly stated in
such a manner as to enable traders interested to become
acquainted with them; the method of licensing shall be as simple
and unvarying as possible and applications for licenses shall be
dealt with as speedily as possible. Moreover, the conditions under
which such licenses are issued by either of the High Contracting
Parties for goods imported from or exported to the territories of
the other Party shall be as favorable with respect to commodities,
formalities, and otherwise as the conditions under which licenses
are issued in respect of any other foreign country. In the event of

rations or quotas being established for the importation or
exportation of articles restricted or prohibited, each of the High
Contracting Parties agrees to grant for the importation from or
exportation or the territories of the other Party an equitable share,
in view of the normal volume of trade in the particular class of
goods between the two countries, in the allocation of the quantity
of restricted goods which may be authorized for importation or
exportation. In the application of the provisions of this paragraph
no distinction shall be made between direct and indirect
shipments. It is agreed, moreover, that in the event either High
Contracting Party shall be engaged in war, it may enforce such
import or export restrictions as may be required by the national
interest.
“(In lieu of the sentence above stricken out, beginning: ‘In the
event of rations or quotas, etc.’ the following sentence will be
acceptable to the Austrian Government: ‘In the event of rations or
quotas being established for the importation or exportation of
articles restricted or prohibited, the formalities required by the
importing or exporting country shall not be such as to prevent an
equitable allocation of the quantities of goods of which the
importation or exportation is authorized.’)
“Any advantages of whatsoever kind which either High
Contracting Party may extend, by treaty, law, decree, regulations,
practice or otherwise, to any article, the growth, produce or
manufacture of any other foreign country shall simultaneously
and unconditionally, without request and without compensation
be extended to the like article, the growth, produce or
manufacture of the other High Contracting Party.
“All articles which are or may be legally imported from foreign
countries into ports of the United States or are or may be legally
exported therefrom in vessels of the United States may likewise
be imported into those ports or exported therefrom in Austrian
vessels, without being liable to any other or higher duties or
charges whatsoever than if such articles were imported or

exported in vessels of the United States; and, reciprocally, all
articles which are or may be legally imported from foreign
countries into the ports of Austria or are or may be legally
exported therefrom in Austrian vessels may likewise be imported
into these ports or exported therefrom in vessels of the United
States without being liable to any other or higher duties or
charges whatsoever than if such articles were imported or
exported in Austrian vessels.
“With respect to the amount and collection of duties on imports
and exports of every kind, each of the two High Contracting
Parties binds itself to give to the nationals, vessels and goods of
the other the advantage of every favor, privilege or immunity
which it shall have accorded to the nationals, vessels and goods of
a third State, whether such favored State shall have been accorded
such treatment gratuitously or in return for reciprocal
compensatory treatment. Every such favor, privilege or immunity
which shall hereafter be granted the nationals, vessels or goods of
a third State shall simultaneously and unconditionally, without
request and without compensation, be extended to the other High
Contracting Party, for the benefit of itself, its nationals and
vessels.
“The stipulations of this Article do not extend to the treatment
which either High Contracting Party shall accord to adjoining
states to facilitate border traffic or to the treatment which is
accorded by the United States to the commerce of Cuba under the
provisions of the Commercial Convention concluded by the
United States and Cuba on December 11, 1902, or any other
commercial convention which hereafter may be concluded by the
United States with Cuba, or to the commerce of the United States
with any of its dependencies and the Panama Canal Zone under
existing or future laws.”
or:
“The stipulations of this Article shall not extend to the treatment
which either Contracting Party shall accord to purely border

traffic within a zone not exceeding ten miles (15 kilometres) wide
on either side of its customs frontier, or to the treatment which is
accorded by the United States to the commerce of Cuba under the
provisions of the Commercial Convention concluded by the
United States and Cuba on December 11, 1902, or any other
commercial convention which hereafter may be concluded by the
United States with Cuba, or to the commerce of the United States
with any of its dependencies and the Panama Canal Zone under
existing or future laws.”
Comparing this revised draft with the draft proposed by the Department on
clause in the third line of paragraph 2, to wit, “or bases of such duties or
charges” is objected to on the ground that it does not appear in the text of
the German or Hungarian treaties, and that its meaning is obscure. The
words “nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on
importations be made effective retroactively on imports already cleared
through the customs or on goods declared for entry into consumption in the
country” are of course also new, and not found in the German or Hungarian
treaties. There was no objection, however, to adding the words “nor shall
any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on importations be
made effective retroactively”. There was a willingness to accept all of the
new language proposed, provided there be added the words: “but it is
understood that prohibitions on importations existing at the time the imports
are cleared through the customs may nevertheless be applied”. The Austrian
difficulty is this. The negotiators are quite willing to agree that duties,
charges, conditions and prohibitions shall not be retroactive, but they say
certain import prohibitions cannot be applied until after importation. For
example, obscene reading matter would, under the Austrian customs
system, encounter little or no difficulty on entry, although an import
prohibition exists against it, but it would subsequently very likely be
confiscated by the police. A film might be imported without difficulty—
customs officials could not judge of its character—but it could not be
exposed until it had received the approval of the censors. Therefore some
language is desired to save the right of making such import prohibitions in
force at the time of entry effective after the goods have been cleared
through the customs. The language here proposed is my own, incorporating

the idea expressed to me in German. I trust that the Department, in view of
the Austrian difficulty, will see no real objection to it. It is possible,
however, that the Department may prefer to stop with the word
“retroactively”. Under our practice “estimated duties” are always imposed
by collectors on merchandise cleared through the customs, and it sometimes
happens that these “estimated duties” do not always agree with the amount
of duties ascertained to be due several months later on final liquidation. I
frequently encountered such cases in my former practice. It might be wise
on this account, in order to avoid diplomatic complaints against the United
States, to stop with the word “retroactively”, though if the entire wording as
proposed by the Department be preserved, the addition of the words “but it
is understood that prohibitions on importations existing at the time the
imports are cleared through the customs may nevertheless be applied” will
not, I think, weaken the principle for which the Department is contending.
As to paragraph 4 of this article as proposed by the United States, the
Austrian Government objects to the words “with respect to commodities,
formalities and otherwise”. The word “commodities” does not appear
anywhere in the International Agreement of November 3, 1923, and the
words “and otherwise” are thought to be too vague. The sentence
beginning: “In the event of rations and quotas being established, etc.” is
objected to as suggested by the United States. There is no objection in lieu
of this sentence to adopting this phraseology, to wit: “In the event of rations
or quotas being established for the importation or exportation of articles
restricted or prohibited, the formalities required by the importing or
exporting country shall not be such as to prevent an equitable allocation of
the quantities of goods of which the importation or exportation is
authorized”. This is in conformity with the language found in article 3 (e) of
was a French proposal. It will be observed that it simply stipulates that the
formalities shall not be such as to prevent an equitable allocation, etc. This
language is somewhat limited and the Department may regard it as
unsatisfactory. My attention is drawn to the fact that at the recent World
Economic Conference at Geneva in its final report there was a
recommendation that there should be a new definition of the most favored
nation principle, and Dr. Schüller tells me that the American delegates were
prominent in advocating this. The Austrian delegates make the point that

France does not recognize that the favored nation principle applies to
rations or quotas or contingents, but that if the American proposal in this
regard were accepted by Austria, it would probably expose Austria to a
claim by France for favored nation treatment in this respect which would be
unilateral, as France would not concede it in return. If this particular
provision, which now finds its counterpart in article 3 (e) of the
International Agreement of November 3, 1923, should be modified by a
new international agreement to which the United States would not be a
party, the Austrian Government stands ready to stipulate by an exchange of
notes that favored nation treatment should be accorded to us. To re-state this
matter: The language proposed by the United States is unacceptable,
because it would enlarge Austria’s obligations under the application of the
favored nation principle, but if a more liberal provision be adopted by
international agreement, Austria will bind itself to give us the benefit of it.
Under such conditions, it would seem advisable to eliminate altogether the
sentence beginning: “In the event of rations or quotas being established”,
and I trust that this recommendation will meet with the Department’s
approval.
There was some objection to the word “war” in the last sentence of this
paragraph 4. It was desired to substitute, “in times of national emergency”,
but this objection was not pressed.
It will be noted that paragraph 6 of article VII incorporates the so-called
“shipping clause” authorized by the Department on page 3 of Instruction
XXV in accordance with the views set forth on page 8 of Instruction 566 of
April 2.
Finally, in the concluding paragraph of article VII, the Minister of
Commerce desired to incorporate language conferring the privilege
accorded in the final paragraph of article VII of the treaty between the
United States and Germany. The Austrian Government would prefer the
language: “The stipulations of this article do not extend to the treatment
which either High Contracting Party shall accord to adjoining states to
facilitate border traffic” but would be content with this language, more
closely corresponding to the text in the German treaty, to wit: “The

stipulations of this article shall not extend to the treatment which either
Contracting Party shall accord to purely border traffic within a zone not
exceeding ten miles (15 kilometres) on either side of its customs frontier”.
If the Department sees no particular objection, I should be glad if the
preference of the Austrian Government could be approved.
Article XI. Commercial travelers. This article has been amended in
accordance with the authority accorded on pages 2 and 3 of Department’s
proposes to add at the end of the first sentence of paragraph (a) of this
article: “Commercial travelers shall not be subject to any other fee or tax on
account of such activity”. This is also a recent proposal of the Department
of Commerce. It is said that in some of the Succession States an attempt has
been made to tax Austrian commercial travelers upon the proceeds of sales
made by them. This has happened especially in Czechoslovakia, and the
insertion of such a clause in the treaty between the United States and
Austria would strengthen the attitude of Austria upon this point, and would
be much appreciated.
Article XII. Commercial travelers. The changes made, noted on pages 3 and
the Austrian Government, pursuant to the desires of the Ministry of
Commerce, proposes to strike out paragraph (d) in regard to advertising
matter brought by commercial travelers in appropriate quantities. The
Austrian law imposes a tax on advertising matter, except in very small
quantities, brought in by commercial travelers, as it would on any other
printed matter. The negotiators did not fail to note that this particular
provision is “subject to the customs laws of the respective countries” in
accordance with its express terms, but nevertheless they thought that the
words “appropriate quantities” would be prolific of constant controversies,
under cover of the favored nation principle, with the Succession States. The
policy of the Austrian law in this respect is fixed, and inasmuch as this
principle is recognized, it is felt that to introduce a provision which might
lay the foundation for controversy would be most unwise. The Department
of Commerce is most insistent upon this particular point.

The Foreign Office gives notice of its intention to notify me, with reference
to the wording of sub-paragraph (c), that under Austrian law, commercial
travelers are not allowed to sell to consumers. This is indirectly said in sub-
paragraph (f) of Article XI.
Article XV. Criminal and civil jurisdiction over consular officers. I have
already reported upon this article in my despatch No. 1372 of April 30.
There will be no change in it, though in plenary session Schüller’s
associates were disposed to press the objection that consular officers could
only be called upon to testify as to matters of fact. The argument embodied
Article XVI. Exemptions of consular officers and government property from
taxation. There was some difficulty here in persuading Schüller’s
colleagues to agree to the provision as revised on page 9 of Instructions 552
of February 11. The objection was chiefly to the language: “except taxes
levied on account of the possession or ownership of immovable property
situated in, or income derived from sources within the territories of the
State within which they exercise their functions”. The Austrian negotiators
desired this language: “except taxes levied on account of income derived
from any property situated within the territories of the State within which
they exercise their functions, according to the laws of that State, upon all
foreigners who have no domicile or residence within that State”. The
American language was, however, ultimately accepted.
Article XX. Competency of consular officers to take charge of property of
deceased nationals, qualify as administrator, etc. The Austrian amendments
as recited on page 11 of Department’s Instruction 552 were quite vigorously
pressed. It appears that there have been various complaints filed with the
Foreign Office, either from the Austrian Legation in Washington or from
Austrian consuls in the United States with respect to the restricted
competency of Austrian consular officers in this regard. I developed at
some length the argument that this was a matter wholly within the
jurisdiction of the States, and the Federal Government did not feel at liberty
to encroach further upon State prerogatives. The American draft was
accepted.

Article XXI. Competency of consular officers to receive funds, etc. This
paragraph has been revised in accordance with the authority found on pages
follows:
“A consular officer of either High Contracting Party may in
behalf of his non-resident countrymen collect and receipt for their
distributive shares derived from estates in process of probate or
accruing
under
the
provisions
of
so-called
Workmen’s
Compensation Laws or other like statutes, for transmission
through channels prescribed by his Government to the proper
distributees.”
Article XXII. Exemptions from duty on importations of consular supplies
and belongings of consuls. This article has been revised in accordance with
the authority accorded on page 18 of Instruction 552. The Austrian
negotiators discussed the possibility of having this article correspond with
the language found in Article XXVII of the treaty with Germany and
Article XXII of the treaty with Hungary. The Department of Finance,
however, preferred the more restricted phraseology which corresponds with
Austrian municipal law and practice.
Article XXIII. Definition of territories and nationals. This article has been
amended in accordance with the Department’s suggestion on page 21 of
Instruction 552.
Article XXIV. Treaty of August 24, 1921, establishing friendly relations. The
Austrian negotiators desire to incorporate the language “or to Austria or its
nationals” as authorized on page 21 of Instruction 552.
Article XXV. Duration and termination of treaty. This article has been
altered in conformity with the revision on page 23 of Instruction 552,
except that it is provided that eight years is substituted for ten years. The
reason for this is that while the Austrian Government does not oppose long-
term treaties, it has so far committed itself to no corresponding treaty
mentioned on page 3 of Instruction 566 may terminate, in accordance with
its terms, in February, 1935. The Government may desire a general revision

of all its commercial treaties at this period, and therefore did not desire to
be hampered in this respect. It preferred six or seven years, but agreed to
eight. One year more or less made no particular difference, but it was felt
that two or three or four years might prove embarrassing.
I am enclosing herewith a revised draft in accordance with the foregoing.93
To recapitulate: Upon analysis it will be noted that the only articles really
requiring the Department’s scrutiny and further instructions are articles VII,
XI and XII. Of these, VII and XII are the most important. If it had not been
for the rather elaborate explanation in regard to article VII, made necessary
of course by the Department’s revised instructions, incorporating the new
provisions found in Instruction 566 of April 2, I should have telegraphed
with respect to the other two articles in accordance with the Department’s
authorization. I trust it will be evident that the United States has secured as
a result of the negotiations practically what it asked for, and that the new
language interpolated in article VII marks a very substantial advance in the
direction desired. The Austrian negotiators feel that they have receded on
most of their conditions, as indeed they have, and if the Department can see
its way clear to do so, I trust it will speedily meet the Austrian views with
respect to the three articles in question, and express its preference for the
various alternatives suggested. If my final instructions could be
communicated by telegraph, it would be most helpful. The Foreign Office is
beginning to put the text into German and a draft, subject to my final
instructions of course, will be in my hands towards the end of the month.
The Foreign Office official who has this matter particularly in hand will
leave for a three weeks’ vacation the last week in July, returning about
August 12. By that time it is hoped that I may have my final telegraphic
instructions. The treaty will then be set up in type in accordance, of course,
with Instruction 573 of April 14,94 and any typographical errors or
discrepancies will be discovered and corrected. The revised draft as
herewith submitted was initialled today by Dr. Schüller and myself. It is
understood that the only articles now left open for discussion are VII, XI
and XII, as above indicated. Schüller leaves tomorrow morning, to be
absent until September. The possibility of slight error in the text is not
excluded but I can assure the Department that the final draft for signature
will be carefully checked, both as to text, spelling and punctuation.

It is probable that the Chancellor, Dr. Seipel, will sign on behalf of Austria,
though this is a matter for the cabinet council to decide. The power of
attorney may be given to the Minister of Commerce, who is quite keen
about his prerogatives in such matters, I am told. The Chancellor will return
from his vacation in Karlsbad the latter part of August, and I hope around
that time the treaty can be concluded. I am rather anxious about this
because it is quite possible that there may be a cabinet crisis in the autumn
—some time in September—if the parliamentary situation does not
improve. If there should be cabinet reconstruction, some serious delay
might ensue. I know it is the Department’s desire that the treaty be in
Washington in ample time for submission to the Senate when Congress
reconvenes, whether it be October, November or on the first Monday in
December. For these reasons I am emboldened to label this despatch urgent,
and to ask for early instructions.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
92 Enclosure not printed.
93 Enclosure not printed.
94 Not printed.

[Document 795]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, September 10, 1927—noon.
for discussion. This is important because Schüller has just returned from
Switzerland for limited stay. We have agreed upon German text and
typographical and clerical errors have been eliminated. Final line of article
25 should of course read “such paragraph” and not “such paragraphs or
articles”.
no discrimination against American commercial travelers in Austria.
WASHBURN

[Document 796]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
10, noon.
1. Except as to Articles seven, eleven and twelve, text of treaty
transmitted by you is approved. Department approves term of
eight years and correction in Article 25.
2. Department of Commerce has examined provisions of Austrian
law and treaties in regard to commercial travelers. It is of opinion
that rights and privileges of American commercial travelers in
Austria would be amply safeguarded by most favored nation
article in instruction No. 605 of June 30 last and expresses
definite preference for the latter. Please endeavor to have it
accepted. If agreed to by Austria further consideration of
unsettled questions in Articles eleven and twelve will be
unnecessary.
3. Department of Commerce accepts in part but not in their
entirety proposals of Austrian Government in regard to Article 7.
This Department has report from Department of Commerce under
consideration and will send instructions at earliest date possible.
KELLOGG

[Document 797]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria
(Washburn)
1. Bases of Duties. In case of duties or charges expressed as a
percentage, bases refers to value upon which duty is calculated,
namely, whether invoice value, value at the frontier, duty-paid
value, wholesale or retail prices; in case of duties or charges
collected by weight or quantity, reference is to dutiable weight,
whether gross, net, or other weight basis. It is obvious that
effective most-favored-nation treatment could in practice be
denied through discrimination in the basis upon which duty is
collected. The purpose of this Government is to make clear that
most-favored-nation treatment includes bases of duties. While
this Government considers that the provisions of the original draft
of Article VII cover by implication the bases on which duty is
computed, it believes that it is desirable to have the assurance
stated specifically as in the new draft. It is hoped that with this
explanation the phrase will be accepted by the Austrian
negotiators. It is included in drafts which this Government now
has under negotiation with other countries.
2. Retroactive Application. You are authorized to agree that the
clause end with the word “retroactively.”
3. Licensing Systems. The United States regards the provisions of
the International Customs Agreement of 1923 and the substitute
provision proposed by Austria to the American draft as
inadequate, because they give assurance only with regard to
formalities to be observed in granting licenses, and do not give

assurances as to commodities and the relative quantities thereof.
The resolutions of the Geneva Economic Conference of 1927
recommended that “the scope and form of the most-favored-
nation clause should be of the widest and most liberal character,
and it should not be weakened or narrowed either by conditions
expressed or by interpretation.” The embodiment in a permanent
commercial treaty of provisions limiting the assurances with
regard to the favorable treatment to formalities in connection with
licenses, and omitting the material factors of commodities and
quantities would be a narrowing of the favored-nation clause in a
way to which this Government would not agree. This
Government hopes that the Austrian Government will agree to the
precise assurances of most-favored-nation and equitable treatment
contained in paragraph 4 of the American draft.
4. Emergency Exceptions. The Department would be glad if
Austria will accept the exception limited to “war”. It desires to
avoid a term which might be interpreted to include financial or
economic crises. If Austria insists upon an enlargement of this
exception, you are authorized to agree to “in the event either High
Contracting Party shall be engaged in war, or shall experience
similar national emergency.”
5. Frontier Traffic. This Government considers that it is desirable
to define the limits of the frontier traffic. You are, therefore,
authorized to accept the second of the alternatives quoted in your
despatch.
6. It is understood that a copy of a memorandum by Mr.
Chalmers95 was sent to the Commercial Attaché at Vienna who
will be glad to render any assistance you may desire.
CARR
95 Mr. Henry Chalmers of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce,
Department of Commerce.

[Document 798]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 11:55 a.m.]
1. Schüller will accept “bases of duties” clause if Finance
Ministry, which objects, will recede.
2. Retroactive application. Agreed as authorized.
3. Licensing. Passed.
4. Emergency exceptions limited to “war”.
5. Frontier traffic. Austrian Government will agree to second
alternative if it must, but greatly prefers first, on the ground that
kilo metre limitation difficult to observe, especially because of
conditions on Czech border. It still [hopes?] first alternative may
be accepted.
Reverting to 3, Schüller asserts he sympathizes with “equitable treatment”
idea mentioned in paragraph four of American draft but experts have
labored in vain to draft acceptable formula. He especially regards words “in
view of normal volume of trade in the particular class of goods between the
two countries” as equivocal and troublesome. “The particular class of
goods” might be new at least to the commerce of the two countries and
there would consequently be no “normal volume of trade” and therefore no
share of ratios or quotas could be granted. This illustrates his difficulty of
applying in practice “equitable treatment” principle.
Schüller made it plain he was unwilling to anticipate precise equitable
treaty formula in advance of possible action [at] approaching Geneva

Economic Conference but he would accept now if agreeable to American
Government my unauthorized tentative suggestion to insert “restrictions”
after prohibitions in line eighteen, page five, my despatch number 1468,
July 11th, and to insert “conditions” in lieu of “formalities” in line 21, page
6. These changes would enlarge scope of favored nation guarantees as
expressed affirmatively and negatively.
[Paraphrase.] The American definition of “equitable treatment” is suggested
by Schüller for submission to the Economic Conference meeting October
17. If adopted there, he will accept the same. He apparently expects
vigorous opposition from the French. Commercial Attaché Groves has been
ordered by the Department of Commerce to attend as an expert on
contingents and prohibitions. …[End paraphrase.]
paragraph of favored nation article in instruction number 605 of June 30th
acceptable. As to second paragraph, legal opinion awaited as to kind of
identification document permissible under Austrian law.
WASHBURN

[Document 799]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, October 4, 1927.
[Received October 14.]
No. 1554
SIR: With respect to the concluding paragraph of my telegram No. 56 of
September 26, 11 a.m., wherein it was stated that the legal opinion was
awaited as to the kind of identification documents for commercial travelers
permissible under Austrian law, I have the honor to report the following:
It develops that practically all of the commercial treaties regulating this
particular matter which Austria has entered into, prescribe that certificates
for commercial travelers shall be issued by the Chambers of Commerce of
the country of departure. In Austria the law requires that certificates of
Austrian commercial travelers shall be issued by the Police Direction in
Vienna and by the Political Authority of the First Instance in other places.
The United States proposes;
“If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an
authentic document establishing the identity and authority of a
commercial traveler, a signed statement by the concern or
concerns represented, certified by a consular officer of the
country of destination shall be accepted as satisfactory.”
If this language were adopted, Austria fears that under the operation of the
favored nation principle she would have to accept signed statements by
employing concerns generally, and whilst there appears to be no objection
to this as far as the United States is concerned, there would be objection to
accepting such certificates from the commercial travelers of certain other
countries that could be mentioned. The Foreign Office therefore suggests in
lieu of the language proposed by the United States, the following:

“If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an
authentic document establishing the identity and authority of a
commercial traveler, such document to be issued by the authority
to be designated in each country for the purpose shall be accepted
as satisfactory.”
This phraseology, it will be observed, embodies language found in the
second paragraph of the new proposed Article XI, as found on page 2 of
Department’s Instruction No. 605 of June 30 last, and in paragraph (b) of
Article XI as originally proposed by the Department. It is the thought of the
Foreign Office that inasmuch as the language in said sub-paragraph (b), to
wit: “… this certificate which shall be issued by the authority to be
designated in each country for the purpose … was proposed by the United
States, there can be no objection to it and no difficulty in its application. It
is assumed by the Austrian Government that the United States would
designate Chambers of Commerce or some administrative body conforming
with the European practice. The Austrian Government has no particular
objection to having the certificate mentioned in subparagraph (b) viséed by
the consul of the country in which the applicant proposes to operate, as is
there provided, but prefers to eliminate such a requirement on the ground
that it would multiply the fees. In this connection I direct attention to
Article 13 of the Commercial and Nautical Treaty between Austria and
Great Britain concluded on May 22, 1924, with which the Department is no
doubt familiar, and which is said to be more or less typical of provisions of
this character:
“The stipulations of the present Treaty with regard to the mutual
accord of the treatment of the most favored nation apply
unconditionally to the treatment of commercial travelers and their
samples. The certificates for commercial travelers shall be issued
in the territories of His Britannic Majesty by the Chambers of
Commerce or such Trade Associations and other recognized
Commercial Associations as may be authorized in this behalf. In
Austria these certificates shall be issued by the Police Direction in
Vienna, and by the Political Authority of first instance in other
places.

Articles imported by commercial travelers as samples shall, in the
territories of each of the Contracting Parties, be temporarily
admitted free of duty on compliance with the Customs regulations
and formalities established to assure their re-exportation or the
payment of the prescribed Customs duties if not re-exported
within the period allowed by law. But the foregoing privilege
shall not extend to articles which, owing to their quantity or
value, cannot be considered as samples, or which, owing to their
nature, could not be identified upon re-exportation.”
As to Article VII, there was a conference in relation to it yesterday
afternoon between officials of the Foreign Office, Ministry of Finance and
Ministry of Commerce. I am led to believe this morning that the opinion
was unanimous that it would be difficult to ascertain the “normal volume of
trade” referred to in my above mentioned telegram No. 56, and that these
words just quoted would, if adopted, lead to unending difficulty, if not with
the United States, then with other countries, by virtue of the application of
the most favored nation clause. It is obvious to me that Schüller regards the
insertion of the word “restrictions” after “prohibitions” in line 18, page 5, of
my despatch No. 1468 of July 11, as mentioned in my telegram under
reference as really accomplishing what the American Government seeks to
obtain, namely unconditional favored nation treatment in the matter of
rations or quotas being established by either of the High Contracting Parties
for the importation or exportation of articles restricted or prohibited.
Furthermore the insertion of the word “conditions” in lieu of “formalities”
in line 21, page 6, is certainly a great improvement. The officials of the
Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce do not view these
changes with enthusiasm, but they will not veto their insertion. This
language in paragraph 4 of the revised American draft of Article VII is the
nub of practically the sole outstanding difficulties in the way of complete
agreement upon the phraseology of the treaty, and I venture to ask the
Department to review the suggestions in this regard contained in my
telegram No. 56 to see whether they do not to all intents and purposes
secure what we desire. I am persuaded that Schüller desires to come to
some agreement and to find some acceptable formula, but he does very
much object to the words “equitable treatment” and “normal volume of
trade” as being vague and lacking the desired precision. My fear is that if

we delay too long, the French attitude, to which I am alluding in a despatch
of corresponding date, (No. 1555)96 may conceivably lead to a
postponement, more or less indefinite, and to our prejudice.
I have [etc.]
ALBERT H. WASHBURN
96 Not printed.

[Document 800]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Commerce and Consular Eights. Article seven.
1. Paragraph two. Department desires that you withdraw the
words “bases of such duties or charges”. This Government desires
to have “restrictions” inserted as suggested in your telegram 56 of
September 26 last. Also insert “restrictions” in the same position
in the last clause of the paragraph.
2. Paragraph four. You are authorized to agree to the omission of
“with respect to commodities, formalities and otherwise” and to
the omission of “in view of the normal volume of trade in the
particular class of goods between the two countries”.
3. This Government desires to retain the provision “an equitable
share in the allocation of the quantity of restricted goods which
may be authorized for importation or exportation”. It considers
that this provision accords completely with the last paragraph of
the protocol concluded at Geneva November 8 last and now
signed by twenty-six countries, including the United States and
Austria.97
4. Revise paragraph four of this Government’s draft in accordance
with the two preceding paragraphs of this telegram and submit it
again to the Austrian negotiators.
5. This Government is unwilling to agree to the Austrian
proposed substitute for the third sentence of paragraph four
because the Austrian proposal does not make provision directly in

regard to the allocation of quantities of goods which is more
important than the formalities or conditions to which that
proposal relates.
6. At the end of the seventh paragraph, strike out “and” before
“vessels” and add after “vessels” the words “and goods”.
KELLOGG
96 Not printed.

[Document 801]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
1. This Government intends to discontinue for application in the
United States the provision that certificates of identification shall
be issued by an authority designated for the purpose such as was
contained in Article Eleven of the original American draft. It does
not desire to establish official regulatory machinery to issue
certificates of identification.
2. Chambers of Commerce in the United States are purely
commercial bodies without official relation to the Federal
Government. No Department of Federal Government has
authority to designate them or other commercial organizations to
issue certificates of identification to commercial travelers.
Chambers of Commerce issue letters of identification to their
members. Not all business firms are members of Chambers of
Commerce.
3. With a view to accepting Austrian proposal for application to
Austrian commercial travelers coming to the United States and
also to meeting conditions in the United States, including
provision for firms not members of Chambers of Commerce, but
members of other commercial organizations, this Government
proposes to substitute for all of the second paragraph of Article
Eleven following the words “commercial traveler” the following:
“a certificate issued by any of the following in the country of his
departure shall be accepted as satisfactory: (a) the authority
designated for the purpose; (b) a chamber of commerce; (c) any
trade or commercial association recognized for the purpose by the

diplomatic representative of the High Contracting Party requiring
such certificate.”
4. Department understands that no questions are now before it in
respect of which you have asked instructions.
KELLOGG

[Document 802]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:18 p.m.]
7 as authorized by Department and as incorporated in red ink modifications
by Austrian Government.
that the provision for “(b) a Chamber of Commerce” in the Department’s
proposed substitute would obligate Austrian Government to accept
certificates issued by American Chambers of Commerce, though, as the
Department states, such chambers are without official relation to the
Federal Government. In view of minor role played by Chambers of
Commerce in Austria, as explained on page two of my despatch number
1554, October 4th last, I would suggest striking out this sub-clause (b)
above quoted though Austrian negotiators will agree to its retention if the
Department desires. So far as Austrian Government is concerned, a
Chamber of Commerce would come within the meaning of any recognized
trade or commercial association provided for in sub-clause (c).
(3) Duration and termination of treaty. Termination of eight years
conferences last summer. For reasons explained on page 15 of my despatch
1468, July 11th last, Austrian Government does not desire to commit itself
beyond first half of 1935. It would agree to a possible definite date
termination at latest July 1st, 1935. Otherwise it desires a term of six years
instead of eight, inasmuch as it figures that an exchange of ratifications
cannot occur for approximately another year since Senate’s approval at
earliest cannot be expected until next winter or spring.

(4) If Department can conveniently, speedily instruct on minor points raised
in two and three, our task will be finished and the treaty can be signed in
May.
WASHBURN
98 Instruction not printed.

[Document 803]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:30 p.m.]
1. Foreign Office informs me that Ministry [of] Commerce upon further
consideration greatly prefers that relevant language in second paragraph of
article 11 should read: “a certificate issued by the authority designated for
the purpose in the country of his departure shall be accepted as
satisfactory.”
This would eliminate sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) in the Department’s
paragraph 2 of my before-mentioned telegram No. 18 stands.
that he will accept term of 7 years which the Department will probably
3. Schüller told me last evening he is leaving May 5th for long absence in
Paris and Geneva and I very much hope it may be possible to dispose
finally of two remaining points here raised before his departure.
WASHBURN

[Document 804]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
1. Department is gratified at acceptance of Article 7.
2. Concerning Chambers of Commerce, Department has consulted with
Department of Commerce which discussed subject informally with
Chamber of Commerce of the United States. Text suggested by this
Government avoids necessity of obtaining recognition of individual
chambers of commerce by Austrian Legation here. Department is grateful
for Austrian willingness to agree and requests acceptance.
establish official machinery, and no authority of the Government can
designate commercial organizations, for the purpose of issuing certificates
of identification. Items (b) and (c) of paragraph three are therefore regarded
as essential.
3. You are authorized to substitute seven years for eight or six if Austrian
negotiator prefers.
Department congratulates you upon the result of your work and desires you
appropriately to express its appreciation to the Austrian negotiators.
KELLOGG

[Document 805]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
[Received 1:40 p.m.]
2. Schüller expressed finally preference for six-year term because
of uncertainty of date of Senate ratification. To this I assented in
view of paragraph three, Department’s telegram 25.
3. Cabinet council is taking necessary formalities and treaty will
shortly be signed probably this month in conformity with
WASHBURN
99 Instruction No. 676 not printed.
1 Not printed.

[Document 806]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
enclosing text.2 If treaty not yet signed, and if agreeable to Austria, you
may strike out third paragraph of Article XXV relating to the termination of
the sixth paragraph of Article VII. If this suppression is made, strike out
also first ten words of first paragraph of Article XXV.
Department has altered policy toward Senate reservation to Article VII of
German treaty, and is signing treaty with another country including
provision for the national treatment of shipping, obligatory for full term of
treaty. Department would prefer to have all treaties submitted to the Senate
the next session uniform in this respect.
KELLOGG
2 Enclosure not printed.

[Document 807]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, June 16, 1928—noon.
government printer’s final proof. Treaty will be signed Monday, noon, 18th
instant.3
WASHBURN
3 On June 19 the Minister in Austria cabled the Secretary of State: “Treaty

Treaty Series No. 838
[Document 808]
Treaty Between the United States of America and Austria, Signed
at Vienna, June 19, 19284
The United States of America and the Republic of Austria, desirous of
strengthening the bond of peace which happily prevails between them, by
arrangements designed to promote friendly intercourse betwen their
respective territories through provisions responsive to the spiritual, cultural,
economic and commercial aspirations of the peoples thereof, have resolved
to conclude a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights and for
that purpose have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America,
Mr. Albert Henry Washburn, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to Austria, and
The Federal President of the Republic of Austria,
Monsignore Ignatius Seipel, Doctor of Theology, Federal
Chancellor,
Who, having communicated to each other their full powers found to be in
due form, have agreed upon the following articles:
ARTICLE I. The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be
permitted to enter, travel and reside in the territories of the other; to exercise
liberty of conscience and freedom of worship; to engage in professional,
scientific, religious, philanthropic, manufacturing and commercial work of
every kind without interference; to carry on every form of commercial
activity which is not forbidden by the local law; to employ agents of their
choice, and generally to do anything incidental to or necessary for the
enjoyment of any of the foregoing privileges upon the same terms as
nationals of the state of residence or as nationals of the nation hereafter to

be most favored by it, submitting themselves to all local laws and
regulations duly established.
The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties within the territories
of the other shall be permitted to own, erect or lease and occupy appropriate
buildings and to lease lands for residential, scientific, religious,
philanthropic, manufacturing, commercial and mortuary purposes upon the
same terms as nationals of the country.
As regards the acquisition, possession, and disposition of immovable
property, except as regards the leasing of lands for specified purposes
provided for in the foregoing paragraph, the nationals of each of the High
Contracting Parties shall enjoy in the territory of the other, subject to
reciprocity, the treatment generally accorded to foreigners by the laws of the
place where the property is situated.
The nationals of either High Contracting Party within the territories of the
other shall not be subjected to the payment of any internal charges or taxes
other or higher than those that are exacted of and paid by its nationals.
The nationals of each High Contracting Party shall enjoy freedom of access
to the courts of justice of the other on conforming to the local laws, as well
for the prosecution as for the defense of their rights, and in all degrees of
jurisdiction established by law.
The nationals of each High Contracting Party shall receive within the
territories of the other, upon submitting to conditions imposed upon its
nationals, the most constant protection and security for their persons and
property, and shall enjoy in this respect that degree of protection that is
required by international law. Their property shall not be taken without due
process of law and without payment of just compensation.
Nothing contained in this Treaty shall be construed to affect existing
statutes of either of the High Contracting Parties in relation to the
immigration of aliens or the right of either of the High Contracting Parties
to enact such statutes.

ARTICLE II. With respect to that form of protection granted by National, State
or Provincial laws establishing civil liability for injuries or for death, and
giving to relatives or heirs or dependents of an injured party a right of
action or a pecuniary benefit, such relatives or heirs or dependents of the
injured party, himself a national of either of the High Contracting Parties
and within any of the territories of the other, shall regardless of their
alienage or residence outside of the territory where the injury occurred,
enjoy the same rights and privileges as are or may be granted to nationals,
and under like conditions.
ARTICLE III. The dwellings, warehouses, manufacturies, shops and other places
of business, and all premises thereto appertaining of the nationals of each of
the High Contracting Parties in the territories of the other, used for any
purposes set forth in Article I shall be respected. It shall not be allowable to
make a domiciliary visit to, or search of any such buildings and premises, or
there to examine and inspect books, papers or accounts, except under the
conditions and in conformity with the forms prescribed by the laws,
ordinances and regulations for nationals.
ARTICLE IV. Where, on the death of any person holding real or other
immovable property or interests therein within the territories of one High
Contracting Party, such property or interests therein would, by the laws of
the country or by a testamentary disposition, descend or pass to a national
of the other High Contracting Party, whether resident or non-resident, were
he not disqualified by the laws of the country where such property or
interests therein is or are situated, such national shall be allowed a term of
three years in which to sell the same, this term to be reasonably prolonged if
circumstances render it necessary, and withdraw the proceeds thereof,
without restraint or interference, and exempt from any succession, probate
or administrative duties or charges other than those which may be imposed
in like cases upon the nationals of the country from which such proceeds
may be drawn.
Nationals of either High Contracting Party may have full power to dispose
of their personal property of every kind within the territories of the other, by
testament, donation, or otherwise, and their heirs, legatees, and donees, of
whatsoever nationality, whether resident or non-resident, shall succeed to

such personal property, and may take possession thereof, either by
themselves or by others acting for them, and retain or dispose of the same at
their pleasure subject to the payment of such duties or charges only as the
nationals of the High Contracting Party within whose territories such
property may be or belong shall be liable to pay in like cases.
ARTICLE V. The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties in the
exercise of the right of freedom of worship, within the territories of the
other, as hereinabove provided, may, without annoyance or molestation of
any kind by reason of their religious belief or otherwise, conduct services
either within their own houses or within any appropriate buildings which
they may be at liberty to erect and maintain in convenient situations,
provided their teachings and practices are not inconsistent with public order
or public morals and provided further they conform to all laws and
regulations duly established in these territories; and they may also be
permitted to bury their dead according to their religious customs in suitable
and convenient places established and maintained for the purpose, subject
to the established mortuary and sanitary laws and regulations of the place of
burial.
ARTICLE VI. In the event of war between either High Contracting Party and a
third State, such Party may draft for compulsory military service nationals
of the other having a permanent residence within its territories and who
have formally, according to its laws, declared an intention to adopt its
nationality by naturalization, unless such individuals depart from the
territories of said belligerent Party within sixty days after a declaration of
war.
ARTICLE VII. Between the territories of the High Contracting Parties there shall
be freedom of commerce and navigation. The nationals of each of the High
Contracting Parties equally with those of the most favored nation, shall
have liberty freely to come with their vessels and cargoes to all places, ports
and waters of every kind within the territorial limits of the other which are
or may be open to foreign commerce and navigation. Nothing in this Treaty
shall be construed to restrict the right of either High Contracting Party to
impose, on such terms as it may see fit, prohibitions or restrictions of a

sanitary character designed to protect human, animal or plant life, or
regulations for the enforcement of police or revenue laws.
Each of the High Contracting Parties binds itself unconditionally to impose
no higher or other duties or charges, and no conditions, prohibitions or
restrictions, on the importation of any article, the growth, produce or
manufacture of the territories of the other Party, from whatever place
arriving, than are or shall be imposed on the importation of any like article,
the growth, produce or manufacture of any other foreign country; nor shall
any such duties, charges, conditions, prohibitions, or restrictions on
importations be made effective retroactively.
Each of the High Contracting Parties also binds itself unconditionally to
impose no higher or other charges or other restrictions or prohibitions on
goods exported to the territories of the other High Contracting Party than
are imposed on goods exported to any other foreign country.
In the event of licenses being issued by either of the High Contracting
Parties for the importation into or exportation from its territories of articles
the importation or exportation of which is restricted or prohibited, the
conditions under which such licenses may be obtained shall be publicly
announced and clearly stated in such a manner as to enable traders
interested to become acquainted with them; the method of licensing shall be
as simple and unvarying as possible and applications for licenses shall be
dealt with as speedily as possible. Moreover, the conditions under which
such licenses are issued by either of the High Contracting Parties for goods
imported from or exported to the territories of the other Party shall be as
favorable as the conditions under which licenses are issued in respect of any
other foreign country. In the event of rations or quotas being established for
the importation or exportation of articles restricted or prohibited, each of
the High Contracting Parties agrees to grant for the importation from or
exportation to the territories of the other Party an equitable share in the
allocation of the quantity of restricted goods which may be authorized for
importation or exportation. In the application of the provisions of this
paragraph no distinction shall be made between direct and indirect
shipments. It is agreed, moreover, that in the event either High Contracting

Party shall be engaged in war, it may enforce such import or export
restrictions as may be required by the national interest.
Any advantage of whatsoever kind which either High Contracting Party
may extend, by treaty, law, decree, regulation, practice or otherwise, to any
article, the growth, produce or manufacture of any other foreign country
shall simultaneously and unconditionally, without request and without
compensation, be extended to the like article, the growth, produce or
manufacture of the other High Contracting Party.
All articles which are or may be legally imported from foreign countries
into ports of the United States or are or may be legally exported therefrom
in vessels of the United States may likewise be imported into those ports or
exported therefrom in Austrian vessels without being liable to any other or
higher duties or charges whatsoever than if such articles were imported or
exported in vessels of the United States; and, reciprocally, all articles which
are or may be legally imported from foreign countries into the ports of
Austria or are or may be legally exported therefrom in Austrian vessels may
likewise be imported into those ports or exported therefrom in vessels of the
United States without being liable to any other or higher duties or charges
whatsoever than if such articles were imported or exported in Austrian
vessels.
With respect to the amount and collection of duties on imports and exports
of every kind, each of the two High Contracting Parties binds itself to give
to the nationals, vessels and goods of the other the advantage of every favor,
privilege or immunity which it shall have accorded to the nationals, vessels
and goods of a third State, whether such favored State shall have been
accorded such treatment gratuitously or in return for reciprocal
compensatory treatment. Every such favor, privilege or immunity which
shall hereafter be granted the nationals, vessels or goods of a third State
shall simultaneously and unconditionally, without request and without
compensation, be extended to the other High Contracting Party, for the
benefit of itself, its nationals, vessels and goods.
The stipulations of this Article shall not extend to the treatment which
either Contracting Party shall accord to purely border traffic within a zone
not exceeding ten miles (15 kilometres) wide on either side of its customs

frontier, or to the treatment which is accorded by the United States to the
commerce of Cuba under the provisions of the Commercial Convention
concluded by the United States and Cuba on December 11, 1902, or any
other commercial convention which hereafter may be concluded by the
United States with Cuba, or to the commerce of the United States with any
of its dependencies and the Panama Canal Zone under existing or future
laws.
ARTICLE VIII. The nationals and merchandise of each High Contracting Party
within the territories of the other shall receive the same treatment as
nationals and merchandise of the country with regard to internal taxes,
transit duties, charges in respect to warehousing and other facilities and the
amount of drawbacks and bounties.
ARTICLE IX. Limited liability and other corporations and associations, whether
or not for pecuniary profit, which have been or may hereafter be organized
in accordance with and under the laws, National, State or Provincial, of
either High Contracting Party and maintain a central office within the
territories thereof, shall have their juridical status recognized by the other
High Contracting Party provided that they pursue no aims within its
territories contrary to its laws. They shall enjoy free access to the courts of
law and equity, on conforming to the laws regulating the matter, as well for
the prosecution as for the defense of rights in all the degrees of jurisdiction
established by law.
The right of such corporations and associations of either High Contracting
Party so recognized by the other to establish themselves within its
territories, establish branch offices and fulfill their functions therein shall
depend upon, and be governed solely by, the consent of such Party as
expressed in its National, State or Provincial laws.
ARTICLE X. The nationals of either High Contracting Party shall enjoy within
the territories of the other, reciprocally and upon compliance with the
conditions there imposed, such rights and privileges as have been or may
hereafter be accorded the nationals of any other State with respect to the
organization of and participation in limited liability and other corporations
and associations, for pecuniary profit or otherwise, including the rights of
promotion, incorporation, purchase and ownership and sale of shares and

the holding of executive or official positions therein. In the exercise of the
foregoing rights and with respect to the regulation or procedure concerning
the organization or conduct of such corporations or associations, such
nationals shall be subjected to no conditions less favorable than those which
have been or may hereafter be imposed upon the nationals of the most
favored nation. The rights of any of such corporations or associations as
may be organized or controlled or participated in by the nationals of either
High Contracting Party within the territories of the other to exercise any of
their functions therein, shall be governed by the laws and regulations,
national, state or provincial, which are in force or may hereafter be
established within the territories of the Party wherein they propose to
engage in business. The foregoing stipulations do not apply to the
organization of and participation in political associations.
The nationals of either High Contracting Party shall, moreover, enjoy
within the territories of the other, reciprocally and upon compliance with
the conditions there imposed, such rights and privileges as have been or
may hereafter be accorded the nationals of any other State with respect to
the mining of coal, phosphate, oil, oil shale, gas, and sodium on the public
domain of the other.
ARTICLE XI. Commercial travellers representing manufacturers, merchants and
traders domiciled in the territories of either High Contracting Party shall on
their entry into and sojourn in the territories of the other Party and on their
departure therefrom be accorded the most favored nation treatment in
respect of customs and other privileges and of all charges and taxes of
whatever denomination applicable to them or to their samples.
If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an authentic
document establishing the identity and authority of a commercial traveller, a
certificate issued by any of the following in the country of his departure
shall be accepted as satisfactory:
a) the authority designated for the purpose;
b) a chamber of commerce;

c) any trade or commercial association recognized for the purpose
by the diplomatic representative of the Contracting Party
requiring such certificates.
ARTICLE XII. There shall be complete freedom of transit through the territories
including territorial waters of each High Contracting Party on the routes
most convenient for international transit, by rail, navigable waterway, and
canal, other than the Panama Canal and waterways and canals which
constitute international boundaries of the United States, to persons and
goods coming from or going through the territories of the other High
Contracting Party, except such persons as may be forbidden admission into
its territories or goods of which the importation may be prohibited by law.
Persons and goods in transit shall not be subjected to any transit duty, or to
any unnecessary delays or restrictions, and shall be given national treatment
as regards charges, facilities, and all other matters.
Goods in transit must be entered at the proper customhouse, but they shall
be exempt from all customs or other similar duties.
All charges imposed on transport in transit shall be reasonable, having
regard to the conditions of the traffic.
ARTICLE XIII. Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees to receive from the
other, consular officers in those of its ports, places and cities, where it may
be convenient and which are open to consular representatives of any foreign
country.
Consular officers of each of the High Contracting Parties shall, after
entering upon their duties, enjoy reciprocally in the territories of the other
all the rights, privileges, exemptions and immunities which are enjoyed by
officers of the same grade of the most favored nation. As official agents,
such officers shall be entitled to the high consideration of all officials,
national or local, with whom they have official intercourse in the state
which receives them.
The Government of each of the High Contracting Parties shall furnish free
of charge the necessary exequatur of such consular officers of the other as
present a regular commission signed by the chief executive of the

appointing state and under its great seal; and it shall issue to a subordinate
or substitute consular officer duly appointed by an accepted superior
consular officer with the approbation of his Government, or by any other
competent officer of that Government, such documents as according to the
laws of the respective countries shall be requisite for the exercise by the
appointee of the consular function. On the exhibition of an exequatur, or
other document issued in lieu thereof to such subordinate, such consular
officer shall be permitted to enter upon his duties and to enjoy the rights,
privileges and immunities granted by this Treaty.
ARTICLE XIV. Consular officers, nationals of the state by which they are
appointed, shall be exempt from arrest except when charged with the
commission of offenses locally designated as crimes other than
misdemeanors and subjecting the individual guilty thereof to punishment.
Such officers shall be exempt from military billetings, and from service of
any military or naval, administrative or police character whatsoever.
In criminal cases the attendance at the trial by a consular officer as a
witness may be demanded by the prosecution or defense. The demand shall
be made with all possible regard for the consular dignity and the duties of
the office; and there shall be compliance on the part of the consular officer.
Consular officers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts in the state
which receives them in civil cases, subject to the proviso, however, that
when the officer is a national of the state which appoints him and is
engaged in no private occupation for gain, his testimony shall be taken
orally or in writing at his residence or office and with due regard for his
convenience. The officer should, however, voluntarily give his testimony at
the trial whenever it is possible to do so without serious interference with
his official duties.
ARTICLE XV. Consular officers, including employees in a consulate, nationals
of the State by which they are appointed other than those engaged in private
occupations for gain within the State where they exercise their functions
shall be exempt from all taxes, National, State, Provincial, and Municipal,
levied upon their persons or upon their property, except taxes levied on
account of the possession or ownership of immovable property situated in,
or income derived from sources within the territories of the State within

which they exercise their functions. All consular officers and employees,
nationals of the State appointing them, shall be exempt from the payment of
taxes on the salary, fees or wages received by them in compensation for
their consular services.
Lands and buildings situated in the territories of either High Contracting
Party, of which the other High Contracting Party is the legal or equitable
owner and which are used exclusively for diplomatic or consular purposes
by that owner, shall be exempt from taxation of every kind, National, State,
Provincial and Municipal, other than assessments levied for services or
local public improvements by which the premises are benefited.
ARTICLE XVI. Consular officers may place over the outer door of their
respective offices the arms of their State with an appropriate inscription
designating the official office. Such officers may also hoist the flag of their
country on their offices including those situated in the capitals of the two
countries. They may likewise hoist such flag over any boat or vessel
employed in the exercise of the consular function.
The consular offices and archives shall at all times be inviolable. They shall
under no circumstances be subject to invasion by any authorities of any
character within the country where such offices are located. Nor shall the
authorities under any pretext make any examination or seizure of papers or
other property deposited within a consular office. Consular offices shall not
be used as places of asylum. No consular officer shall be required to
produce official archives in court or testify as to their contents.
Upon the death, incapacity, or absence of a consular officer having no
subordinate consular officer at his post, secretaries or chancellors, whose
official character may have previously been made known to the government
of the State where the consular function was exercised, may temporarily
exercise the consular function of the deceased or incapacitated or absent
consular officer; and while so acting shall enjoy all the rights, prerogatives
and immunities granted to the incumbent.
ARTICLE XVII. Consular officers, nationals of the State by which they are
appointed, may, within their respective consular districts, address the
authorities, National, State, Provincial or Municipal, for the purpose of

protecting their countrymen in the enjoyment of their rights accruing by
treaty or otherwise. Complaint may be made for the infraction of those
rights. Failure upon the part of the proper authorities to grant redress or to
accord protection may justify interposition through the diplomatic channel,
and in the absence of a diplomatic representative, a consul general or the
consular officer stationed at the capital may apply directly to the
government of the country.
ARTICLE XVIII. Consular officers may, in pursuance of the laws of their own
country, take, at any appropriate place within their respective districts, the
depositions of any occupants of vessels of their own country, or of any
national of, or of any person having permanent residence within the
territories of, their own country. Such officers may draw up, attest, certify
and authenticate unilateral acts, deeds, and testamentary dispositions of
their countrymen, and also contracts to which a countryman is a party. They
may draw up, attest, certify and authenticate written instruments of any kind
purporting to express or embody the conveyance or encumbrance of
property of any kind within the territory of the State by which such officers
are appointed, and unilateral acts, deeds, testamentary dispositions and
contracts relating to property situated, or business to be transacted, within
the territories of the State by which they are appointed, embracing unilateral
acts, deeds, testamentary dispositions or agreements executed solely by
nationals of the State within which such officers exercise their functions.
Instruments and documents thus executed and copies and translations
thereof, when duly authenticated under his official seal by the consular
officer, shall be received as evidence in the territories of the contracting
parties as original documents or authenticated copies, as the case may be,
and shall have the same force and effect as if drawn by and executed before
a notary or other public officer duly authorized in the country by which the
consular officer was appointed; provided, always that such documents shall
have been drawn and executed in conformity to the laws and regulations of
the country where they are designed to take effect.
ARTICLE XIX. In case of the death of a national of either High Contracting
Party in the territory of the other without having in the territory of his
decease any known heirs or testamentary executors by him appointed, the

competent local authorities shall at once inform the nearest consular officer
of the State of which the deceased was a national of the fact of his death, in
order that necessary information may be forwarded to the parties interested.
In case of the death of a national of either of the High Contracting Parties
without will or testament, in the territory of the other High Contracting
Party, the consular officer of the State of which the deceased was a national
and within whose district the deceased made his home at the time of death,
shall, so far as the laws of the country permit and pending the appointment
of an administrator and until letters of administration have been granted, be
deemed qualified to take charge of the property left by the decedent for the
preservation and protection of the same. Such consular officer shall have
the right to be appointed as administrator within the discretion of a tribunal
or other agency controlling the administration of estates provided the laws
of the place where the estate is administered so permit.
Whenever a consular officer accepts the office of administrator of the estate
of a deceased countryman, he subjects himself as such to the jurisdiction of
the tribunal or other agency making the appointment for all necessary
purposes to the same extent as a national of the country where he was
appointed.
ARTICLE XX. A consular officer of either High Contracting Party may in behalf
of his nonresident countrymen collect and receipt for their distributive
shares derived from estates in process of probate or accruing under the
provisions of so-called Workmen’s Compensation Laws or other like
statutes, for transmission through channels prescribed by his Government to
the proper distributees.
ARTICLE XXI. Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees to permit the entry
free of all duty and without examination of any kind, of all furniture,
equipment and supplies intended for official use in the consular offices of
the other, and to extend to such consular officers of the other and their
families and suites as are its nationals, the privilege of entry free of duty of
their personal or household effects actually in use which accompany such
consular officers, their families or suites, or which arrive shortly thereafter,
provided, nevertheless, that no article, the importation of which is

prohibited by the law of either of the High Contracting Parties, may be
brought into its territories.
It is understood, however, that this privilege shall not be extended to
consular officers who are engaged in any private occupation for gain in the
countries to which they are accredited, save with respect to governmental
supplies.
ARTICLE XXII. Subject to any limitation or exception hereinabove set forth, or
hereafter to be agreed upon, the territories of the High Contracting Parties
to which the provisions of this Treaty extend shall be understood to
comprise all areas of land, water, and air over which the Parties claim and
exercise dominion as sovereign thereof, except the Panama Canal Zone.
ARTICLE XXIII. Nothing in the present Treaty shall be construed to limit or
restrict in any way the rights, privileges and advantages accorded to the
United States or its nationals or to Austria or its nationals by the Treaty
between the United States and Austria establishing friendly relations,
concluded on August 24, 1921.
ARTICLE XXIV. The present treaty shall remain in full force for the term of six
years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, on which date it shall
begin to take effect in all of its provisions.
If within one year before the expiration of the aforesaid period of six years
neither High Contracting Party notifies to the other an intention of
modifying, by change or omission any of the provisions of any of the
articles in this Treaty or of terminating it upon the expiration of the
aforesaid period, the Treaty shall remain in full force and effect after the
aforesaid period and until one year from such a time as either of the High
Contracting Parties shall have notified to the other an intention of
modifying or terminating the Treaty.
ARTICLE XXV. The present Treaty shall be ratified, and the ratifications thereof
shall be exchanged at Vienna as soon as possible.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the same and have
affixed their seals hereto.

DONE in duplicate in the English and German languages at Vienna, this 19th
day of June 1928.
ALBERT HENRY WASHBURN
[SEAL]
SEIPEL
[SEAL]
[A Senate reservation on February 11, 1929, was accepted by the
Governments of the United States and Austria in an exchange of notes
printed infra.]
4 In English and German; German text not printed. Ratification advised by
the Senate, with reservation and understanding, Feb. 11, 1929; ratified by
1931.

Treaty Series No. 838
[Document 809]
The American Minister in Austria (Stockton) to the Austrian
Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Schober)
VIENNA, January 20, 1931.
EXCELLENCY: Referring to the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular
Rights signed by the United States and Austria on June 19, 1928, I have the
honor to inform you that the United States Senate on February 11, 1929,
gave its advice and consent to the ratification of the said Treaty in a
resolution, as follows:
“Resolved (two-thirds of the Senators present concurring therein),
That the Senate advise and consent to the ratification of Executive
B. Seventieth Congress, second session, a treaty of friendship,
commerce, and consular rights with Austria, signed at Vienna on
June 19, 1928, subject to the following reservation and
understanding to be set forth in an exchange of notes between the
high contracting parties so as to make it plain that this condition
is understood and accepted by each of them:
That the sixth paragraph of Article VII shall remain in force for
twelve months from the date of exchange of ratifications, and, if
not then terminated on ninety days’ previous notice, shall remain
in force until either of the high contracting parties shall enact
legislation inconsistent therewith, when the same shall
automatically lapse at the end of sixty days from such enactment,
and on such lapse each high contracting party shall enjoy all the
rights which it would have possessed had such paragraph not
been embraced in this treaty.”
It will be observed that by this resolution the advice and consent of the
Senate to the ratification of the Treaty are given subject to a certain

reservation and understanding.
I shall be glad if when bringing the foregoing resolution to the attention of
your Government, Your Excellency will state that my Government hopes
that the Austrian Government will find acceptable the reservation and
understanding which the Senate has made a condition of its advice and
consent to the ratification of the Treaty. You may regard this note as
sufficient acceptance by the Government of the United States of this
reservation and understanding. An acknowledgment of this note on the
occasion of the exchange of ratifications, accepting by direction and on
behalf of your Government the said reservation and understanding, will be
considered as completing the required exchange of notes and the acceptance
by both governments of the reservation and understanding.
Accept [etc.]
G. B. STOCKTON

Treaty Series No. 838
[Document 810]
The Austrian Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Schober) to the American Minister in Austria (Stockton)
[Translation]
VIENNA, January 20, 1931.
MR. MINISTER: In the name and by the direction of the Austrian Federal
Government, I have the honor to acknowledge to Your Excellency the
receipt of your communication of January 20, 1931, concerning the Treaty
of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights between Austria and the
United States, signed on June 19, 1928, and to advise you as follows:
The Austrian Federal Government has taken note of the resolution of the
Senate of the United States, of February 11, 1929, of the following tenor:
[Here follows text of the resolution.]
and declares itself in agreement therewith, subject to ratification thereof.
Please accept [etc.]
SCHOBER

Treaty Series No. 839
[Document 811]
Supplementary Agreement Between the United States of America
and Austria, Signed at Vienna, January 20, 19315
The United States of America and the Republic of Austria, by the
undersigned Mr. Gilchrist Baker Stockton, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America at Vienna, and Dr.
Johann Schober, Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Austria, their duly empowered plenipotentiaries, agree,
as follows:
Notwithstanding the provisions of the first paragraph of Article XXIV of
the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights, between the
United States of America and the Republic of Austria, signed June 19,
1928, to the effect that the said Treaty shall remain in force for the term of
six years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, it is agreed that the
said Treaty may be terminated on February 11, 1935, or on any date
thereafter, by notice given by either high contracting party to the other party
one year before the date on which it is desired that such termination shall
become effective.
DONE in duplicate, in the English and German languages, at Vienna, this 20th
day of January One Thousand Nine Hundred and Thirtyone.
[SEAL] G. B. STOCKTON
[SEAL] SCHOBER
5 In English and German; German text not printed. Ratification advised by
1931.

Treaties of arbitration and conciliation
between the United States and Austria,
signed August 16, 1928
[812] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
[813] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 3, 1928.
[814] Arbitration Treaty Between the United States of America and
Austria, Signed at Washington, August 16, 1928
Done at Washington the sixteenth day of August in the year of our Lord one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
Treaty Series No. 776
[815] Conciliation Treaty Between the United States of America and
Austria, Signed at Washington, August 16, 1928
Done at Washington the sixteenth day of August in the year of our Lord one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
Treaty Series No. 777

[Document 812]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
23. Department handed Austrian Minister March 23 a draft of a proposed
treaty of arbitration between the United States and Austria. The provisions
of the draft operate to extend the policy of arbitration enunciated in the
Convention which was signed at Washington January 15, 1909,6 but is not
now in force and are identical in effect with the provisions of the arbitration
treaty signed between the United States and France on February 6, 1928,7
and with draft arbitration treaties submitted to the Spanish, British,
Japanese, Italian, Norwegian, Hungarian, German, Portuguese, Danish and
Dutch Governments.8
Department also handed to the Minister draft of treaty of similar purport to
the so-called Bryan treaties.9
The text of these proposed treaties will be forwarded in next pouch.10
KELLOGG
7 See vol.  II, pp. 816 ff.
8 For correspondence concerning treaties with Denmark, Germany, and
with Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Spain, see vol.  III, pp. 102 ff., pp.
and Portugal were concluded in 1929.
9 For the Bryan treaties for the advancement of general peace, see Foreign
1007 .
10 Drafts not printed.

[Document 813]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, May 3, 1928.
No. 96/R
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to notify Your Excellency that the Federal
Government of Austria is willing and ready to conclude with the
Government of the United States a treaty of arbitration between the United
States of America and Austria as well as a conciliation treaty, and that it
fully approves of and consent to the wording of the pertaining drafts as
proposed by Your Excellency in your esteemed note of March 23rd,11
directed to this Legation.
The special power to conclude and sign these treaties as well as their
German text is on the way and I shall not fail to notify Your Excellency as
soon as these papers reach me.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
11 Not printed.

Treaty Series No. 776
[Document 814]
Arbitration Treaty Between the United States of America and
Austria, Signed at Washington, August 16, 192812
The President of the United States of America and the Federal President of
the Republic of Austria
Determined to prevent so far as in their power lies any interruption in the
peaceful relations now happily existing between the two nations;
Desirous of reaffirming their adherence to the policy of submitting to
impartial decision all justiciable controversies that may arise between them;
and
Eager by their example not only to demonstrate their condemnation of war
as an instrument of national policy in their mutual relations, but also to
hasten the time when the perfection of international arrangements for the
pacific settlement of international disputes shall have eliminated forever the
possibility of war among any of the Powers of the world;
Have decided to conclude a new treaty of arbitration enlarging the scope
and obligations of the arbitration convention which was signed at
Washington, January 15, 1909, but is not now in force, and for that purpose
they have appointed as their respective Plenipotentiaries
The President of the United States of America, Mr. Frank B.
Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and
The Federal President of the Republic of Austria, Mr. Edgar L. G.
Prochnik, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to
the United States of America,
Who, having communicated to one another their full powers found in good
and due form, have agreed upon the following articles:

ARTICLE I
All differences relating to international matters in which the High
Contracting Parties are concerned by virtue of a claim of right made by one
against the other under treaty or otherwise, which it has not been possible to
adjust by diplomacy, which have not been adjusted as a result of reference
to an appropriate commission of conciliation, and which are justiciable in
their nature by reason of being susceptible of decision by the application of
the principles of law or equity, shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of
Arbitration established at The Hague by the Convention of October 18,
1907, or to some other competent tribunal, as shall be decided in each case
by special agreement, which special agreement shall provide for the
organization of such tribunal if necessary, define its powers, state the
question or questions at issue, and settle the terms of reference.
The special agreement in each case shall be made on the part of the United
States of America by the President of the United States of America by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and on the part of Austria
in accordance with its constitutional laws.
ARTICLE II
The provisions of this treaty shall not be invoked in respect of any dispute
the subject matter of which
(a) is within the domestic jurisdiction of either of the High
Contracting Parties,
(b) involves the interests of third Parties,
(c) depends upon or involves the maintenance of the traditional
attitude of the United States concerning American questions,
commonly described as the Monroe Doctrine,
(d) depends upon or involves the observance of the obligations of
Austria in accordance with the Covenant of the League of
Nations.

ARTICLE III
The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of
America by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof and by
Austria in accordance with its constitutional laws.
The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible, and
the treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of the ratifications. It
shall thereafter remain in force continuously unless and until terminated by
one year’s written notice given by either High Contracting Party to the
other.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in
duplicate in the English and German languages, both texts having equal
force, and hereunto affixed their seals.
Done at Washington the sixteenth day of August in the year of our Lord one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
FRANK B. KELLOGG [SEAL]
EDGAR PROCHNIK [SEAL]
12 In English and German; German text not printed. Ratification advised by
exchanged at Washington, Feb. 28, 1929; proclaimed by the President, Feb.

Treaty Series No. 777
[Document 815]
Conciliation Treaty Between the United States of America and
Austria, Signed at Washington, August 16, 192813
The President of the United States of America and the Federal President of
the Republic of Austria, being desirous to strengthen the bonds of amity
that bind them together and also to advance the cause of general peace,
have resolved to enter into a treaty for that purpose, and to that end have
appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
The President of the United States of America, Mr. Frank B.
Kellogg, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and
The Federal President of the Republic of Austria, Mr. Edgar L. G.
Prochnik, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to
the United States of America,
Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,
found to be in proper form, have agreed upon and concluded the following
articles:
ARTICLE I
Any disputes arising between the Government of the United States of
America and the Government of Austria, of whatever nature they may be,
shall, when ordinary diplomatic proceedings have failed and the High
Contracting Parties do not have recourse to adjudication by a competent
tribunal, be submitted for investigation and report to a permanent
International Commission constituted in the manner prescribed in the next
succeeding Article; and the High Contracting Parties agree not to declare
war or begin hostilities during such investigation and before the report is
submitted.
ARTICLE II

The International Commission shall be composed of five members, to be
appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country, by
the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government
from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common
agreement between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall
not be a citizen of either country. The expenses of the Commission shall be
paid by the two Governments in equal proportions.
The International Commission shall be appointed within six months after
the exchange of ratifications of this treaty; and vacancies shall be filled
according to the manner of the original appointment.
ARTICLE III
In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute by
diplomatic methods, and they do not have recourse to adjudication by a
competent tribunal, they shall at once refer it to the International
Commission for investigation and report. The International Commission
may, however, spontaneously by unanimous agreement offer its services to
that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request
their cooperation in the investigation.
The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the Permanent International
Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation
and report.
The report of the Commission shall be completed within one year after the
date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the
High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual
agreement. The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be
presented to each Government, and the third retained by the Commission
for its files.
The High Contracting Parties reserve the right to act independently on the
subject matter of the dispute after the report of the Commission shall have
been submitted.
ARTICLE IV

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States of
America by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by
Austria in accordance with its constitutional laws.
The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible, and
the treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of the ratifications. It
shall thereafter remain in force continuously unless and until terminated by
one year’s written notice given by either High Contracting Party to the
other.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty in
duplicate in the English and German languages, both texts having equal
force, and hereunto affixed their seals.
Done at Washington the sixteenth day of August in the year of our Lord one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight.
FRANK B. KELLOGG [SEAL]
EDGAR PROCHNIK [SEAL]
13 In English and German; German text not printed. Ratification advised by

Disinclination of the United States to
enter into a treaty with Austria
granting to immigrants equal rights
with citizens in matters of legal
protection
[816] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Under Secretary of State
(Olds)
Washington, July 21, 1927.
[817] The Assistant Secretary of State (Castle) to the Austrian Minister
(Prochnik)
Washington, February 10, 1928.

[Document 816]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Under Secretary of State
(Olds)
WASHINGTON, July 21, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE: Reverting to our conversation of today, I take
the liberty of outlining in the enclosed memorandum the subject which the
Austrian Government is anxious to regulate by convention to be negotiated
and concluded with the Government of the United States.
You would do me a great favor by having me advised in due course of the
attitude of your Government in regard to this question.
Kindly accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
[Enclosure]
MEMORANDUM
At the International Immigration and Emigration Conference in Rome in
heretofore did not enter into agreements relating to mutual aid in the
administration of justice, that they should grant by special conventions to
immigrants and their families equal rights with their own citizens in matters
of legal protection.
Although the American delegation to said Conference did not join the
abovereferred to resolution the Austrian Government hope that the
Government of the United States may be inclined to enter into negotiations
with a view of concluding a treaty assuring legal protection and mutual
assistance in the interest of administration of justice in general and granting
in particular certain exemptions from fees and other dues in cases where the

parties in litigation are found to be destitute of means and freeing the
citizens of each of the contracting parties from a necessity of furnishing
bond when they wish to enter suit in one of the courts of the other.
As to the two latter points (paupers exemption and freedom from bond) the
Austrian Government have in mind the relating stipulations in the
Convention relating to civil procedure (Convention relative à la procédure
14 For correspondence concerning participation of United States in
conference, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol.  I, pp. 115 ff.
15 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. XCIX, p. 990.

[Document 817]
The Assistant Secretary of State (Castle) to the Austrian Minister
(Prochnik)
WASHINGTON, February 10, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. MINISTER: I beg to refer to your note of July 21, 1927, transmitting a
Memorandum concerning the Austrian Government’s desire to enter into
negotiations with this Government looking toward the conclusion of a
treaty assuring legal protection and mutual assistance in certain cases to the
citizens of both countries and to enclose a Memorandum setting forth this
Government’s views in regard to the proposition of your Government in the
matter.
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.
[Enclosure]
MEMORANDUM
The Austrian Government refers to a resolution adopted at the International
Immigration and Emigration Conference in Rome in 1925 advising all
countries which heretofore did not enter into agreements relating to mutual
aid in the administration of justice, that they should grant by special
conventions to immigrants and their families equal rights with their own
citizens in matters of legal protection.
It is presumed that reference is had to the following resolution adopted at
the International Immigration and Emigration Conference at Rome in 1924
(and not 1925, as stated in the Memorandum):
“LEGAL AND JUDICIAL ASSISTANCE

“The Conference,
“considering that it is advisable to facilitate legal assistance for
emigrants and their families,
“expresses the Wish:
“(a) that the States which have not yet concluded
conventions on this subject, and particularly emigration
and immigration States, should establish, by means of
agreements based on reciprocity, equality of treatment
with nationals as regards access to judicial assistance;
“(b) that when consular conventions are being
negotiated, the States concerned should consider the
possibility of authorising consuls, in the interests of
their nationals who may be absent, to approach the
administrative and judicial authorities, in order that
their nationals may avoid prescription or the forfeiture
of the rights which they possess under the laws for
social insurance. The steps taken by the consuls must be
confirmed by the parties concerned in the forms
prescribed by the laws of the country of residence;
“(c) that each Government should encourage the
formation and facilitate the work of private associations
for legal assistance to emigrants.”
Reference is also made to Article XVII of the Convention for Civil
Procedure of July 17, 1905,16 which provides as follows:
“Aucune caution ni dépôt, sous quelque dénomination que ce soit,
ne peut être imposé, à raison soit de leur qualité d’étrangers, soit
du défaut de domicile ou de résidence dans le pays, aux nationaux
d’un des États Contractants, ayant leur domicile dans l’un de ces
États, qui seront demandeurs ou intervenants devant les tribunaux
d’un autre de ces Étas.

“La même règie s’applique au versement qui serait exigé des
demandeurs ou intervenants pour garantir les frais judiciaires.
“Les Conventions par lesquelles des États Contractants auraient
stipulé pour leurs ressortissants la dispense de la caution
judicatum solvi ou du versement des frais judiciaires sans
condition de domicile continueront à s’appliquer.”17
In this relation it may be observed that in practically all jurisdictions in the
United States it is customary to require a plaintiff who is a non-resident of
the State in which he brings suit to give security for costs, but that no
discrimination is made between citizens and aliens since the question
whether a cautionary bond should be required from a plaintiff is determined
solely by the residence of such plaintiff in the State regardless of his
nationality. Except in respect of actions in the Federal Courts the benefit of
the privilege of suing in forma pauperis likewise depends in the most
jurisdictions on residence and is accorded to alien residents as well as to
nationals.
Should the United States bind itself by a treaty provision similar to that of
Article XVII of July 17, 1905, aliens in this country would be placed on a
more favorable basis with regard to the deposit of cautionary bonds than
nationals since the test of residence in the State would not be applied to the
case of aliens as it is in the case of nationals.
This Government has not heretofore concluded treaties relating specifically
to the granting of legal assistance to aliens. Paragraph 1 of the Protocol of
the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights concluded with
Esthonia on December 23, 1925, is the only specific provision in regard to
this matter which has been included in a treaty of the United States. Articles
I, II and XXV of a similar treaty concluded with Germany in 1923, which
also are included in other treaties may be of interest. Copies of the above
mentioned treaties are enclosed.18
The conditions under which aliens might sue in the courts of the several
States of this country have generally been regarded as matters to be
determined in accordance with the laws of the several States. This
Government has, however, included in treaties negotiated with other

Governments provisions guaranteeing to nationals of the respective
countries freedom of access to the courts on conforming to the local laws
and the most constant protection and security for their persons and their
property and stipulating that property of nationals of the respective
countries shall not be taken without due process of law.
Generally speaking, it may be stated that even in the absence of treaty
provisions aliens in this country are placed upon an equality with American
citizens in the matter of legal remedies. In view of this fact and since
questions of procedure in the courts of the different States of this country
are determined by the laws of such States, this Government does not
consider that there are sufficient grounds which would warrant it in
negotiating a treaty of the nature suggested in the Memorandum of the
Austrian Government, infringing as it does upon matters normally falling
within the jurisdiction of the several States.
As showing the extent to which this Government has concluded treaty
provisions pertaining to the right of aliens to pursue legal remedies,
attention is invited to Paragraph 3 and 4 of Article I of the Treaty between
the United States and Germany of Friendship, Commerce and Consular
Rights, concluded on December 8, 1923. Attention is also invited to Article
II of this Treaty regarding the rights of relatives or heirs of nationals of the
respective countries under laws establishing civil liability for injuries or for
death; and to Article XXV of the same treaty conferring upon consular
officers the right to receive on behalf of their non-resident countrymen
distributive shares derived from estates in process of probate or accruing
under the provisions of so-called Workmen’s Compensation Laws, or other
like statutes. Such provisions have already been agreed upon for inclusion
in the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights between the
United States and Austria, the negotiation of which is nearing conclusion at
Vienna.19
WASHINGTON, February 10, 1928.
17 Translation:

“No cautionary bond nor deposit, under any denomination whatever, may
be imposed, by reason either of their status as aliens or of a defect of
domicile or of residence in the country, on nationals of one of the
Contracting States, having their domicile in one of these States, who shall
be plaintiffs or second parties before the courts of another of these States.
“The same rule applies to payment which would be required of plaintiffs or
second parties in order to guarantee the judicial costs.
“The Conventions by which the Contracting States have contracted for their
nationals exemption from the cautionary bond judicatum solvi or the
payment of judicial costs without a proviso of domicile shall continue to
apply.”

Bolivia:

Good offices of the Department of
State in behalf of the Standard Oil
Company in establishing radio station
at Yacuiba
[818] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia
(Kaufman)
[819] The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State

[Document 818]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia
(Kaufman)
12. Representative of Standard Oil Company1 states that that Company is
requesting permission from the Bolivian Government to establish a radio
station at Yacuiba for communication with its home office in New York,
and has asked for the assignment of short wave channels. The United States
Federal Radio Commission has already assigned short wave channels for
this circuit. You may informally advise the Minister for Foreign Affairs that
the Department would be glad to see this additional channel of
communication established between Bolivia and the United States, feeling
that it would serve to draw the two nations closer together and strengthen
their mutual interests. This of course with the understanding that the
privileges granted to the Sandard Oil Company should not infringe upon the
rights of any other American interests.
OLDS
1 Standard Oil Company of New Jersey.

[Document 819]
The Minister in Bolivia (Kaufman) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, August 24, 1928—noon.
[Received 12:10 p.m.]
authorizing Standard Oil Company of Bolivia to construct wireless
telegraph station at Yacuiba signed on August 23rd.
KAUFMAN

Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See
under General.)

Brazil:

Disapproval by the Department of
State of proposed refunding in the
American market of State of São
Paulo loan of 19261
1 For previous disapproval by the Department of State of the proposed
flotation of this loan by American bankers, see Foreign Relations, 1925,
vol.  I, pp. 533 ff.
[820] Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins & Sons, New York, to the
Secretary of State
[Washington,] February 2, 1928.
[821] The Secretary of State to Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins
do Sons, New York
Washington, February 16, 1928.

[Document 820]
Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins & Sons, New York, to the
Secretary of State
[WASHINGTON,] February 2, 1928.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE:
In accordance with the suggestion of the Secretary of State at a conference
this morning I reduce to writing the following inquiry on behalf of the
investment bond house of E. H. Rollins & Sons of 44 Wall Street, New
York City:
In 1926 the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil, brought out a £5,000,000,
7½% loan in London. This loan was brought out through the Sao
Paulo Coffee Institute by Lazard Brothers, and was specifically
secured by a first charge and receipt of transport tax of one gold
milreis on each bag of coffee, and by all the assets of the Institute
above mentioned. This issue was brought to the attention of E. H.
Rollins & Sons and discussed with the Secretary of Commerce,
Mr. Hoover, but was not offered in this market due to his
opposition to the nature of the business, involving as it seemed
apparent to him, the financing of a monopoly, which might have
had the tendency of raising the price of coffee to the American
consumer.
This loan has been very successful in London and the bonds are
now selling above par. E. H. Rollins & Sons would like to
consider the possibility of calling the present issue in London and
bringing out a dollar issue in the American market, provided of
course the situation would be such that the government would not
object to the financing. The call and refunding operation would
not involve any new money, nor would it change the actual
existing situation as far as coffee is concerned. At the present time

it would be possible for E. H. Rollins & Sons to do this business
at probably a more favorable rate than that current in London,
thereby showing a distinct advantage to the State of Sao Paulo.
The Secretary of Commerce has advised the undersigned to present the
matter to the Secretary of State for appropriate consideration, and
conference with the departments of the government concerned, because of
recent developments with regard to American financing operations in Brazil
to the end that the matter may be presented to the President. It is
respectfully requested that specific approval be given to the call and
refunding operation above set forth.
ANDREW TEN EYCK

[Document 821]
The Secretary of State to Mr. Andrew Ten Eyck, for E. H. Rollins
do Sons, New York
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1928.
SIR: I beg to refer to your memorandum of February 2, 1928, in regard to
possible refunding in the American market of the loan of the State of Sao
Paulo, Brazil, which was brought out in London in 1926 through the Sao
Paulo Coffee Institute.
After careful consideration, the conclusion has been reached that there is no
change in the situation which would warrant modification at this time of the
position taken by this Government prior to the flotation of the loan of 1926,
namely, that the issue in the American market of a loan in connection with
coffee valorization would not be viewed with favor.
For the Secretary of State:
W. R. CASTLE, Jr.,
Assistant Secretary

Refusal of the Department of State to
disapprove loan to State of São Paulo
because of claim of American firm
against State
[822] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Sao Paulo
(Cameron)
[823] The Consul at São Pernio (Cameron) to the Secretary of State
[824] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[825] Speyer & Co. to the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)

[826] The Secretary of State to Speyer & Co.
Washington, June 21, 1928.
[827] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[828] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, June 29, 1928—noon.
[829] Speyer & Co. to the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
[830] Field, Glore & Co., International Acceptance Bank, Baker,
Kellogg & Co., and Ulen & Company to the Secretary of State
[831] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

[832] The Secretary of State to Field, Glove & Co., International
Acceptance Bank, Baker, Kellogg & Co., and Ulen & Company
Washington, July 28, 1928.

[Document 822]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Sao Paulo
(Cameron)
The Department has been approached by representatives of Baker, Kellogg
and Company and Ulen and Company with regard to the failure of the
Government of São Paulo to deliver an issue of vicinal bonds to the Itararé-
Fartura Railroad which were assigned by the latter to the American interests
mentioned as security for an advance of about $380,000 made to the
railroad company. It is alleged that as security for the bonds not yet
delivered the Government has taken a mortgage on the railroad. American
interests consider it unjust for the Government to refuse delivery of the
bonds on the ground of the Company’s failure to meet certain financial
requirements when such failure is caused by the Government’s refusal to
deliver the bonds.
The American interests have not exhausted their legal remedies, or even
taken the case into court, feeling that such procedure would entail great
delay and expense which should not be necessary under the circumstances.
They have asked the Department to use its informal good offices in an
endeavor to persuade the Government of Sao Paulo to settle the case.
Consult with Mr. Ralph D. Kellogg, now at Sao Paulo, and if you see no
objection discuss the matter informally with the appropriate authorities,
expressing the hope that a solution mutually satisfactory to the Government
and the American interests concerned may be reached in the near future.
Endeavor to ascertain definitely the reason for the state’s refusal to deliver
the bonds. Report briefly by cable and fully by mail.
OLDS

[Document 823]
The Consul at São Pernio (Cameron) to the Secretary of State
[Received 3:50 p.m.]
Department’s telegram March 29, 5 p.m. I have consulted with Kellogg and
Whitson, latter being the representative of Ulen and Company. On March
31st I called on the State Secretary of Fazenda and discussed the matter
informally expressing the hope suggested in Department’s telegram March
29, 5 p.m. Secretary stated as follows: bonds have not been issued because
the State has been judicially notified by another creditor that bonds should
be delivered to him. The matter is now being studied by State’s legal
adviser. Such creditor is Lafayette Siqueira and Company, contractor, who
constructed portion of Itararé-Fartura line. About a week ago State
authorities answered a telegram from the Foreign Office at Rio de Janeiro
regarding the same matter. State Government has had no dealings with
Baker, Kellogg and Company or with Ulen and Company, and State
government believes claim of those companies to be solely against Itararé-
Fartura Railway Company. Latter company has numerous bills protested
and may soon be forced into bankruptcy. For partial explanation of this case
see my report of March 23rd entitled “Aid to [Neighborhood] Railways”3 in
the mail pouch scheduled to arrive at New York on April 10th. Full report
by mail pouch scheduled to arrive at New York on April 24th.
CAMERON
3 Not printed.

[Document 824]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
regarding vicinal bonds of the Itararé-Fartura Railway, the bankers are
convinced that the State of Sao Paulo is under legal obligations to carry out
its agreement with them. The bankers state, however, that they will not take
the case into court, since they realize that years will be required to get a
final decision. They say that even if such a decision were to be in their
favor—and they consider this certain—an appropriation by Congress would
still be necessary. The Department has been informed by the bankers that if
the State of Sao Paulo will not agree to make a settlement which will be
satisfactory to the American interests concerned, influence will be brought
to bear by these American interests on bankers’ associations both in the
United States and in Europe to prevent the flotation of future loans by the
State of Sao Paulo, on the ground that the State of Sao Paulo does not live
up to its financial obligations.
With the information at its disposal, the Department is not prepared to pass
on the merits of the controversy between the State of Sao Paulo and the
bankers; nevertheless, because of the serious consequences which may
result if this matter is not settled in a way which will be mutually
satisfactory to both parties, it is the belief of the Department that you would
be justified in discussing this matter informally with President Washington
Luis, whose influence with the State Government of Sao Paulo, according
to the bankers, is considerable. You will express the hope that for the best
interests of all concerned a satisfactory settlement may be reached. The
bankers are willing for you to use any information transmitted herewith
with regard to their intentions and views as you see fit, and in such a

manner as you may think most likely to produce a favorable effect. You will
take care not to appear to be making any threats on behalf of the bankers.
KELLOGG
4 Not printed.

[Document 825]
Speyer & Co. to the Assistant Secretary of State (Castle)
NEW YORK, June 19, 1928.
[Received June 20.]
SIR: Referring to the Department’s request that American bankers furnish
information regarding loans that they may be negotiating with foreign
governments,5 we beg to submit the following concerning a loan to the
State of San Paulo, Brazil.
The State of San Paulo proposes to issue about $25,000,000 principal
amount of its Forty-Year 6% Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, being part of an
international loan to be known as either the “External Refunding Loan of
1928” or the “External Loan of 1928” of an authorized amount of about
£10,000,000. We are negotiating with London bankers for the above
$25,000,000 Bonds, being the American tranche.
Of the remaining bonds constituting this loan, about £5,000,000 principal
amount are being negotiated in London by Messrs. J. Henry Schroder &
Co., Baring Brothers & Co., Ltd. and N. M. Rothschild & Sons.
A sinking fund will be provided sufficient to retire all of the bonds at or
before maturity. The bonds will be the direct and unconditional obligation
of the State of San Paulo, and will be payable in Pounds Sterling and in
United States gold, free from all Brazilian taxes. The State will covenant
that if in the future it shall guarantee any loan, or issue a loan secured by a
lien on any of its assets, it would give first to this loan adequate security
approved by the Fiscal Agents.
We are advised that approximately $15,350,000 of the proceeds of this loan
about $7,500,000 for additions, betterments and extensions to the water

supply and sewerage systems of the City of San Paulo, and the balance of
the proceeds for the extension of the Sorocabana Railway from Mayrink to
the port of Santos.
We trust that the Department of State will find no objection to the flotation
in this country of the American part of the above loan, and shall be obliged
if you will so advise us at your earliest convenience.
Respectfully yours,
SPEYER & Co.

[Document 826]
The Secretary of State to Speyer & Co.
WASHINGTON, June 21, 1928.
SIRS: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of June 19, 1928,
regarding your interest in a loan of about $25,000,000 to the State of Sao
Paulo, Brazil.
In reply to your request for an expression of this Department’s views, I beg
to state that, in the light of the information before it, the Department of
State offers no objection to this financing.
You of course appreciate that, as pointed out in the Department’s
announcement of March 3, 1922,6 the Department of State does not pass
upon the merits of foreign loans as business propositions nor assume any
responsibility in connection with such transactions, also that no reference to
the attitude of this Government should be made in any prospectus or
otherwise.
The Department would be glad to learn in what manner the proposed public
works and railroad construction will be carried out. In this connection, the
Department hopes that American firms may be afforded the freest
opportunity to compete for such work on equal terms, and assumes that the
proposed contracts and the procedure in connection therewith will not in
any way interfere with such free opportunity.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
Assistant Secretary

[Document 827]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
Paulo in relation to the Itararé-Fartura Railway matter it is difficult to
secure reliable information for the interested firm on account of the
antagonism which their peremptory methods have developed among the
members of the São Paulo Government described in Consul Cameron’s
despatches,7 the accuracy of which I confirm. Further antagonism has been
developed by the statement in the bankruptcy proceedings that the
bankruptcy has been wholly caused by the failure of the State Government
to fulfill its obligations. The illness of President Washington Luis has
prevented conferences with him but I should hesitate to hold them until I
was persuaded that the action of the State Government is unjustified.
MORGAN
7 Not printed.
7 Not printed.

[Document 828]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, June 29, 1928—noon.
you will remember stated that the Department is not prepared to pass on the
merits of the controversy. Neither does it expect you to decide whether the
action of the state government is justified. However, the Department
believes that as soon as the President’s health permits you should, very
informally, of course, take the action suggested in the last paragraph of the
instruction cited.
KELLOGG

[Document 829]
Speyer & Co. to the Assistant Secretary of State (White)
NEW YORK, July 10, 1928.
[Received July 11.]
negotiation for the above loan, we now beg to advise you that the plan of
refunding the American and Dutch portions of the 8% External Loan of
1921 has been abandoned, and that the total authorized amount of the loan
has been reduced to an American portion of $15,000,000 (instead of
$25,000,000, as stated in the above letters) and an English portion of
£3,500,000 Sterling Bonds.
The proceeds of the loan will be used for additions, betterments and
extensions to the water supply and sewerage systems of the City of San
Paulo, and for extension of the Sorocabana Railway.
In reply to the last paragraph of your letter of June 21st, we are informed
that the railroad earthwork contracts have all been granted to private parties
and that the rails will be laid by the State. With regard to the waterworks
construction, the proceeds of the loan will be used only to complete
construction already under contract.
We are [etc.]
SPEYER & Co.
8 Latter not printed.

[Document 830]
Field, Glore & Co., International Acceptance Bank, Baker,
Kellogg & Co., and Ulen & Company to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, July 17, 1928.
[Received July 20.]
DEAR SIR: The undersigned desires to call the attention of the State
Department to a statement of facts submitted to the Department by the law
firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle on our behalf under date of
March 22nd, 1928,9 regarding our claim against the State of Sao Paulo,
Brazil. This statement of facts sets forth very clearly the obligation upon the
part of the State in an amount of approximately $380,000 which obligation
the State has definitely defaulted in fulfilling.
Our attention has lately been called to the report that this same State of Sao
Paulo contemplates the flotation on the American market in the immediate
future of upwards of $15,000,000 of its bonds which bonds will be sold to a
wide list of American investors.
It is our feeling that the facts as stated in the memorandum submitted by us
should be given full consideration in connection with the reported new loan
and we should appreciate it if the Department will take full cognizance of
said memorandum in determining its attitude toward any such proposed
loan.
We take the liberty of inquiring whether under these circumstances the
Department would give its approval to a loan to a borrower known to be in
default as indicated in the above mentioned memorandum. We wish
furthermore to point out that we are in no way interested in the
contemplated loan to the State of Sao Paulo and are in no sense competitors
of the bankers who are negotiating it.
Respectfully yours,

FIELD, GLORE & CO., INC.
By M. S. HARRISON, V.P.
INTERNATIONAL ACCEPTANCE BANK, INC.
By JAMES WARBURG, V.P.
BAKER, KELLOGG & CO., INC.
By J. C. LUITWEILER
120 Broadway,
ULEN & COMPANY
By C. M. BOUNELL
9 Not printed.

[Document 831]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 20, 1928.
[Received August 11.]
No. 3039
SIR: Referring to the Department’s telegraphic instructions Nos. 15, of May
instruction contained in the last paragraph of the Department’s instruction
of May 3 has been complied with and that the President of the Republic will
endeavor to interest the President of Sao Paulo in affording some assistance
to the American groups concerned with the Itararé-Fartura Railway.
How successful his representations may prove I cannot prophesy because
Dr. Julio Prestes is seriously offended by the character of the telegram
which the interested bankers addressed to him on March 1 last, as well as
by the statement that
“We request Your Excellency’s immediate reply since we desire
to avoid the necessity of bringing the matter to the attention of
our State Department at Washington”
a copy of the text of which telegram formed schedule No. 4 of the
exposition which Messrs. Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle submitted
to the Department under date of March 22.10
President Prestes considers the quoted words to be a threat which no group
of foreign bankers has the right to address to a self-respecting foreign
government, and that after their wide international experience in dealing
with foreign governments it is surprising that the bankers interested in the
railway should have employed them.

In his recent annual message to the State Legislature, President Prestes has
referred to the relations of the State Government with the Itararé-Fartura
Railway and the text of these references, both in English and Portuguese, I
have the honor to enclose.10 They elucidate the viewpoint of the State
Government, and may assist the Department in adjusting its relations to the
matter in hand.
I have [etc.]
EDWIN V. MORGAN
10 Not printed.
10 Not printed.

[Document 832]
The Secretary of State to Field, Glove & Co., International
Acceptance Bank, Baker, Kellogg & Co., and Ulen & Company
WASHINGTON, July 28, 1928.
SIRS: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of July 17, 1928,
regarding your claim against the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
As stated in a telephonic conversation of July 20 with Mr. F. Abbott
Goodhue, President of the International Acceptance Bank, Incorporated,
regarding the subject of the letter, the Department can establish no
connection between your grievance against the State of São Paulo and the
flotation of a loan of that State. With reference to your statement that the
State is known to be in default, it was also pointed out that the Department
has never undertaken to pass on the merits of your complaint against the
State, but, at your request, has merely used its good offices to bring about a
settlement of the matter satisfactory to both parties. I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
Assistant Secretary

Assistance of the Department of State
in protecting patent rights of the
Symington Company in Brazil from
infringement by Belgian firm
[833] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Belgium (Reed)
Washington, February 29, 1928.
[834] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, March 5, 1928.
[835] The General Counsel of The Symington Company (Mechlin) to
the Secretary of State
Washington, March 22, 1928.
[836] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

[837] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, April 5, 1928.
[838] The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Document 833]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Belgium (Reed)
WASHINGTON, February 29, 1928.
No. 92
SIR: The Department transmits herewith copies of a letter dated February 15,
1928, and its enclosures from Mr. Ernest F. Mechlin, General Counsel for
The Symington Company,12 manufacturers of railway equipment in regard
to the alleged infringement by Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de
Construction de Familleureux of Familleureux, Belgium, of the patents
covering equipment designed, patented and manufactured by The
Symington Company.
It will be observed from the enclosed letter that the Symington equipment
mentioned was adopted and made standard equipment by the Paulista
Railroad and the Central Railroad of Brazil and that negotiations are now in
progress looking to the adoption of the equipment by other Brazilian
railroads; that the Central Railroad of Brazil ordered from the Societe
Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux 150 freight cars
specifying that they be equipped with the Symington equipment designated:
“1.
Symington
Farlow
draft
attachments
with
Symington tandem spring draft gears in accordance
with railway drawing No. 1512.
“2. Symington journal boxes and Symington patented
malleable iron torsion spring lid with latest improved
split pin”;
that the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux
represented to the Brazilian railroad officials that it would have the
Symington equipment manufactured in Belgium under a license from The

Symington Company; that this representation was false, no such license
having been issued by The Symington Company or requested by the Societe
Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux; that it is
understood that the equipment is now in process of manufacture; that as a
result of this piracy and false representation, The Symington Company’s
interests will be seriously injured unless measures are taken to prevent the
unauthorized manufacture in Belgium of the equipment under discussion
until recognition of the rights of The Symington Company and the payment
to them of adequate compensation is assumed.
The Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux is
specifically representing that the cars being furnished for the Central
Railroad of Brazil will be equipped with the Symington equipment called
for in the specifications, whereas the equipment actually about to be
furnished are unauthorized imitations of the genuine Symington equipment
and the Belgian company is therefore not only pirating the patent right of
The Symington Company and falsely representing that the equipment is
being manufactured under a license issued by The Symington Company, but
they are using the trade names of The Symington Company without the
authority of that company and to its detriment.
The action of the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de
Familleureux seems clearly to contravene the provisions hereinafter quoted
of the Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property signed at
Washington on June 2, 1911, to which the United States and Belgium are
parties.13 Article 8 of the Convention reads as follows:
“Trade names shall be protected in all the countries of the Union
without the obligation of filing, whether it be a part or not of a
trademark.”
Article 10½ contains the following provisions:
“All the contracting countries agree to assure to the members of
the Union an effective protection against unfair competition.”
In view of the reprehensible actions of the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de
Construction de Familleureux and the treaty violations involved therein and

the loss resulting therefrom to The Symington Company, you will please
bring this matter to the attention of the Foreign Office and inquire whether
it will not be possible for the Belgian authorities to take action with a view
to preventing the violation by the Belgian company of the treaty rights of
these citizens of the United States.
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
12 Not printed.

[Document 834]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, March 5, 1928.
No. 1342
SIR: The Department transmits herewith copies of a letter dated February 15,
1928, and its enclosures from Mr. Ernest F. Mechlin, General Counsel for
The Symington Company,14 manufacturers of railway equipment, in regard
to the alleged infringement by the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de
Construction de Familleureux of Familleureux, Belgium, of the patents
covering equipment designed and manufactured by The Symington
Company and patented under the laws of Brazil.
It will be observed from the enclosed letter that the Symington equipment
mentioned was adopted and made standard by the Paulista Railroad and the
Central Railroad of Brazil and that negotiations are now in progress looking
to the adoption of the equipment by other Brazilian railroads; that the
Central Railroad of Brazil ordered from the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers
de Construction de Familleureux 150 freight cars specifying that they be
equipped with the Symington equipment designated as:
“1.
Symington
Farlow
draft
attachments
with
Symington tandem spring draft gears in accordance
with Railway drawing No. 1512.
“2. Symington journal boxes and Symington patented
malleable iron torsion spring lid with latest improved
split pin”;
that the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux
represented to the Brazilian railroad officials that it would have the
Symington equipment manufactured in Belgium under a license from The

Symington Company; that this representation was false, no such license
having been issued by The Symington Company or requested by the Societe
Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux; that it is
understood that the equipment is now in process of manufacture; that as a
result of this piracy and false representation The Symington Company’s
interests will be seriously injured unless measures are taken to insure the
protection to which they are entitled under the patent laws of Brazil and
under the provisions of the Convention Relating to Inventions, Patents,
Designs and Industrial Models signed at Buenos Aires on August 29 [20],
1910,15 to which the United States and Brazil are parties.
In ordinary circumstances The Symington Company could enforce its rights
by judicial proceedings in Brazil designed to prevent the entry into that
country of railway cars bearing the pirated devices of the patentee but the
Department is advised that such action would be ineffective in this case
because the Brazilian Government is financially interested in the Central
Railroad of Brazil and that accordingly no embargo may be placed on the
shipment of cars containing the infringing equipment.
In view of the gross violation of the rights of The Symington Company by
the action of the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de
Familleureux and the inadequacy of any remedy by judicial proceedings by
the Company, you are requested to bring this matter urgently to the
attention of the Foreign Office and to request that action be taken by the
appropriate Brazilian authorities with a view to preventing the entry into
Brazil of the shipment in question until the rights of The Symington
Company under the laws of Brazil and the Treaty of 1910 above mentioned
have been adequately recognized and due compensation paid them by the
infringers of the patents mentioned.
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
14 Not printed.

[Document 835]
The General Counsel of The Symington Company (Mechlin) to
the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 22, 1928.
SIR: I wish to advise that the Brazilian situation, brought to your attention by
my letter of February 28th, 1928,16 has been adjusted to our satisfaction in
the following manner:
Familleureux, the Belgian manufacturer, has recognized the validity of the
Brazilian patents owned by the Symington Company and has agreed to pay
us a royalty for the right to manufacture and import into Brazil Farlow
tandem draft gear attachments and journal box lids.
Permit me to express to you and to the Department the deep appreciation of
the officials of the Symington Company for your kind offices in our behalf,
without which we would not have been able to carry the matter to its
present satisfactory conclusion.
Yours respectfully,
ERNEST F. MECHLIN
16 Not printed.

[Document 836]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, March 24, 1928.
[Received April 13.]
No. 2978
SIR: Replying to the Department’s instruction No. 1342, of March 9 last (File
Company of Rochester, New York, manufacturers of railroad equipment,
reported by Mr. Ernest F. Mechlin, McGill Building, Washington, D. C. to
the Department, I have the honor to state that the claim of the said company
for piracy of patent against the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers de
Construction de Familleureux, of Familleureux, Belgium, has been
satisfactorily settled and that the said company has made compensation
through the payment of an adequate royalty.
The representatives of the company in Rio de Janeiro, Messrs. Norton,
Megaw and Company, have acknowledged that this satisfactory result was
due to the efforts of our able Commercial Attaché, Mr. Carlton Jackson,
who handled the matter (in cooperation with this office) under instructions
from his Department.
I have [etc.]
EDWIN V. MORGAN

[Document 837]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)17
WASHINGTON, April 5, 1928.
No. 1355
regard to the attempted infringement by the Societe Anonyme des Ateliers
de Construction de Familleureux of Familleureux, Belgium, of the patents
covering railway equipment designed and manufactured by The Symington
Company and patented under the laws of Brazil, the Department informs
you that it has received a letter from the General Counsel of The Symington
Company, dated March 22, 1928, stating that the Belgium Company
mentioned has recognized the validity of the Brazilian patents owned by
The Symington Company and has agreed to pay that Company a royalty for
the right to manufacture the equipment and to import it into Brazil.
Accordingly no further action in the matter need be taken by the Embassy.
For the Secretary of State:
FRANCIS WHITE
17 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date to the Ambassador in
Belgium as instruction No. 101.

[Document 838]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, April 23, 1928.
[Received May 5.]
No. 234
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 92 of
infringement by the Société Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de
Familleureux of Familleureux, Belgium, of the patents covering equipment
designed, manufactured and patented by the Symington Company.
By note of March 20, 1928, the Embassy brought this matter to the attention
of the Foreign Office, pursuant to the Department’s instruction first
mentioned above, and asked whether it might not be possible for the
Belgian authorities to take action with a view to preventing the threatened
violation by the Belgian Company of the treaty rights of the Symington
Company as citizens of the United States.
The Department’s second instruction was received April 17, 1928, and a
note was addressed to the Foreign Office the same day, in which attention
was invited to the satisfactory settlement of the matter between the two
companies concerned.
I have now received under date of April 20, 1928, a reply from the Foreign
Office to my first note on the subject. This reply was apparently drafted
before the receipt of my second note, but as it contains information which
may be of value in the event that similar cases occur in the future, I am
enclosing a copy and translation of it for the records of the Department.

In acknowledging this note I have, of course, confined myself to an
expression of thanks for the information furnished the Embassy and of
appreciation of the Ministry’s interposition with the Familleureux Company
which appears to have borne satisfactory results.
I have [etc.]
HUGH GIBSON
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy
BRUSSELS, April 20, 1928.
Direction B
Section I. B. No. 441/1480
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
States at Brussels requested its intervention in favor of the Symington
Company who makes complaint of unfair competition and misuse of its
trade name on the part of the Société Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction
de Familleureux.
In order to meet the stipulations of articles 8 and 10½ of the International
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property signed at Washington
June 2, 1911 the Belgian Government has made provision in its legislation
for an action against firms or persons misusing the trade name of a foreign
competitor or who have committed actions involving unfair competition.
However, it should be noted that this action for which provision is made in
Belgian legislation has only a civil character and that as a consequence
thereof injured persons or firms should themselves take the initiative in
bringing such action. It is not the same insofar as concerns trade marks, as a
penal action is provided in such cases in accordance with the law of April 1,
1879.

On the other hand, contrary to the opinion which the note of the Embassy of
the United States of America appears to indicate, the facts invoked by the
Symington Company against the Société Anonyme des Ateliers de
Construction de Familleureux do not constitute a violation of the
International Convention. The Symington Company may invoke the
provisions of this Convention in order to demand their judicial application
and it is for the company to take the initiative in citing the Société
Anonyme des Ateliers de Construction de Familleureux before the Courts.
The matter is thus one of private law.
From the foregoing considerations it results that the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs has not, in this matter, any means of constraint and that it can only
interpose its good offices in order to obtain eventually a friendly settlement.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been careful to invite the serious
attention of the Directorate of the Société Anonyme de Construction de
Familleureux to the claim of the Symington Company and has moreover
asked the company to inform it of the measures which it intends to take
with a view to putting an end as soon as possible to the criticisms resulting
from the attitude of the said company.
18 See supra, footnote 17.

Bulgaria:
Disinclination of the United States to participate in
agreement regarding apportionment of Bulgarian reparation
payments (Documents 839-843)

Disinclination of the United States to
participate in agreement regarding
apportionment
of
Bulgarian
reparation payments
[839] The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 21, 1928.
[840] The Secretary of State to the Greek Minister (Simopoulos)
Washington , June 12, 1928.
[841] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[842] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[843] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Washington, July

[Document 839]
The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1928.
No. 841
The Minister of Greece presents his compliments to His Excellency, the
Secretary of State, and has the honor, by direction of his Government, to lay
the following before him:
As Your Excellency is aware, according to Article 23 of the Agreement of
apportionment under the Dawes Plan, which Article has to do with
Bulgarian payments, the said payments are distributed, up to December 31,
apportionment is contemplated after that date.
Pending such new apportionment, the amounts available have been
deposited by the Reparation Commission in the National City Bank of New
York, at the interest of 2½% per annum.
In the same bank there has been deposited an amount of $31,500 derived
from liquidated Bulgarian war materiel. At the suggestion of the economic
offices of the Reparation Commission, the question has been raised of
converting these available moneys into short-term, interest-bearing
securities, such, for instance, as United States Treasury Certificates of
Indebtedness.
The Government of the Republic has the honor to request of the Powers
signatory to the Agreement referred to above, that steps be taken, either by

calling a Conference, or by any other method judged to be proper, to effect
a new apportionment of Bulgarian payments.
It reserves the right to request also that the share of Greece, set by the Spa
Agreement at 12.7%, be increased on the strength of new factors which it
will bring forward at the proper time and place, especially on account of the
amounts awarded to it by the Arbitrator appointed by Mr. Ador,3 or which
were due to it under the head of damages during the pre-belligerent period
the Annex to Part IX, Section IV of the Treaty of Neuilly,4 and with the
decision of The Hague Court, on September 12, 1924,5 bringing that
category of claims within the aggregate reparations contemplated by
Articles 121 and 122 of the Treaty of Neuilly.
3 Gustave Ador, President of the Swiss Confederation for 1919 and
afterward president of the International Red Cross at Geneva.
5 Collection of Judgments, Publications of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, Series A. No. 3, p. 9.

[Document 840]
The Secretary of State to the Greek Minister (Simopoulos)
The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Minister of Greece
and, in acknowledging the receipt of his note of May 21, 1928,
communicating the request of the Greek Government that the Powers
signatory to the agreement of January 14, 1925, regarding the distribution
of the Dawes annuities, proceed to a new apportionment of Bulgarian
payments, has the honor to inform him that the matter of the formal
relationship of the United States Government to the proposed action is
receiving the consideration of this Government. Inasmuch, however, as this
Government does not participate in the distribution of Bulgarian reparation
payments, it desires in no way to prejudice the consideration of the request
of the Greek Government by the other Governments to which it has been
addressed.
WASHINGTON , June 12, 1928.

[Document 841]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, June 28, 1928.
[Received July 7.]
Reparation
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s letter,
information a translation of a note, dated May 21, 1928, from the Greek
Minister at Washington requesting that the Powers signatory to the
Agreement of January 14, 1925, agree to a new division of Bulgarian
Reparation payments, together with a copy of the Department’s reply of
June 12th.
The Department states that it will probably not desire to sign any agreement
which may eventually be reached for the distribution of Bulgarian
payments, and invites my comments in the matter.
As pointed out in the Department’s letter under reference, it is clear that
when we signed the Agreement of January 14, 1925, we undertook no
commitment as to the obligations of other Governments, since
commitments between the Allied Governments are specifically so described
in the Agreement, and wherever we are concerned specific reference in the
text of the Agreement is made to the United States. Further, as I pointed out
in my letter of April 20, 1928,6 regarding the official notification to me by
the Reparation Commission of its action in regard to the 10th Bulgarian
Reparation payment, we are, in fact, not interested in the Bulgarian
Reparation payments: we were not at war with Bulgaria, and any claim we
might have had under the Wadsworth Agreement7 upon payments made by
Bulgaria was waived under the January 14, 1925, Agreement.

In view of the foregoing, I am in entire accord with the Department’s
opinion that it is not desirable for us to sign any Agreement which may be
reached for the distribution of Bulgarian payments.
I note that the Greek Government in its communication of May 21, 1928,
reserves the right to request that the share of Greece, set by the Spa
Agreement at 12.7%, be increased in view of certain considerations set
forth in the note. The Greek share referred to seems clearly intended to
mean that in non-German Reparations, and not the 0.4% share in German
Agreement.
The Department will recall that in a letter, dated January 26, 1925,
addressed to the Secretariat General of the Conference of Finance
Ministers8 which resulted in the signature of the Agreement of January 14,
1925, by the representatives of the Belgian, French, British, Italian and
Japanese Governments on the Conference’s Committee of Experts (Annex
the Reparation percentages attributed to Greece and Roumania on non-
German Reparations would also apply, in conformity with Article 2 of the
Spa Agreement, to any sums received on account of the so-called
Liberation Bonds. It would seem clear, however, that any Agreement
reached by the other Powers altering the Greek share in non-German
Reparations could not have any effect upon our rights as concerns the
Liberation Bonds.
I have [etc.]
For the Ambassador:
EDWIN C. WILSON
5a Not printed.
6 Not printed.
8 Not printed.

[Document 842]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Received 5:25 p.m.]
187. Reparation 105.
June 28, regarding agreement to be reached for distribution
Bulgarian reparation payments. Also my letter June 299
concerning Commission’s decision of June 23 as to postponement
Bulgarian payments and recommendation that Greece be allotted
certain sum out of blocked Bulgarian payments.
2. General Secretary has now circulated as matter of urgency
protocol prepared by British, French and Italian representatives
granting Greek Government on account of earthquake damages a
special advance from the Bulgarian blocked payments equal to its
agreement.10 Meeting of representatives of signatories of January
this protocol.
3. [Paraphrase.] May I suggest the Department authorize me to
advise the General Secretary that, since the United States
Government does not participate in reparation payments by
Bulgaria, it does not feel called upon to sign a protocol drawn up
following the proposed discussions. Early instructions would be
appreciated. [End paraphrase.]
HERRICK
9 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

[Document 843]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
4 p.m. You are authorized to inform the Secretary General that, inasmuch as
the United States Government does not participate in reparation payments
by Bulgaria, it does not consider it desirable or necessary to sign any
protocol which may allot such payments among the Governments
concerned.
KELLOGG

portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]
Africa, international conventions relating to. See Convention
Revising the General Act of Berlin of 1885, etc.; Liquor traffic in
Africa; Slavery convention.
Aggression, resolution of Sixth International Conference of
204 is part of Doc. 172]
Agreements. See Treaties, conventions, etc.
Doc. 716]
Treaties of arbitration and conciliation with United
Submittal of drafts by United States, and
715]
Texts signed Oct. 22: Arbitration treaty, 853–

Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Message of congratulation from President
and Doc. 710]; appreciation of the King and
Proclamation as King, reports concerning,
Recognition by United States, 847–852 [Pgs.
governments, 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc.
851 is part of Doc. 712]
Alien Property Custodian, proposed disposition of property held
Austria: Transfer of funds to satisfy awards of Tripartite

Doc. 347]; U. S. Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928,
question of possible effect on Austrian-owned property,
British Public Trustee, court actions against Alien
Property Custodian, U. S. memorandum concerning,
Rumanian claims to assets of Austro-Hungarian Bank,
346, and Doc. 347]
Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928:
Alsace-Lorrainese claims, effect on, 465–466
Doc. 330]
Austrian-owned property, question of possible
Danish representations in connection with,
Hungarian
inquiries
as
to
correct

Statement of U. S. Secretary of State to
Swiss representations for safeguarding of
rights of Swiss nationals and complete release
U. S. legislation. See Settlement of War Claims Act of
1928, supra.
Valuation
of
German
shipping
by
Reparation
Commission, information in reply to queries of War
Alien seamen, Senate bills for deportation of, representations to
Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]
Aliens:
Pan American convention regarding status of, 596–598
U. S.-Austrian negotiations concerning rights of aliens
to acquire real property on most-favored-nation basis,
part of Doc. 785]; to lease lands for agricultural purposes,
Doc. 794]

Alsace-Lorrainese claims for release of property held by Alien
Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]
American states, conferences. See Conference of American
States, Sixth International; Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration.
Anti-war resolution of Sixth International Conference of
Arbitration:
Boundary disputes, arbitration of. See under Boundary
disputes: Guatemala–Honduras.
Conference of American States. See Conference of
American States on Conciliation and Arbitration.
Sixth International Conference of American States,
Doc. 390]
Treaties:
U. S.–Albania. See Albania: Treaties.
U. S.–Austria. See under Austria: Treaties.
U. S. Senate reservations in connection with U. S.
ratification of certain international conventions, 427 [Pg.

Argentina (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration; and under Boundary disputes:
Bolivia-Paraguay):
Aviation, U. S. interests, 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc.
Commercial treaty with United States (1858), cited, 926
[Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 785]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, attitude toward, 157
and Doc. 194]
Armament limitation. See Naval armament limitation; Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference.
Arms and munitions. See Military equipment; Naval armament
limitation; Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference; Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms.
Australia, participation in treaty for the renunciation of war, 69–

Austria (see also under Alien Property Custodian), 157 [Pg. 157
Doc. 817]
Commercial treaty with Great Britain (1924), cited,
Debt agreement with United States:
Negotiations: Preliminary, 859 [Pg. 859 includes
Doc. 757, and Doc. 758]; progress of U. S.
legislation for settlement of debt and
subordination
of
relief
loans
to
new
investment loan, 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of

Austrian proposal for final settlement, 917–
Doc. 781, and Doc. 782]; visit of Austrian
Passage by U. S. Congress of joint resolution
authorizing conclusion of an agreement, 923
784]
Investment loan, proposed:
Control Committee of the Guarantor States
for the Reconstruction of Austria, attitude,
Doc. 753]
League of Nations financial committee,
Morgan & Co., J. P., negotiations in

Relief
loans,
Austrian
desire
for
subordination to investment loan:
Consent of Reparation Commission
and European creditor countries,
includes portions of Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and
part of Doc. 756]; of Relief Bonds
Committee, 885
[Pg.
includes
portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739]
Italian attitude, 909 [Pg. 909 includes
Doc. 776]
Negotiations with United States:
Austrian
requests
and
desire for U. S. action,

portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719,
Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc.
portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730,
883–884 include portions of Doc.
Data
as
to
principal
aspects and productivity
of investment loan, 869–
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 724 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 725, Doc.
portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730,
Doc. 731, and Doc. 732]
U.
S.
legislation
for
deferment
of
liens:
Discussions, preliminary,
881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740,
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 740, Doc. 741,
[Pg. 889 is part of Doc. 744],
894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of
Doc. 749, Doc. 750, and Doc.
portions of Doc. 754 and Doc.
755]; recommendation of
Secretary of Treasury and

approval
of
President
Coolidge, 897–902 [Pgs.
897–902 include portions of Doc.
reports and discussions
concerning progress of
legislation
through
Congress, 902
[Pg.
includes portions of Doc. 758,
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761,
Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 767, Doc.
910 includes portions of Doc. 770,
[Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc.
Service of loan, action of Reparation
Commission excepting certain revenues for:
Austrian desire and favorable attitude of
Commission, 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc.
opposition of Italian delegation, 907–908 [Pgs.
766]
Legal protection, Austrian desire for treaty with United
States granting to immigrants equal rights with citizens,
and Doc. 817]; U. S. disinclination to enter into treaty,
817]

Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation
271]
Relief Bonds Committee, International, 858–859 [Pgs.
portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780]
Relief loans (see also Debt agreement with United
States, supra; and under Investment loan, supra):
Amount of Austrian relief obligations, 894–
Doc. 763]
Funding
of:
Austrian
proposals,
and

Doc. 780]; reparations and liabilities for army
costs, relation to, 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of
750, and Doc. 751]
Reparations, relation to funding of relief debt, 888 [Pg.
Treaties with United States (see also Debt agreement,
supra):
Arbitration and conciliation, 1008–1013 [Pgs.
Submittal of drafts by United
States, and Austrian acceptance,
[Pgs.
include
Doc. 814]
Texts signed Aug. 16: Arbitration
treaty, 1009–1011
[Pgs.
include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and
Doc. 815]; conciliation treaty, 1011–
Friendship, commerce, and consular rights,

Aliens, right to lease lands and
acquire real property, question of,
Doc. 793 and Doc. 794]
Commercial travelers, provisions
include portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788],
include portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799],
includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and
Doc.
805];
most-favored-nation
treatment, question of, 972–974
includes portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and
799]
Consular
officers,
provisions
regarding, 943–954
[Pgs.

include portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788],
part of Doc. 794]
Importations
and
exportations,
most-favored-nation
provision,
991 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc.
802]
include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc.
Signature, 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions
Doc. 809]
Exchange
of
notes
accepting U. S. Senate
reservation, texts signed
[Pgs. 1006–1007 include portions
and Doc. 811]

Supplementary
agreement, text signed
[Pgs. 1007–1008 include portions
and Doc. 812]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Aviation:
Aircraft and aircraft engines as implements of war,
position of U. S. and other governments regarding
provision
in
draft
convention
on
the
private
[Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 267]
Commercial aviation (see also Latin America, infra):
Convention signed at Sixth International Conference of
of Doc. 363]
Exportation to certain countries of aviation engines for
military purposes, U. S. policy concerning, 334–336
Latin America, activities of—

German interests, 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of
U. S. interests. See U. S. interests, infra.
U. S. interests, efforts to establish air lines in Latin
America, and U. S. good offices in behalf of, 775–830
Air mail service between United States and
Boeing Airplane Co. and Pratt and Whitney

Curtiss Co. and Consolidated Aircraft Co.,
661]
Department of Commerce experimental and
661]
Extension of American air lines to Venezuela,
Doc. 685]
Huff–Daland Dusters and Keystone Airplane
Open-door policy of United States, 800 [Pg.
and Doc. 682]
Pan American Airways, Inc., 775–800 [Pgs.
645]

Concessions
and
contracts,
include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc.
include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and
include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc.
include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc.
Inauguration
of
air
mail
and
passenger
services,
negotiations
concerning landing privileges and
other details, 781 [Pg. 781 includes
include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc.
includes portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc.

Survey flights, U. S. assistance in
necessary
arrangements
with
include portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc.
612, and Doc. 613]
Pratt and Whitney Motor Corp. and Boeing
Tri-Motors Airways concession in Argentina,
Baker, Kellogg & Co. See Brazil: Loans: Claims of American
interests.
Behn Meyer & Company vs. Miller, case cited, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of
Doc. 325]
Belgium: Proposal at meeting of Special Commission for the
Preparation of a Draft Convention on the Private Manufacture of
includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]; treaty for the renunciation of
and Doc. 96]; U. S. assistance in protecting patent rights of the
Symington Co. in Brazil from infringement by Belgian firm,
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,

Boeing Airplane Co., expedition to Latin America, 818–824 [Pgs.
Bolivia (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration; and under Boundary disputes): Aviation, U. S.
Doc. 651]; military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation
concerning proposed settlement by direct negotiation, 666–668
renunciation of war, question of adherence, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]; U. S. good offices in behalf of Standard Oil
Co. in establishing radio station at Yacuiba, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes
portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819]
585, and Doc. 586]

Argentina, good offices:
Conference
of
Boundary
Commission:
Resumption
of
negotiations,
consideration
of
Argentine proposals of 1927, 673–
439 and Doc. 440]; suspension of
conference, with statements of
position of both delegations, 674–
Relation of Argentine action to that
of Conference of American States
on Conciliation and Arbitration,
includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and
Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]
Text of proposals of 1927, 678 [Pg.
and Doc. 442]
U. S. position, 683 [Pg. 683 includes
include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc.
468, and Doc. 469]

Conference
of
American
States
on
Conciliation and Arbitration, good offices:
Arrangements for tender of good
of Bolivia and Paraguay to accept
Doc. 472]
Attitude of Argentina, 689–690 [Pgs.
[Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 476 and
Doc. 477]
Resolution
of
good
wishes
transmitted to both countries, 684–
and
Doc.
460]; acknowledgments,
462, and Doc. 463]
Tender of good offices, 692–694
include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc.
Frontier incidents and military
operations, 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions

includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and
Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]
Gondra Treaty, question of resort to
proceedings
established
by:
Paraguayan
proposal,
and
consequent severance of diplomatic
relations by Bolivia, 680 [Pg. 680
includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447],
include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc.
include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc.
includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc.
468, and Doc. 469]
Good offices. See Argentina and
Conference of American States,
supra;
Spain, infra. League of Nations,
efforts for settlement, 686 [Pg. 686
includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and

Spain, offer of good offices, 692 [Pg.
692 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc.
472]
Submission of dispute to United
States, possibility of, 672 [Pg. 672
includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]
Colombia–Nicaragua, conclusion of treaty
settling dispute regarding ownership of San
Attitude of United States toward
and Doc. 485]
part of Doc. 485]
U. S. public statement concerning,
494]
Exchange of notes regarding basis
for settlement of question, 706–708
Doc. 493, and Doc. 494]
Negotiations leading to conclusion
of informal agreement, 709–711

Treaty, proposed, report concerning,
includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]
Doc. 586]
Arbitration by the International
Central
American
Tribunal,
proposed:
Jurists, lists from which
Tribunal is to be chosen,
discussions, 748 [Pg. 748
includes portions of Doc. 559 and
portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565,
includes portions of Doc. 571,
Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc.
portions of Doc. 574 and Doc.
of Doc. 583]

U.
S.
preliminary
representations
to
Guatemala and Honduras,
based on recommendation
of U. S. representative on
Boundary
Commission,
portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539,
Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 545, Doc.
743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of
Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 554, Doc.
attitude of Guatemala and
Honduras, 740 [Pg. 740
includes portions of Doc. 545,
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553,
Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc.
556]
U.
S.
proposal:
Consideration
and
acceptance by Guatemala,
portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558,
[Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc.
includes portions of Doc. 566 and
Doc. 567]; negotiations with
Honduras,
and
final
Honduran
rejection
of
proposal, 747
[Pg.
includes portions of Doc. 557,

[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 561 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 563, Doc.
portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565,
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569,
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 574 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 576, Doc.
[Pgs. 765–767 include portions of
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582,
Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 583, Doc.
text of note, 746–747 [Pgs.
746–747 include portions of Doc.
559]
Commission to inspect border and
fix provisional boundary line:
Composition (see also U.
S. representative, infra):
Discussions
concerning,
portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514,
and Doc. 515]; Guatemalan
and Honduran members,
723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of
Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc.

portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519,
726–727 include portions of Doc.
524, and Doc. 525]
Honduran
decree
dissolving
its
commission,
[Pgs. 756–757 include portions of
Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc.
portions of Doc. 576 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 577, Doc.
[Pgs. 768–769 include portions of
Doc. 583]
Honduran proposal, and
request for U. S. good
718 include portions of Doc. 507,
Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc.
510];
Guatemalan
acceptance of proposal,
and U. S. position, 718–
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510,
Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]
Negotiations (see also U.
S. efforts, infra), 731–732
[Pgs. 731–732 include portions of
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542,
Doc. 543, and Doc. 544]

Place
and
time
of
meeting,
arrangements
for, 723 [Pg. 723 includes
portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517,
includes portions of Doc. 518,
[Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc.
730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of
732 include portions of Doc. 533,
Doc. 537]
Recess, 739 [Pg. 739 includes
portions of Doc. 543 and Doc.
portions of Doc. 547 and Doc.
portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555,
and Doc. 556]
U. S. efforts on behalf of
final arbitration, based on
inability of commission to
reach agreement, 733–
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539,
Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 545, Doc.
portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555,
Doc.
556,
and
Doc.
557];
attitude of Guatemala and
Honduras, 740 [Pg. 740
includes portions of Doc. 545,
[Pgs.
include

portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553,
Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc.
556]
U. S. representative:
Appointment
and
preliminary
instructions.
723–
portions of Doc. 516, Doc.
and Doc. 520], 726 [Pg.
726 includes portions of
Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and
includes portions of Doc.
[Pg. 730 includes portions
of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc.
[Pg. 732 includes portions
of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and
Doc. 537]
Authority
to
fix
provisional line in
case
of
disagreement,
negotiations
concerning, 727–730
[Pgs.
include
portions of Doc. 523, Doc.
Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc.
Doc. 532, and Doc. 533],
include portions of Doc.
Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and
includes portions of Doc.

535, Doc. 536, and Doc.
[Pgs.
738–739 include portions of
Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and
Doc. 544]
Recommendation for
permanent
arbitration in view of
difficulties involved
in fixing provisional
line.
See
U.
S.
efforts, supra.
Conditions in disputed territory and alleged
requests for U. S. good offices, and U. S.
574, and Doc. 575]
Brazil (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation

Aviation, U. S. interests, 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc.
Doc. 832, and Doc. 833]
Claims of American interests against São
Paulo for alleged default of obligations: Good
offices of United States for settlement of
disapprove a loan to. Sao Paulo because of
832, and Doc. 833]
Interest of Speyer & Co. in proposed loan for
public works and construction:
Correspondence with Department
include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc.
U. S. refusal to disapprove loan
because of certain claims against
Sao Paulo. See Claims, supra.

1926 loan, U. S. disapproval of proposed
refunding in American market, 1019–1020
and Doc. 822]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
141]
U. S. assistance in protecting patent, rights of the
Symington Co. in Brazil from infringement by Belgian
Recognition of Zog I, King of the Albanians, 849 [Pg.
portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]
Reparation payments, Greek request for an agreement
among interested powers for new apportionment of,
and Doc. 841]; U. S. disinclination to participate, 1036–
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Doc. 160]
U. S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization,

Canada, participation in treaty for the renunciation of war, 56–57
Chile (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration; Tacna-Arica controversy):
Aviation:
French interests, 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of
U. S. interests: Air mail service between
United States and Chile, proposed, 805–810
portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668]; Pan American
Airways, negotiations for contract, 798 [Pg. 798
Doc. 645]
Diplomatic relations between Chile and Peru, good
offices of United States in reestablishment of, 647–660
Arrangements for establishment of Embassies
and appointment of Ambassadors, 652–657

Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]
Presentation
of
credentials
by
newly
and Doc. 424]
U. S. proposal to Chile and Peru, 647–649
Doc. 405]; acceptance by both countries, 650–
Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]
Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
China: Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation to,
Government, question of recognition, Japanese policy, 216–217
Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]
Claims. See Alien Property Custodian; and under Brazil: Loans.
Colombia (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration; and under Boundary disputes):
Aviation: German interests, 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of

Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Commercial treaties. See under Treaties, conventions, etc.
Commissions, committees, etc.:
Boundary commissions:
Guatemala–Honduras.
See
Boundary
disputes: Guatemala–Honduras: Commission.
Tacna-Arica boundary commission, 662–663
Inter-American Commission on Commercial Aviation,
International Central American Tribunal. See Boundary
disputes: Guatemala–Honduras: Arbitration.
International Commission of Jurists, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of
542 is part of Doc. 363]
League of Nations: Advisory Committee on Opium and
Other Dangerous Drugs, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc.
Doc. 728]; Permanent Central Board provided for by

Doc. 320]
Pan American Commission on the Simplification and
is part of Doc. 363]
part of Doc. 363]
Permanent Commissions under art. 3 of Gondra Treaty,
Reparation Commission (see also Austria: Investment
344]
Security Committee of the Preparatory Commission for
the Disarmament Conference, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions
Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms. See

Special Commission.
Tripartite Claims Commission, U. S.–Austria and
Concessions, contracts, etc. See Pan American Airways and Tri-
Motors Airways under Aviation: U. S. interests.
Conciliation. See Albania: Treaties; Austria: Treaties: Arbitration
and conciliation; Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration.
Conference of American States, Sixth International, Habana, Jan.
Conventions signed Feb. 20, regarding—

Duties and rights of states in the event of civil
Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]
include portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]
Preliminaries to assembling of conference (see also U.
S. participation, infra):
League of Nations, question of participation:
Press reports of Cuban invitation,
U. S. inquiries concerning, 529–530
Cuban
assurances
as
to
incorrectness of reports, 530–532
533 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc.
362]
U.
S.
statement
of
policy
Doc. 363]
Program prepared by Governing Board of Pan
part of Doc. 363]; U. S. discussion of subjects,

Spain, desire to participate, 530 [Pg. 530 includes
U. S. opposition to participation by League of
Nations or European countries, 529–533 [Pgs.
Resolutions:
Aggression, resolution introduced by Mexico,
Doc. 172]
Arbitration
conference
to
convene
at
Washington:
Doc. 390]
U. S. arrangements for conference
in accordance with. See Conference
of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration.
U. S. participation, plans for:
Cuban invitation and U. S. acceptance, 527–
and Doc. 357]

include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]; personnel,
Outline of policy concerning—
Commercial aviation, 548–551 [Pg.
548 is part of Doc. 363]
Communications problems, 548–
Economic problems, 558–568 [Pg.
558 is part of Doc. 363]
Frontier police, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of
Doc. 363]
of Doc. 363]
Intellectual cooperation, 554–558
[Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 363]
part of Doc. 363]
Pan American Union, 540–542 [Pg.
of Doc. 363]
Political
questions
and
other
matters
not
on
agenda
of
include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]
part of Doc. 363]
Conference of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration,

Boundary disputes: Bolivia-Paraguay), preliminary arrangements
Gondra Treaty, U. S. efforts to secure ratification by all
signatories prior to convening of conference. See
Inquiries and suggestions, infra.
Inquiries and suggestions to other countries, 621–623
Conferences, international:
American states. See Conference of American States,
Sixth International; Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration; also Pan American
conferences, infra.
Copyright. See International Conference on Copyright.
Emigration and Immigration:
International Conference of 1924, 1013 [Pg.

Doc. 817]
Second
International
Conference.
See
Emigration
and
Immigration,
Second
International Conference.
Import and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions,
Second International Conference for the Abolition of.
See Import and export prohibitions, etc.: Conference.
Literary and artistic works, protection of. See
International Conference on Copyright.
Naval armament limitation, Three-Power Conference at
Pan American conferences (see also Conference of
American States, Sixth International; Conference of
American States on Conciliation and Arbitration):
Conference of National Directors of Public Health of
[Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 363]; Pan American Red Cross
American Sanitary Conference, Eighth, 571 [Pg. 571 is part
of Doc. 363]
Telegraph Conference at Brussels, Sept. 10–22, U. S.
Consolidated Aircraft Co., demonstrations of planes in Latin

Consular agents, Pan American convention concerning, 598–604
Consular officers, provisions in U. S.-Austrian commercial treaty
Consular procedure, Pan American commission relating to, 559–
Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin of 1885 and the
portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]
U. S. ratification: Recommendation by Secretary of
State and concurrence by the President, 433–437 [Pgs.
reservation regarding arbitral procedure, 436 [Pg. 436 is
Conventions. See Treaties, conventions, etc.
Coolidge, Calvin (President):
Communication to President of Paraguay regarding
boundary dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay, 689
466]
Franco-British compromise plan for naval limitation,
correspondence with Secretary of State concerning, 267

Message of congratulation to Zog I upon proclamation
as King of the Albanians, 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of
Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]; appreciation of the King and
Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]
Message to Congress (annual), VII–XXVI [Pg. VII is part of
Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 4,
1928]
Message to President of France on conclusion of treaty
for the renunciation of war, 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of
Recommendation for passage of legislation relating to
Austrian debt to United States and proposed Austrian
Statement issued at time of signing of Immigration Act
Submission to the Senate of certain international
311]
Copyright Union, International Convention of, as revised and
International Conference for the Revision of the

Costa Rica (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation
and
Arbitration):
Pan
American
Airways,
establishment of San José-Limon air mail service, 796–797 [Pgs.
Cuba (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and
Arbitration;
Emigration
and
Immigration,
Second
International Conference):
Aviation:
U. S. interests:
Pan American Airways: Desire for
contract with Cuban Government,
permissions in connection with
inauguration of air services to Latin
U. S. Department of Commerce
Doc. 660]

portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Curtiss Airplane and Motor Corp., demonstrations of planes in
Czechoslovakia, participation in treaty for the renunciation of
Doc. 98]
Danzig, Free City of, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of
Denmark: Claims in connection with property held by Alien
concerning Senate bill relating to payment of advance wages to
S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization, dual
Diplomatic relations between Chile and Peru, reestablishment of,
and Doc. 424]

Disconto-Gesellschaft vs. U. S. Steel Co., case cited, 479–481 [Pg.
Dominican Republic (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration; and under Boundary disputes): Pan
American Airways, permissions in connection with inauguration
Doc. 668]
Dual nationality, naturalization, and military service, U. S.
proposals to European countries for agreements regarding, 494–
351, and Doc. 352]
Duties and rights of states in the event of civil strife, Pan
of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]
Ecuador:
Aviation: German interests, 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of
portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669]
Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation

Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Egypt, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg. 157
Emigration and Immigration, International Conference of 1924,
resolution relating to legal and judicial assistance, 1013 [Pg. 1013
portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817]
Emigration and Immigration, Second International Conference,
Doc. 363]
is part of Doc. 354]
Resolution regarding a third conference: Text and
U. S. participation:

and Doc. 355]
Expression of inability to participate in a third
355 and Doc. 356]
Policy regarding immigration, 505–507 [Pgs.
Equality of treatment in commercial matters, U. S. policy, 434 [Pg.
434 is part of Doc. 310]
Estonia: Commercial treaty with United States, cited, 938–939
[Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 787]; treaty for the renunciation of war,
convention concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and
351, and Doc. 352]
Ethiopia, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg.
188, and Doc. 189]
Finland: Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg. 157
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,

France (see also Naval armament limitation: Franco-British
compromise plan; Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference; Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms; Treaty for the
renunciation of war):
Films, proposed restrictions on. See under Import and
export prohibitions, etc.: Conference: Negotiations.
Recognition of Zog I, King of the Albanians, 850 [Pg.
Doc. 712]
Representations to United States concerning Senate bill
for deportation of certain alien seamen, 839–840 [Pgs.
U. S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization,
Germany (see also Special Commission for the Preparation of a
Draft Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms; Treaty for
the renunciation of war): Armament limitation, participation in
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference, 237

817]; military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation to,
representations to United States concerning Senate bill for the
deportation of certain alien seamen, 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of
Gondra Treaty (1923) (see also under Boundary disputes:
Bolivia-Paraguay):
Establishment
of
Permanent
Commissions
in
U. S. efforts to secure ratification by all signatories
prior to meeting of Conference of American States on

Doc. 397]
Good offices. See Aviation: U. S. interests; Bolivia: U. S. good
offices; Brazil: Loans: Claims of American interests; Chile:
Diplomatic relations; Boundary disputes: Guatemala–Honduras;
also under Boundary disputes: Bolivia–Paraguay.
Great Britain (see also Alien Property Custodian: British Public
Trustee; Naval armament limitation; Franco-British compromise
plan; Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference;
Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft Convention on
the Private Manufacture of Arms; Treaty for the renunciation of
988 is part of Doc. 799]; Pan American Airways, desire for use of
landing facilities in British Honduras, 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of
712]; representations to United States concerning certain Senate
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,
Greece:
Bulgarian reparation payments, desire for agreement
among interested powers for new apportionment of,
and Doc. 841]; U. S. disinclination to participate, 1036–

Recognition of Zog I, King of the Albanians, 847 [Pg.
Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
U. S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization,
Guatemala (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration; and under Boundary disputes): Pan
treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Doc. 165]
Hague Opium Convention of 1912, narcotic control based on
Haiti (see also Boundary disputes: Dominican Republic–Haiti;
Conference of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration):
Pan American Airways: Negotiations for contract with
in connection with inauguration of air services in Latin
603, and Doc. 604]
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.

Hedjaz and Nejd, Kingdom of the, adherence to treaty for the
Helium gas, U. S. reservation concerning exportation, 376 [Pg. 376
Honduras (see also Boundary disputes: Guatemala-Honduras;
Conference of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration):
Arms and munitions embargo by United States, 334 [Pg.
Pan American Airways contract: Negotiations, 780 [Pg.
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Huff–Daland Dusters, interest in establishing air lines in Latin
Hungary: Inquiries as to interpretation of U. S. legislation
concerning disposition of property held by Alien Property
military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation to, 335–

Iceland, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg.
Immigration (see also Emigration and Immigration): Immigration
protection to immigrants, U. S. disinclination to enter into a treaty
Import and export prohibitions and restrictions, abolition of, 336–
Conference, Second International, Geneva, July 3–19
(see also Convention, infra):
Agreements on hides and bones, signed by
certain states, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc.
294 and Doc. 295]
portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]
Negotiations in connection with international
convention signed Nov. 8, 1927:
Exceptions requested by certain
states under art. 6 of convention:
include portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286],

U. S. position, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of
includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and
French
proposed
restrictive
measures applying to films: French
inquiry to League of Nations, 366–
368 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and
includes portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and
include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc.
298, and Doc. 299]
Ratification of convention, plan for,

include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc.
include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and
301, and Doc. 302]
Signature of agreement, July 11,
1928, supplementary to convention,
U. S. delegation:
include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc.
include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc.
297, and Doc. 298]
Personnel, 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions
includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]
Speech by chief of delegation
concerning
French
proposed
restrictions on films, 382 [Pg. 382
includes portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and
attitude
of
French
and
other
include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc.
298, and Doc. 299]
Suggestions and reports, 383–387

[Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc.
Convention,
international
(see
also
Conference:
Negotiations, supra):
Text of convention and protocol signed Nov.
Doc.
and
Doc.
271]; of supplementary
agreement and protocol signed July 11, 1928,
U.
S.
Senate
reservation
concerning
India, participation in treaty for the renunciation of war, 69–71
International Conference on Copyright, Rome, May 7–June 2,
Doc. 303, and Doc. 304]
Convention of the Copyright Union as revised and

U. S. participation: Italian invitation and U. S.
and Doc. 304]
Iraq, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg. 157
includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]
Irish Free State, participation in treaty for the renunciation of war,
and Doc. 89]
Italy (see also Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms; Treaty for the
renunciation of war):
Armament limitation: Attitude toward Franco-British
participation in Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of
Doc. 226]
Austria, relations with: Attitude toward Austrian
claim against Austria for army costs, question of
750, and Doc. 751]; opposition to proposed Austrian

Consular convention with United States, 1878, cited,
Invitation to United States to participate in International
Conference on Copyright, and U. S. acceptance, 398–
Recognition of Zog I, King of the Albanians, 847 [Pg.
Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]
Representations to United States concerning Senate bill
relating to payment of advance wages to seamen on
U. S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization,
Jackson et al. vs. the Archimedes, case cited, 831 [Pg. 831 includes
portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]
Japan (see also Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms; Treaty for the
renunciation of war):

Armament limitation: Participation in fifth session of
Preparatory
Commission
for
the
Disarmament
China, Japanese policy concerning recognition of
Commercial treaty with United States (1911), cited, 925
[Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 785]
Kellogg Pact. See Treaty for the renunciation of war.
Keystone Airplane Corp., interest in establishing air lines in Latin
Latin America (see also under Aviation): Arms and munitions
portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]
Latvia: Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg. 157
175 and Doc. 176]; U. S. proposal of convention concerning
naturalization, dual nationality, and military service, 500–505 [Pgs.
League of Nations (see also Import and export prohibitions, etc.;
Narcotic drugs; Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference; Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft
Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms; and under
Conference
of
American
States,
Sixth
International:

Preliminaries; also under Treaty for the renunciation of war):
Efforts for settlement of boundary dispute between Bolivia and
financial committee, policy in connection with Austrian proposed
Liberia, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg.
Limitation of armament. See Naval armament limitation;
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference.
U. S. ratification: Recommendation by Secretary of
State and concurrence by the President, 426–429 [Pgs.
reservation regarding arbitral procedure, 427 [Pg. 427 is
includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]
Literary and artistic works, convention for protection of, as
revised and signed at Rome, June 2: International conference for
Lithuania: Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.

concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,
Loans. See Investment loan and Relief loans under Austria; also
under Brazil.
Luxemburg, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157
154]
Maritime neutrality, Pan American convention concerning, 604–
Mexico (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration): Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding
Airways, permission to fly over territory, 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions
of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598]; treaty for the renunciation of war,
Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation to certain
Military service, naturalization, and dual nationality, U. S.
proposals to European countries for agreements regarding, 494–
351, and Doc. 352]
Morgan & Co., J. P., negotiations in connection with proposed

131]
Most-favored-nation principle, U. S.-Austrian negotiations, 960–
Narcotic drugs, U. S. interest in efforts of League of Nations to
Advisory Committee on Opium and Other Dangerous
Drugs, U. S. unofficial observers at meetings of, 446
includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]
Permanent Central Board provided for by Geneva
Opium Convention of 1925: American member,
appointment by League Council, 452 [Pg. 452 includes
portions of Doc.
317, Doc.
318, and Doc.
nonacceptance of invitation to participate in selection
Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]
U.
S.
communications to insurance companies
regarding “dangerous drug clause” in contracts, 446–

U. S. permission for visit by a League commission to
study control of opium smoking in Philippine Islands,
Naturalization, dual nationality, and military service, U. S.
proposals to European countries for agreements and treaties
Naval armament limitation:
Discussions in connection with meetings of Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference (see also
Franco-British compromise plan, infra), 238–239 [Pg.
Franco-British compromise plan, 258 [Pg. 258 includes
Texts of notes exchanged between Great
portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

U. S. position: British and French submission
of draft to United States for suggestions, 264–
portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]; nature and scope
of plan, U. S. inquiries and British
explanations, 266–267 [Pgs.
include
attitude, and communications with Secretary
rejection of plan, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of
portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]
U. S. Congress, resolution favoring abolition of
Netherlands (see also Special Commission for the Preparation of
a Draft Convention on the Private Manufacture of Arms):

Armament limitation, participation in Preparatory Commission
for the Disarmament Conference, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc.
212 and Doc. 213]; representations to United States concerning certain
Doc. 700, and Doc. 701]; treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence,
portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]; U. S. proposal for convention
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,
New Zealand, participation in treaty for the renunciation of war,
Nicaragua (see also Boundary disputes: Colombia–Nicaragua;
Conference of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration):
Arms and munitions embargo by United States, 334 [Pg.
Pan American Airways contract negotiations and
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Norway: Representations to United States concerning Senate bill
for deportation of certain alien seamen, 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of
Doc. 701 and Doc. 702]; treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence,
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,

Open-door policy of United States, U. S. aviation interests in
Opium. See Narcotic drugs.
Pan American Airways, Inc. See under Aviation: U. S. interests.
Pan American league of nations, proposed, U. S. views, 574–577
[Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 363]
Pan American Union. See Conference of American States, Sixth
International.
Panama (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration), adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war,
Paraguay (see also Boundary disputes: Bolivia-Paraguay;
Conference of American States on Conciliation and Arbitration),
adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Patent rights of Symington Co. in Brazil, U. S. assistance in
protecting from infringement by Belgian firm, 1028–1034 [Pgs.
837, and Doc. 838]
Persia, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg. 157
Peru (see also Chile: Diplomatic relations between Chile and
Peru; Conference of American States on Conciliation and
Arbitration; Tacna-Arica controversy):

Aviation:
German interests, 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of
Doc. 637]
U. S. interests: Expeditions, 812 [Pg. 812 includes
Doc. 668, and Doc. 669]; Huff–Daland Dusters and
Keystone Airplane Corp., negotiations for
636, and Doc. 637]
Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg.
Philippine Islands, interest of League of Nations in Philippine
Poland: Treaty for the renunciation of war, participation, 63–66
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,
Portugal: Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 134–135

convention concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and
349, and Doc. 350]
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference (see
Fifth session:
Agenda, provisional, 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions
Discussions and negotiations concerning—
Capital ships, British proposal and
include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and
Doc. 219]
Renunciation of war, 243–244 [Pg.
[Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 214]
Russian proposals for immediate
and
complete
disarmament:
Attitude of United States and of
other governments, 236 [Pg. 236 is part

part
of
Doc.
148]; summary of
proposals, 240–241
[Pgs.
include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]
Second
reading
of
draft
disarmament convention, 240 [Pg.
240 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc.
includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and
Doc. 216]
Security Committee, 235 [Pg. 235
includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198],
[Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 199 and
Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]
U. S. participation and policy (see also
Sixth session, plans for: Decision as to date, 263–264

Radio station at Yacuiba, Bolivia, establishment by Standard Oil
Recognition of—
Chinese Nationalist Government, Japanese policy, 216–
196]
Zog I as King of the Albanians, by United States and
713]
Relief loans. See under Austria.
Renunciation of war. See Treaty for the renunciation of war.
Reparation Commission (see also Austria: Investment loan),
Reparations: Austrian relief debt, relation to, 888 [Pg. 888 includes
to participate in an agreement for new apportionment of 1035–
and Doc. 843]
Rollins & Sons, E. H., proposed refunding of São Paulo loan of

Doc. 822]
Rumania: Claims to certain funds held by Alien Property
of convention concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and
351, and Doc. 352]
Russia:
Armament limitation, proposals at fifth session of
Preparatory
Commission
for
the
Disarmament
Conference: Attitude of United States and other
Military equipment, U. S. policy regarding exportation
Treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 125–126

Salvador (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration): Commercial treaty with United
renunciation of war, question of adherence, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Doc. 196]
Seamen, alien, Senate bills for deportation of, representations to
Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]
Seamen on foreign vessels, Senate bill relating to payment of
Representations to United States by various European
694]; attitude of Department of State, communications to
Chairman of House Committee on Merchant Marine
Doc. 685, and Doc. 686]
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Kingdom of the. See Yugoslavia.
Shipping, German, valuation by Reparation Commission, 485–
Doc. 344]
Siam, adherence to treaty for the renunciation of war, 157 [Pg. 157

U. S. adherence: League of Nations invitation, 417 [Pg.
by Secretary of State and concurrence by the President,
Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]
Spain:
Desire to participate in Sixth International Conference
363]
Offer of good offices in boundary dispute between
and Doc. 472]
Treaty for the renunciation of war:
of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]
Participation as an original signatory, desire
for. See under Treaty for the renunciation of
war.
U. S. proposal of convention concerning naturalization,
Special Commission for the Preparation of a Draft Convention on
the Private Manufacture of Arms and Ammunition and of

attitude of other governments, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc.
Doc. 267]
Belgian proposal regarding analysis of categories of
arms, plan for meeting of experts to discuss, 304 [Pg. 304
includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]
Date of second session, 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc.
Drafts of convention:
Preliminary draft adopted at second session,
Doc. 257]; revised text submitted at third
Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]
Publicity for government manufacture as well as private
manufacture of arms, U. S. position, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of

U. S. representative:
Report on negotiations at second session,
includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]; at meeting
Suggestions regarding U. S. position, 315–
Doc. 263, and Doc. 264]
Speyer & Co., interest in proposed loan to State of Sao Paulo,
and Doc. 830]
Standard Oil Co., establishment of radio station at Yacuiba,
Submarines (see also Naval armament limitation), resolution of
Sweden: Armament limitation, participation in Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference, 252 [Pg. 252 includes
portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]; representations to United States
concerning certain Senate bills relating to seamen, 834–835 [Pgs.

proposal
of
convention
concerning
naturalization,
dual
Switzerland: Properties of nationals held by Alien Property
Custodian, representations to United States concerning, 461–463
treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Symington Co., patent rights in Brazil, U. S. assistance in
protecting from infringement by Belgian firm, 1028–1034 [Pgs.
837, and Doc. 838]
Tacna-Arica controversy, beginning of direct negotiations
between Chile and Peru at U. S. suggestion (see also Chile:
Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]
Information concerning beginning of negotiations, 665
Doc. 436]
U. S. suggestion for suspension of operations of
Boundary Commission pending settlement of dispute

Telegraph Conference, International, Brussels, Sept. 10–22, U. S.
Three-Power Conference at Geneva for Limitation of Naval
is part of Doc. 248]
Treaties, conventions, etc. (see also Conventions under
Conference of American States, Sixth International):
Arbitration and conciliation:
Gondra Treaty (1923). See Gondra Treaty.
U. S.–Albania, treaties signed Oct. 22, 852–
U. S.–Austria, treaties signed Aug. 16, 1008–
Boundary treaty between Colombia and Nicaragua,
Civil procedure, convention of July 17, 1905, cited,
[Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 817]

Commercial treaties between—
Austria and Great Britain (1924), cited, 988–
United States and—
is part of Doc. 785]
Austria. See
Austria:
Treaties:
Friendship, commerce, and consular
rights.
of Doc. 787]
of Doc. 817]
of Doc. 785]
part of Doc. 787]
Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin of 1885
and the General Act and Declaration of Brussels of
include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]; U. S. ratification,
Copyright Union, International Convention of, as
revised and signed at Rome, June 2: Conference for the

Doc. 320]
Gondra Treaty (1923). See Gondra Treaty.
Hague Opium Convention of 1912, narcotic control
Doc. 319, and Doc. 320]
Import and export prohibitions and restrictions. See
Import and export prohibitions, etc.: Convention.
Industrial property, convention for protection of (1911),
Intellectual property, inter-American convention (1910),
Liquor traffic in Africa, convention relating to: Text
Literary and artistic works, protection of. See Copyright
Union, supra.
Locarno treaties. See Treaty for the renunciation of war:
League of Nations covenant and Locarno treaties.
Naturalization, dual nationality, and military service, U.
S. proposals to European countries for agreements and

portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]
Pan American conventions. See Conference of
American States, Sixth International: Conventions;
Gondra Treaty.
Renunciation of war. See Treaty for the renunciation of
war.
Slavery convention, international: Text signed Sept. 25,
includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]
St. Germain, Treaty of, cited, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc.
787]
Treaty to avoid or prevent conflicts between the
American States. See Gondra Treaty.
U. S.–Albania. See under Albania.
U. S.–Argentina, commercial treaty of 1853, cited, 926
[Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 785]
U. S.–Austria. See under Austria.
is part of Doc. 787]
U. S.–Germany, commercial treaty of 1928, cited, 924
part of Doc. 817]

U. S.–Italy, consular convention of 1878, cited, 833–
U. S.–Japan, commercial treaty of 1911, cited, 925 [Pg.
925 is part of Doc. 785]
U. S.–Salvador, commercial treaty, cited, 938–939 [Pg.
938 is part of Doc. 787]
U. S.–Turkey, amity and general relations (1923), cited,

Adherences:
Invitations to adhere:
Negotiations concerning invitations
to Afghanistan, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of
211 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc.
include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc.
Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]
U. S. note: Draft and modifications,

Doc. 193, and Doc. 194]
Procedure for deposit of instruments of
Provision
for
expediting
adherence
by
countries other than original signatories, 140
British Empire, participation of countries as original
signatories. See Preliminary drafts: Invitation, infra;
also Revised U. S. draft, infra.

Dates of ratification by various countries, 156–157 [Pgs.
Japanese position with respect to ratification, 215–217
Doc. 195, and Doc. 196]
League of Nations covenant and Locarno treaties,
question of compatibility with proposed treaty:
Consideration of question by a commission of legal
Doc.
53];
discussions
and
opinions
of
various

Locarno powers, participation as original signatories.
See Preliminary drafts: Views, infra; also Revised U. S.
draft, infra.
Locarno treaties. See League of Nations covenant and
Locarno treaties, supra.
Negotiations. See Preliminary discussions, Preliminary
drafts, and Revised U. S. draft, infra.
Portugal, desire to participate as an original signatory,
112 and Doc. 113]
Preliminary discussions between United States and
France, Great Britain, Germany, Italy, and Japan, based
on Briand proposal and U. S. counterproposal of 1927,
Preliminary drafts of treaty, negotiations concerning:
Correspondence between United States and
France (from June 1927) and U. S. draft,
submission to Great Britain, Germany, Italy,
and Japan:
Decision to submit correspondence

Text
of
draft
and
note
of
arrangements
for
delivery
to
include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc.
20]
include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc.
is part of Doc. 40]; Great Britain, 35 [Pg.
68, and Doc. 69]
French draft, submission to United States,
Great Britain, Germany, Italy, and Japan:
Information concerning, 26 [Pg. 26 includes

Doc. 24, and Doc. 25]; U. S. views concerning
Invitation to countries of British Empire to
participate in treaty as original signatories:
71]; British Government’s suggestion as to
procedure in extending invitations, 69 [Pg. 69
includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]; preliminary
discussions
in
regard
to
Canadian
includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]; text of note,
59]
Points of difference, discussions and opinions
of United States and other powers, 34–42 [Pgs.

Proposal to submit certain questions to a
Views of Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, 54–
Revised U. S. draft, submission to fourteen countries:
Acceptances, 106–109 [Pgs.
include
100]

include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]
Noninclusion of other countries, U. S. reasons
Text of draft and note of submission, 90–96
and Doc. 73]
Signature of treaty:
Announcement of, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of
Italian attitude, 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc.
Messages of congratulation on conclusion of
treaty exchanged between President Coolidge
and President Doumergue, 153 [Pg. 153 includes
135, and Doc. 136]

Plans concerning date, place, and ceremonies,
Spain, question of participation as an original signatory:
Inquiries and attitude of Spain, 105–106 [Pgs.
124]
U. S. consultation with France, Germany,
and Doc. 112]

U. S. decision and notification to Spain, 130–
71]
Turkey: Armament limitation, participation in Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference, 249 [Pg. 249 includes
portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]; treaty of amity and general relations
treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence, 157 [Pg. 157 includes
Ulen & Co. See Brazil: Loans: Claims of American interests.
Union of South Africa, participation in treaty for the renunciation
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See Russia.
Uruguay (see also Conference of American States on Conciliation
and Arbitration): Aviation, U. S. interests, 813 [Pg. 813 includes

for the renunciation of war, question of adherence, 157 [Pg. 157
portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]
U. S. Congress:
House joint resolution favoring abolition of submarines
by all nations, approval by Secretary of State, 291–292
Doc. 253]
Legislation relating to Austrian debt to United States
and subordination of relief loans to proposed new
investment loan. See Debt agreement and Investment
loan under Austria.
Resolutions recommending negotiation of agreements
with other countries regarding naturalization, dual
and Doc. 352]
Senate bill relating to payment of advance wages to
695]; bills for the deportation of certain alien seamen,
Senate reservations concerning certain international

Settlement of War Claims Act of 1928. See under Alien
Property Custodian.
U. S. Department of Commerce, experimental and pathfinding
U. S. Navy Department, work of Navy officials in connection
with plans for submission to Disarmament Conference, 268 [Pg.
Venezuela (see also Conference of American States on
Conciliation and Arbitration): Aviation, possible extension of
War, treaty for renunciation of. See Treaty for the renunciation of
war.
War claims. See Alien Property Custodian.
War debt, Austrian. See Debt agreement and Relief loans under
Austria.
Yugoslavia: Recognition of Zog I, King of the Albanians, 849–
851 is part of Doc. 712]; treaty for the renunciation of war, adherence,
concerning naturalization, dual nationality, and military service,
