176  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
for a variety of mobile ICBM forces, assuming a mobile ban took effect 
after deployment of rail-­mobile Peacekeeper. Most of the cost differ-
ence would be in budgets beyond FY 1994.
If we are to accept mobiles at all, we should examine what, if any, 
concessions the United States should seek from the Soviets for formally 
accepting mobile ICBMs in START. Some believe that maintaining a 
formal ban adds complexity to the negotiations and may provide lit-
tle leverage if the Soviets believe that we ultimately will allow mobile 
ICBMs, especially given an announced Presidential decision to proceed 
with deployment of two mobile ICBM systems. Others note that we 
will never know unless we try and suggest we should, at a minimum, 
continue to insist on acceptance of our verification approach as a price 
for falling off our mobile ban.
[2 paragraphs (20 lines) not declassified]
Options—Allowing Mobile ICBMS. Three options exist:
— Option 1—Maintain a formal ban on mobile ICBMs pending res-
olution of our verification concerns.
— Option 2—Propose a ban on all MIRV mobile ICBMs, while 
allowing single warhead mobiles, subject to appropriate sublimits. 
Modify the Small ICBM program to eliminate the option for two war-
heads. Augment this with a ban on single warhead rail mobile ICBMs 
to ensure that the rail-­mobile infrastructure is eliminated.
— Option 2A—Include a ban on silo-­basing of types of ICBMs 
deployed as mobiles (SS–24 and presumably Peacekeeper).
— Option 3—Modify the U.S. position to allow both single-­warhead 
and MIRVd mobile ICBMs, subject to appropriate sublimits.
If Option 2 is selected, additional study is required as to how to 
limit breakout potential from silo-­based SS–24s and follow-­on systems. 
In addition to an outright ban, such constraints could take the form 
of specific sublimits on high-MIRVd systems or of general restrictions 
on total MIRVd warheads. Study is also required of what additional 
constraints (e.g. missile size or minimum RV weight-­to-­throwweight 
ratio) should be imposed on mobile missiles to limit the potential for 
breakout through covert fractionation.
Issue 3—Mobile ICBM Sublimits. Assuming mobile ICBMs are to 
be allowed in START there is consensus that some form of sublimit is 
appropriate. Such a sublimit is intended to constrain Soviet deploy-
ment of mobiles to a level no greater than the U.S. plans to deploy. 
Verification and breakout concerns are not the driving considerations 
in limiting the number of mobile ICBMs once the number of launch-
ers is several hundred. (Lower sublimits, under one hundred, should 
present lesser verification difficulties.) There are several approaches to 
dealing with a mobile ICBM sublimit.
