Human Rights about Vaky and Holbrooke (Moose is great, the problems in NEA are understandable and Patt sympathized, EUR is unhelpful but not hostile, Jules Katz is actively hostile but totally open in his hostility which Patt finds refreshing). Christopher was quietly resistant to most of Patt’s arguments (a good deal which was explicitly directed against what she and Mike Schneider clearly feel was a reluctance on Chris’s own part to defend HA by giving them access to information on ARA issues). The lunch went on so long, largely I think, because Chris wanted to let Patt get her frustrations off her chest. (At one point in describing her existential way of getting access to the Secretary, Patt noted that she had had a “quickie” with the Secretary last week—a metaphor I would not have urged her to repeat!) It is conceivable that Chris may do something about Patt’s concerns that HA have more access to NODIS and that its views be solicited more actively on policy issues, but I doubt it. He is clearly sensitive to the confrontational and ideological approach HA takes, and Patt’s comments at lunch underscored these, although she emphasized her own awareness of broad strategic policy issues such as Korean security several times. The only really concrete outcome of the lunch was the clearance of the cable4 you brought in. Paul Kreisberg5 Attachment Action Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)6 Washington, October 23, 1979 Human Rights Goals and Objectives Patt’s memo to you7 deals with three broad issues: 1. Her belief that human rights considerations (and HA as a bureau) should carry greater weight in foreign policy decisions. She cites the Nicaragua special mission; the decision to support seating Pol Pot’s 4 Not further identified. 5 Kreisberg initialed “PAK” above his typed signature. 6 No classification marking. 7 It is possible that Kreisberg meant to refer to the memorandum to Vance from Derian, printed as Document 194. A similar memorandum from Derian to Christopher has not been found.
