December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 609 —The inspiration that religious revolutionaries in Iran have given right and left-wing extremists elsewhere; and —The consequent potential for a wider spread of instability in the area. [handling restriction not declassified] We do not believe these concerns have eroded either side’s fundamental commitment to continuing the peace effort. Nevertheless, both countries have been shaken by the fall of the Shah, and seem more determined than ever to protect their own equities and less inclined toward the kind of flexibility necessary to hasten the conclusion of a treaty. [handling restriction not declassified] Concern over US losses in Iran and the perception that Washington was either unable or unwilling to act in ways to protect its interests there seems to be at the heart of Egypt’s greater caution and to have reinforced longstanding Israeli suspicious about the value of great power security commitments. President Sadat’s decision to embark on a high-risk pursuit of a peace settlement was based on a calculation of US power in the region and a belief that the US would be able and willing to use those strengths to engineer a comprehensive settlement and stand as its guarantor. Israel, although much less inclined to depend on the benefits of superpower guarantees, nevertheless has integrated its special relationship with the US into the basic assumptions underlying its peace moves. Although both sides have expressed some appreciation of our difficulties in dealing with rapidly unfolding events in Iran, confidence in US power and reliability has clearly been shaken. [handling restriction not declassified] We have detected an attitude emerging in Israel and Egypt of stricter self-reliance which contains the seeds of an uncertainty as to whether a treaty can be concluded which could withstand new shifts in the power balance and political currents in the region. [handling restriction not declassified] The tide of Islamic fervor in Iran, the Ayatollah Khomeini’s explicit endorsement of the Palestinians, and the collapse of the de facto security system in the Persian Gulf region have added significant pressure on President Sadat to demand from Israel a more explicit commitment to a comprehensive settlement and respect for Egypt’s sovereignty and pan-Arab obligations. Even before the crisis in Iran, the Egyptians were deeply disturbed by the force of Arab rejection of their independent dealings with Israel and particularly by Saudi Arabia’s endorsement of the anti-Egyptian resolutions of the Baghdad summit. Now the Egyptians face: —A coalition of Arabs spearheaded by Syria and Iraq, which has added reason in the wake of events in Iran to maintain an alliance. —A Saudi leadership [less than 1 line not declassified] seemingly less willing to risk taking positions unacceptable to the Palestinians and other Arabs.
