1956  1037
paragraph former draft as you recommended. We have also amended 
latter portion same paragraph. Reasons for these changes will be evi­
dent to you from our 2099 and 2101.
QUOTE There is enclosed a copy of the Agreed Announcement 
issued at Geneva on September 10, 1955.
In the near future, you will be given an opportunity to state for­
mally whether you elect to continue serving your sentence in the United 
States subject to prevailing regulations, or whether you prefer to be dis­
charged expeditiously from prison for the purpose of immediate and 
direct deportation to Mainland China. The Government of the United 
States also gives you the option of immediate and direct deportation 
to Taiwan if the Government of the Republic of China will receive you. 
If you apply for parole or commutation of sentence for the purpose of 
being deported, the American authorities concerned will give prompt 
consideration to your application.
You will later be visited to verify that you have been informed of 
this opportunity to be deported, and to ascertain whether you elect to 
be deported, so that the necessary arrangements can be made. The war­
den of the prison where you are confined will notify you in advance of 
the arrangements for the visit. END QUOTE
Dulles
647.	 Telegram 2009 from Geneva1
Geneva, June 8, 1956, 10 a.m.
2009. From Johnson. ReDeptel 2105.
While I understand reasons for revision latter portion second 
para will of course reduce effectiveness of action in obtaining release 
­Americans when letter inevitably comes to attention CHICOMS through 
Indians. Would, therefore, hope some method could be found whereby 
position relating Taiwan could be deleted and possibly included sub­
sequent letter or handled orally. While we have made statement to 
GRC contained para 6 Deptel 2101, we have made no commitment as 
to form in which this would be done and in any event GRC has not yet 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/6–856. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution.
