1956 643 wasted lots of time. Chinese side considers there has been deliberate stalling in talks. This is why Chinese side suggested we make meet­ ings open: so that people will realize what issues between us are. That is what Chinese side considers responsible attitude toward people. 38. I said he had said that if we shared common desire to reach agreement we should be able to do so. I most thoroughly agreed. That is what I had been trying to find out. 39. I said clear back on October eight I had said that US was willing to make declaration that we were determined our differences should not lead to war. I made it clear that US was desirous and willing, in order that there be no misunderstanding between us or in world, that this would specifically apply to area in which our most serious dispute existed, that is area of Taiwan. I made it clear this did not involve in any way and it was not intention US in these talks involve rights and interests third parties. Nor was there any intention to prejudice peaceful pursuit of our several national policies. Yet after three months their government still unwilling publicly to make such statement. It was difficult to understand why, if Chinese considered that such statement applied to Taiwan area, as he had stated, why he would be unwilling to do so. 40. I said I did not agree that we had not made progress—I believed we had made some. I believed discussions had been useful. Insofar as responsibility for failure thus far to agree on text of announcement on renunciation of force—it is very clear. 41. Wang said US side had remarked that our exchange views had been useful, but he did not see how it had been useful. If it were really useful, it should have been demonstrated in progress toward solution of issues between us. 42. Wang said as to wording of text, if phrase concerning right to individual and collective self-­defense could be removed, then Chinese side could give consideration to mention of Taiwan area. However, if we fail reach agreement on text of declaration, responsibility squarely on US side. 43. I asked if he objected to principle of individual and collective self-­defense. 44. Wang said that principle was all right but could not apply to Taiwan area. US attempting to exercise this right in Taiwan area would be abuse. 45. I asked if he intended to tell United States in what countries it could have arrangements for individual and collective self-­defense. As I understood it, their country had individual and collective self-­defense arrangements with other countries but I had never raised question here. 46. Wang said they had such arrangements but they had them on their own territory and they had never gone thousands of miles across
