1588 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement duties, the conditions required to be met in order for verification per­ sonnel to be effective, the equipment requirements, and the initial and recurring costs of the verification systems. c. Evaluate the possible impact of the measures and systems dis­ cussed in subparagraphs 3 a and b above on U.S. national security interests. Assess the effect of such measures and systems on U.S. deter­ rent and retaliatory capabilities. Identify those measures and systems which are inimical to U.S. national security; those which are condition­ ally acceptable and the conditions for acceptance; and those which are clearly advantageous to the United States. d. Identify U.S. unilateral measures which would be required to avoid a reduction in the U.S. national security position relative to Soviet Bloc nations in the event the measures and systems discussed in subparagraphs 3 a and b above, were incorporated in an international agreement and implemented. 4. The Study Group shall be furnished necessary military and technical data pertinent to this study and shall receive all necessary assistance and cooperation from the Departments and Agencies of the Government. 5. The Director of the Study Group shall submit a final report of the work of the study group to the Interdepartmental Coordinating Group by _______________ 1959. 434. Telegram Supnu 319 From Geneva1 Geneva, March 5, 1959, 3 p.m. Supnu 319. Eyes only for Herter from Wadsworth. I am somewhat disturbed by the tenor of certain newspaper stories concerning “Western agreement” with certain elements of the Soviet veto list, particularly as to possible congressional reaction to such sto­ ries. Luther Reid has tried hard to inculcate the correspondents here with the difference between the right of veto on the Control Commis­ sion and the acceptance of the necessity for unanimity in a few other parts of the treaty. However, the few stories to which I have reference make no distinction in this regard and give the impression that we have yielded to Soviet insistence on a whole series of vetoes in the Control Commission. 1 Source: Expresses concern with news reports that U.S. and U.K. have agreed to Soviet veto list. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/3–559.
