Afghanistan 659 anything can happen during 1980, since it will obviously take some time before we can resolve the Afghanistan question. And 1981 will also be a difficult year when agreements will be expiring. It may take two years, it may take longer, but I am confident that reasonable relations will eventually be restored between us, Bessmertnykh repeated. (S) At that point I had another meeting to attend. We agreed once more on the importance of staying in touch with each other. (U) COMMENT: Despite the hard edges, the conversation was entirely non-polemical in tone. Bessmertnykh’s performance was, as usual, smooth and affable.4 (U) 4 Vance and Dobrynin met the following day and also discussed the deterioration in U.S.-Soviet relations due in part to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the U.S. response. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 272. 242. Telegram From the Department of Defense to the Commander in Chief, Allied Forces Southern Europe1 Washington, March 25, 1980, 2323Z [cable number not declassified] NATO Secret to NATO addressees. Subj: Request for Information (Afghanistan Rebels) (U). Ref: SY Sec SHAPE Msg DTG 141450Z Mar 80.2 1. (C) Afghan insurgent groups can be divided into two major categories; those groups based and operating within Afghanistan and those groups (exiles) based in Pakistan but operating in Afghanistan. The former represents the major ethnic groups (Pushtu, Tajik, Hazara, Uzbek and Aimak). Little is known of their exact numbers of leaders. Afghanistan’s tribes, especially the Pushtu tribes, have historically resisted government encroachments. Resistance is generally confined to ethnic or tribal boundaries. Islam, resentment of foreign intervention, and antipathy to Russians serve as unifying motives, however, none are strong enough to produce a coordinated rebellion. The second category, exiles based in Pakistan, is comprised of several major groups whose number changes almost daily with the formation of new groups, 1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, JCS Support Request, 80–81. Secret. Sent for information to SACEUR and SHAPE. 2 Not found.
