For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Related Arms Control Initiatives
NSDM 3452 essentially directs that the Director, ACDA, in coordi-
nation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Di-
rector of Central Intelligence, identify and assess arms control initia-
tives intended to limit the development or deployment of a capability
to attack satellites, to reduce the likelihood that satellites will be at-
tacked, and to define actions that would constitute “interference” with
satellites.
In view of its importance, but mindful of the possibility that the
timing and scope of the arms control study and of related anti-satellite
efforts may be changed, I am beginning the effort directed by the
NSDM. I have asked that points of contact be designated by State, De-
fense and CIA.
Leon Sloss
Acting
2 The Ford administration issued National Security Decision Memorandum 345,
“U.S. Anti-Satellite Capabilities,” on January 18, 1977. It is printed in Foreign Relations,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2.
Editorial Note
While the administration of President Jimmy Carter pondered its
options for anti-satellite capabilities, it also tried to establish a “co-
herent” space policy. The President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, “concluded that this issue is of a high pri-
ority nature warranting a timely, comprehensive review and statement
of national policy.” In an undated draft Presidential Review Memo-
randum, he tasked the various departments involved in national secu-
rity decision-making to weigh in on the administration’s strategy. In
particular, he asked that the departments examine “the relative impor-
tance of the use of space for the different yet interrelated goals of our
civil, military, and intelligence programs.” (Memorandum from Brze-
zinski to the Secretaries of State, Defense, Interior, Agriculture, Com-
merce, the Directors of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,
Central Intelligence, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, and
the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion, March 5, 1977, and draft Presidential Review Memorandum; Li-
brary of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 22,
1977 Missiles and Space Policy)
On March 14, 1977, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield
Turner urged Brzezinski to create a Policy Review Committee devoted
to space policy, which would be chaired by Secretary of Defense Ha-
rold Brown, and argued that “No policy initiative likely to have major
effects, e.g. ASAT negotiations, should be permitted until those effects
have been carefully assessed.” (Memorandum from Turner to Brzezin-
ski, March 14; Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
Paul Warnke, the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, concurred with Turner, and noted that “of particular concern
to the arms control effort is that the policy options and recommenda-
tions delineate clearly what the impact of possible US actions might be
on maintaining the free use of space and what effect changes in the op-
eration of US satellite programs for military, intelligence and civil pur-
poses might have on our verification capabilities.” (Memorandum
from Warnke to Brzezinski; Carter Library, National Security Council,
Carter issued Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 23, “A Co-
herent National Space Policy” on March 28, which included the deter-
mination of “the appropriate degree of system survivability, defensive,
and offensive capabilities in space, and arms limitations initiatives.”
The memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XXV, Global Issues; United Nations Issues. (Ibid.)

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
3.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Berlin, Cyprus, Arms Control, CSCE, Bilateral Matters
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary
Deputy Foreign Minister
Arthur Hartman
Georgiy Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. O. Sokolov
Slocombe
Mr. V.M. Sukhrodrev, Interpreter
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite capabilities.]
ANTI-SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
The Secretary said that in this connection2 he wanted to raise the
issue of placing limits on the anti-satellite capabilities of both sides. We
had noted that such capabilities were in the process of being devel-
oped. We firmly believed that an attempt should be made to stabilize
the strategic situation by discussing such capabilities, and were pre-
pared to enter into discussions with the Soviet Union concerning their
limitation. In the interim, he would suggest that it would be useful to
exercise restraint in testing anti-satellite systems.
Gromyko said he could not say that no problem existed in this area.
He would be prepared to examine any proposal the United States could
submit.
The Secretary thought that was good, because he believed it impor-
tant that we do this.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Anti-Satellite Capabilities.]
Kremlin. Drafted by Krimer on April 2; reviewed by Hyland; and approved by Twaddell
viet Union, Document 21.
2 Gromyko and Vance had just briefly discussed a possible international treaty
whereby states would promise not to be the first to use nuclear weapons.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, July 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Antisatellites
of Staff hereby provide their positions regarding acquisition of a US
antisatellite (ASAT) capability and potential negotiations with the
USSR concerning an ASAT ban.
2. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that an urgent requirement
exists for the United States to attain an ASAT capability. This capability
is needed to deny the USSR significant military advantages in the event
of conflict and to provide a credible deterrent against USSR interfer-
ence with US space systems during crises.
3. (TS) Soviet space systems provide major military benefits which,
together with projected future space systems, will have an increasingly
larger role in strategic and tactical conflict for real time reconnaissance,
command and control, navigation, and meteorological support. The
most immediate threat against US Forces is the use of ELINT and radar
ocean reconnaissance satellite systems capable of locating ships. This
real time enhanced capability seriously challenges the survivability of
the US surface fleet.
4. (TS) The USSR is well aware that the United States is increas-
ingly dependent on space systems for intelligence collection, warning
of missile launch, communications, navigation, and meteorological
support. Current ASAT capabilities favor the USSR; not only can the
USSR eliminate an important element of the US force structure which
supports US strategy, but it can do so without suffering similar conse-
quences. Currently, the United States has no ASAT capability. The Joint
Chiefs of Staff conclude that it would be undesirable for the United
States to remain operationally incapable of responding to or interfering
with military-related USSR space systems, particularly those which
constitute a direct threat to US Forces.
5. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff further believe that the United
States should not participate in a ban on research, development,
testing, and deployment of various ASAT systems. Of principal con-
Anti-Satellite Program. Top Secret.
2 Not found.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
cern is the lack of adequate verification methods to provide assurance
that the USSR does not retain or increase an ASAT capability. Because
of the USSR’s present lead in proven engineering and in operational ex-
perience, it could quickly gain superiority in space should it choose to
abrogate a total ASAT ban. Since the United States does not have an
ASAT capability, any ban of a lesser degree which allowed present So-
viet ASAT systems to exist but which prohibited development of new
systems would legitimize and perpetuate the present imbalance.
6. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider the medium of space to be
of utmost importance to the United States. They request you support
their views concerning the acquisition and deployment of an ASAT ca-
pability as well as their related views on potential negotiations with the
USSR concerning an ASAT ban.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
George S. Brown
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5.
Summary of Significant Discussion and Conclusions of a
Policy Review Committee Meeting1
Subject:
PRM/NSC–23, Coherent Space Policy
Participants:
State:
ACDA:
Warren Christopher
Spurgeon Keeny
Michael Michaud
James Timbie
Defense:
OMB:
Harold Brown
W. Bowman Cutter
Charles Duncan
E. Randy Jayne
Hans Mark
Interior:
Robert A. Greenberg
Cecil D. Andrus
Walter Slocombe
Commerce:
Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith (JCS)
David Johnson
DCI:
Richard Frank
John McMahon
Agriculture:
[name not declassified]
Robert Bergland
NASA:
Harold L. Strickland
Robert Frosch
NSC:
Alan Lovelace
Zbigniew Brzezinski
OSTP:
William Hyland
Frank Press
Robert A. Rosenberg
Arthur Morrisey
Benjamin Huberman
The PRC, chaired by Secretary Brown, met to review national
space policy issues, identify areas of agreement and disagreement and
make recommendations for decisions to the President.
Secretary Brown opened the meeting with a discussion of United
States’ policy on antisatellite (ASAT) activity and arms control (Issue
Five),2 focusing mainly on arms control initiatives. Secretary Brown
proposed a ban only on peacetime use of antisatellite systems since the
Soviets already have a capability. The U.S. does not. He added that ver-
ification of a more comprehensive ban would be extremely difficult,
and that in wartime, arms control would not provide protection.
Old Executive Office Building.
2 Presumably Brown is referring to a briefing memorandum on space policy issues
which was not found.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the President has committed to discus-
sions with the Soviets,3 stating that a comprehensive ban would serve
our security interests, reinforce stability, and support our SALT efforts.
He asked that we proceed rapidly to form a working group to examine
the essential aspects of such negotiations. Dr. Brzezinski opined that
just because the Soviets have something is no adequate reason for us to
acquire an ASAT. He felt that a comprehensive ban would hold the So-
viets at their present level and add some assurances that they would
not proceed in other areas.
Mr. Keeny noted that a peacetime ban adds little to existing agree-
ments. John McMahon stated [2 lines not declassified] General Smith rec-
ommended we not proceed with negotiations on limitations due to ver-
ification problems.
A formulation by Mr. Hyland would propose to the Soviets a mor-
atorium on testing and explore with them what level agreement would
be possible before explicitly deciding on an option. Secretary Brown
agreed to provide a coordinated outline for the President covering the
major approaches, disagreements and problems in this area in two
weeks, based on a special working group effort. The U.S. ASAT ques-
tion would be treated as well in this paper.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite capabilities.]
3 In a March 4 letter to Brezhnev, Carter wrote that he wanted to “reach an early
agreement” on a number of issues, including an “agreement not to arm satellites nor to
develop the ability to destroy or damage satellites.” The letter is printed in full in Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
6.
Issues Paper Prepared by the PRM–23 Interagency Group1
Washington, August 9, 1977
ARMS CONTROL FOR ANTISATELLITE SYSTEMS ISSUES PAPER
Page
I. INTRODUCTION
II. BACKGROUND
A. Prior Statements
B. Summary of the Issues
C. The Baseline: Current Circumstances/Projections
1. U.S. and Soviet Dependence on Space
2. Current and Projected ASAT Systems
3. Current Treaty Limits Upon ASAT Use
III. GENERAL CONCERNS AND ISSUES
A. The Threat of ASAT Arms Competition
B. Need for a U.S. ASAT
C. Verification
1. General
2. Particular U.S. Verification Concerns
3. Particular Soviet Concerns
4. Breakout
D. Other Considerations
IV. RELATIONSHIP OF ASATS TO OTHER ISSUES
A. Survivability
B. Free Use of Space
V. APPROACHES TO ASAT ARMS CONTROL
ARMS CONTROL FOR ANTISATELLITE SYSTEMS
I. INTRODUCTION
(S) The principal issue for decision is one of basic policy: assuming
a U.S. initiative with the Soviet Union on anti-satellite (ASAT2) systems,
2 The term ASAT will here include any physical or electromagnetic attack on space
systems (i.e., physical destruction, jamming, laser attack, or command capture. [1 line not
declassified] [Footnote is in the original.]

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
what general approach should be taken in seeking limitations? Clearly
the decision cannot be approached in isolation, but must be integrated
with overall analysis of space policy. It would be premature to draw up
detailed negotiating options at this stage, but it is important to set
broad objectives before proceeding with preparations on an initial pro-
posal. This paper reviews ASAT status and background, relates the
ASAT issue to other policy issues, and describes four approaches for
ASAT arms control. Given a decision on approach, it will be possible to
develop an initial proposal to the Soviets, and to pose technical ques-
tions for more intensive study.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Prior Statements
(S) As described publicly, the President has suggested to the So-
viets that each side “forego the opportunity to arm satellite bodies and
. . . to destroy observation satellites.”3 Further, Secretary Vance raised
the issue of controlling ASAT systems during the March Moscow
meeting with Minister Gromyko; Secretary Vance emphasized the need
to maintain strategic stability, suggested the need for discussions on
ASAT’s, and indicated that during the interim it would be useful if the
sides exercised restraint in their testing of ASAT systems.4 Minister
Gromyko replied that he could not say that no problem existed in this
area, and stated that the Soviets would examine any proposal the U.S.
submitted on the subject. It was agreed to establish a bilateral Working
Group on antisatellite limitations. The U.S. has agreed to make a sub-
stantive proposal on ASAT limitations to the Soviets. Following this,
the Working Group would be convened. [2 lines not declassified]
B. Summary of the Issues
(S) In overview, the ASAT issue reduces ultimately to a few key
points. On the one hand,
—ASAT limitations might preclude a long-term arms competition
characterized by action-reaction cycles, increased defense costs, peace-
time tensions, and crisis instability; furthermore,
—limitations on Soviet capabilities to attack satellites would be de-
sirable since the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on satellites
for basic functions in peacetime, crisis, conventional war, and strategic
war.
However, we must take into account:
3 Not found.
4 See Document 3.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—the possible need, independent of Soviet ASAT capabilities, for a
U.S. ASAT system to counter threatening Soviet satellites.
—the existence of a current Soviet orbital ASAT, noting that the
U.S. has none.
—the difficult verification problems in a realm where incentives to
cheat may be greater than under previous agreements such as SALT
One.
(S) Since each side has only a small number of critical operational
satellites (6–15), small numbers of ASAT’s could have a decisive signifi-
cance. This is in contrast with SALT and ABM issues where stability is
not affected by small numbers of weapons.
C. The Baseline: Current Circumstances and Projections
1. U.S. and Soviet Dependence on Space
(S) There is a tendency to think of space as “peaceful”, in part be-
cause some [less than 1 line not declassified] compliance with stabilizing
treaties which would not otherwise be possible, warning satellites con-
tribute to our strategic and space exploration, and international com-
munications. Furthermore, there has never been a confrontation in
space, treaties have given space a special status, and space has been
used as a peaceful area where the U.S. and USSR can work together
cooperatively.
(S) On the other hand, space systems are becoming increasingly
important for battle management on both sides. Table One lists some of
the applications which military [less than 1 line not declassified] satellites
have now or could have within ten years.
Table One (TS)
Examples of Military Use of Space Now or in 1980’s
Tactical Operations
—real-time surveillance with readout to battlefield commanders5
—all-weather broad ocean surveillance of surface combatant; and
convoys providing real-time targeting data to submarines, surface
ships and aircraft6
—[1 line not declassified]
—antisubmarine warfare (e.g., relay reports from sonobuoys)
—real-time weather data7
5 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.] [Footnote
in the original not declassified.]
7 Ibid.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
—responsive world-wide command and control capability8
—battlefield surveillance
Strategic Operations
—targeting data9
—early warning of attack by SLBM’s and ICBM’s10
—delivery of the Emergency Action Message to nuclear capable
forces11
—precise navigation for strategic weapons delivery systems12
—post-attack damage assessment
(S) The entries in Table One are realistic rather than speculative
plans. It follows that satellites may, in the future, have a significant ef-
fect on warfare—they may even determine the outcome of certain wars,
especially wars short of a full nuclear exchange.
Relative Dependence and Vulnerability
(TS) The U.S. is likely to remain more dependent on space systems
than the Soviets in several important functional areas. However, the
U.S. and USSR have differing needs and are dependent on space in cor-
respondingly different ways. The U.S. space program tends to have a
small number of expensive, long-lived and sophisticated multipurpose
satellites. As space systems have been integrated into military opera-
tions, the U.S. has changed its operations, plans, and uses of terrestrial
forces. Space is now an integral part of U.S. military, tactical, and stra-
tegic planning. The Soviets tend to have larger numbers of simpler
systems and have launched additional satellites during crises (e.g.,
prior to the invasion of Czechoslovakia and during the 1973 Mid-East
war). The Soviets may be emphasizing tactical use of satellites [less than
1 line not declassified] A given U.S. satellite will often represent a higher
value target than a given Soviet satellite. However, some Soviet satel-
lites are very valuable and unique [2½ lines not declassified]
2. Current and Projected ASAT Systems
(S) The U.S. currently has no operational ASAT system, but did
have a single-pad system deployed at Johnston Island from 1964 until
1975. The system employed Thor boosters and a nuclear warhead, and
operated in a direct-ascent mode against low-altitude targets only. The
Johnston Island system was initially a response to Soviet threats about
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid.
11 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.]
12 Ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
orbital weapons of mass destruction (Orbital Bombardment Systems).
The system was deactivated because of fiscal pressures and because a
low-altitude nuclear burst would probably damage U.S. satellites large
distances away from the burst as well as the targeted Soviet satellite.
(TS) By contrast with the U.S., the Soviets have an operational or-
bital ASAT capability. [1 line not declassified]
Table Two (TS)
[1 line not declassified]
System
Comments &
Capability
Description
1. [1 chart item not declassified]
2. Galosh Interceptor
—nuclear (with
—[less than 1 line not
potential for
declassified]
nonnuclear variant)
—direct ascent
—[less than 1 line not
declassified]
—has ASAT
—is operational as an
capability, [less than 1
ABM
line not declassified]
3. [1 chart item not declassified]
4. [1 chart item not declassified]
U.S. Activities are:
(S) The U.S. has not consumated any ASAT deployment plans. The
U.S. is developing a miniature homing vehicle (MHV) which destroys
its target by high-velocity impact. This system is planned to be tested
against low altitude target by 1981. The MHV could be air-launched
against satellites below 2000 km. If the MHV were used on Minuteman
or equivalent space launchers, it could have high-altitude capability.
(TS) [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
Other U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified] Possibilities are:
Ground-Based Lasers—[less than 1 line not declassified] possible for
U.S. by 1981 (there is no dedicated U.S. laser ASAT program at this
time).
Space-Based Lasers—possible for U.S. by mid-1980’s; ARPA is
doing subsystem technology. [3 lines not declassified]
High-Altitude Interceptors—[1 line not declassified] The U.S. ASAT
interceptor currently under development can grow to a high altitude
capability.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
[less than 1 line not declassified]
3. Current Treaty Limits Upon ASAT Use
(U) A number of agreements currently limit ASAT activities to
some degree during peacetime.
(U) The International Telecommunications Convention prohibits
harmful interference with radio services or communications.
(U) The 1967 Outer Space Treaty14 bans placing nuclear weapons
or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction in orbit and estab-
lishes satellites as under the jurisdiction of states which register them
with the UN. This treaty further requires international consultations
before proceeding with any activity which would cause potentially
harmful interference with the activities of other parties in the peaceful
use of outer space.
(U) The Limited Test Ban Treaty prohibits detonating a nuclear
weapon in space.
(U) The 1971 “Measures Agreement to Reduce the Outbreak of
Nuclear War” requires the U.S. and USSR to notify each other in the
event of interference with strategic warning systems or their related
communication systems.
(U) The 1972 ABM Treaty and the Interim SALT Agreement ban
interference with National Technical Means (NTM) of Verification, op-
erated in accordance with international law.
III. GENERAL CONCERNS AND ISSUES
A. The Threat of an ASAT Arms Competition
(TS) A number of recent events have raised public concerns about
a possible arms competition in space, e.g., [2 lines not declassified] exag-
gerated statements in the U.S. press about lasers and charged particle
beams, and misinformed leaks to the press about “laser blinding” of
U.S. satellites.
(TS) Concern about Soviet resumption of orbital ASAT tests [less
than 1 line not declassified] led to two NSC directives. Last year, NSDM
333 directed a major review of satellite vulnerability and survivability.
ASAT system on an expedited basis to selectively nullify certain mili-
13 [2 footnotes in the original not declassified]
14 The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and other Celestial Bodies was signed at Wash-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tarily important Soviet space systems. Both NSDM 33315 and 34516 are
currently in abeyance pending PRM–23 review.
(TS) The U.S. has not yet made a decision on deploying an ASAT,
and the pace of related R&D has not been accelerated. There is no de-
ployment program to put a U.S. laser weapon into space. The U.S. has
not begun approved implementation of the survivability measures rec-
ommended in response to NSDM 333. [11 lines not declassified] The com-
petition could be self-limiting on the U.S. side because of fiscal con-
straints. However, an ASAT competition could lead to an expensive
long-term series of action-reaction events in which each side would at-
tempt to maintain the survivability of his own systems and to develop
ASAT systems with better capabilities for attack against the adver-
sary’s satellites. In addition to their value as ASAT systems, lasers in
space could be provocative because of concerns that they were step-
ping stones to a space-based laser ABM system. There are major differ-
ences between systems for ASAT’s and those for ABM’s; nonetheless,
the situation would be a source of concern.
(S) Improvements and proliferation of ASAT’s could be disadvan-
tageous to the U.S. military since we may remain more dependent on
space than the Soviets, and we may be in a better position to exploit
space because of our superior technological space capabilities. An ac-
tive Soviet ASAT program could raise doubts about the survivability of
proposed U.S. satellite systems, and prevent us from reaping the ben-
efits of our technological advantages.
B. Need for a U.S. ASAT
(TS) There are important scenarios in which the absence of U.S.
ASAT capabilities could leave the U.S. at a net disadvantage; for ex-
ample, keeping the sea lanes of communication open during U.S./
Soviet conflicts. Further, the U.S. could probably build more effective
ASAT’s and more survivable satellites than could the Soviets, which
given the U.S. determination to do so, they could function to the disad-
vantage of the Soviets.
(TS) [6½ lines not declassified] These satellites are uniquely valuable
over the broad ocean areas where the Soviets’ terrestrial resources are
limited or subject to attack. In addition, other Soviet space threats may
affect U.S. force operations, e.g., Soviet photo reconnaissance of U.S.
15 The Ford Administration issued National Security Decision Memorandum 333,
“Enhanced Survivability of Critical U.S. Military and Intelligence Space Systems,” on

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
massing forces, Soviet intelligence message transmissions, Soviet
weather data over U.S. deployment routes, and Soviet communications.
(TS) In a December 1976 response17 to the ad hoc NSC Panel report
that led to NSDM 345, the Secretary of Defense stated that it is [3 lines
not declassified] He further suggested that it was not appropriate to
initiate an immediate program to develop and deploy an ASAT inter-
ceptor using the then state-of-the-art techniques rather than use devel-
oping technology. At this time a U.S. direct ascent nonnuclear inter-
ceptor development and test program has been approved. Deployment
planning is underway, but deployment has not been approved.
C. Verification
Soviet compliance with an ASAT treaty cannot be assumed, and
the net assessment must account for the possibility of Soviet cheating.
1. General
(TS) [2 paragraphs (10 lines) not declassified]
—The Soviets have existing ASAT capabilities [4 lines not declassi-
fied] the ABM/ASAT role of Galosh, [2 lines not declassified]
—A relatively small level of successful cheating, e.g., a handful of
ASAT’s and EW sites, could have a high payoff.
Although the U.S. would abide by the limitations, we could not
have confidence that the Soviets would do likewise if the agreement
were not verifiable.
(TS) On the other hand, if ASAT testing were banned [8 lines not
declassified]
2. Particular U.S. Verification Concerns
(TS) a. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
(TS) b. [1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
(TS) [2½ lines not declassified] Over time the Soviets might lose
system confidence without such testing. The Department of Defense
believes that confidence would not be lost, e.g., the U.S. has retained
confidence in the Titan II ICBM force without launches over many
years. The Soviets could conduct crew training by launching satellites.
For example, the U.S. system at Johnston Island was maintained opera-
tional for eight years after the last ASAT test by allowing the crew to
launch weather satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Document 123.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(TS) [5 lines not declassified] Cooperative measures such as on-site
inspection and other collateral constraints might reduce ambiguities.
[3 lines not declassified]
(TS) Galosh. Presumably, the Soviets would be permitted under an
ASAT treaty to retain the Galosh interceptors of their ABM systems.
This ABM has nuclear ASAT capability against low-altitude satellites
and could have a secondary ASAT mission. However, its use as such, if
not very precisely planned, could damage their own satellites as well as
the target satellite.
(TS) [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]
3. Particular Soviet Concerns
The Soviets may be concerned that the U.S. could test and deploy
ground-based ASAT systems covertly. They may not believe that the
former U.S. ASAT system cannot now be launched from Vandenberg
or Johnston Island. They may have the same concerns as the U.S. about
the inherent capabilities of both military and civilian ground-, ship-, or
air-based lasers that exist or might be developed for other purposes.
The Soviets may also have parallel concerns to ours about the use of
radar equipment for EW. They have already evidenced concern about
the space shuttle and may believe it could be used for satellite inspec-
tion, capture, and interference.
4. Breakout
(S) Even if the Soviets complied with terms of an ASAT agreement,
we would have to be concerned about breakout, including breakout si-
multaneous with ASAT attack. Since the lead time for U.S. ASAT and
satellite programs is long, U.S. R&D hedges would still require 2 to 4
more years to achieve compensating operational capabilities.
D. Other Considerations
(S) The following are some other considerations which could affect
policy judgments regarding ASAT arms control.
—[1 line not declassified]
—[2½ lines not declassified]
—[1½ lines not declassified]
—[1 line not declassified]
—[1 line not declassified]
IV. RELATIONSHIP OF ASATS TO OTHER SPACE POLICY ISSUES
A. Survivability
(TS) The survivability issue is being considered separately in the
response to PRM–23. Some conclusions are:

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
—It would not be prudent to forego implementation of such sur-
vivability measures as were recommended in response to NSDM 333
because of a belief that the satellites will be protected by treaties. The
measures recommended in NSDM 333 would primarily preclude
“cheap shots” based on current and near-term threats and current U.S.
vulnerabilities; most of the threats could still exist covertly under a ban.
—[5 lines not declassified]
—[6 lines not declassified]
—[4 lines not declassified]
—ASAT arms control agreements could reduce or delay advanced
threats.
B. Free Use of Space
(U) Since incentives to build ASAT’s are directly related to the na-
ture of satellites they would destroy, the Soviets may raise the possi-
bility of limiting satellite functions in response to our ASAT proposal.
Some concessions such as an agreement not to use the space shuttle as a
weapons carrier could overcome open Soviet concerns without major
impact on current U.S. plans. However, in considering any concessions
we should examine the effect it would have on a U.S. policy that pro-
motes freedom of use of space for peaceful (non-aggressive) purposes.
Any limits, for example, to ban radars in space, navigation systems like
the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System or reconnaissance satellites
which appear to concern the Soviets, would represent a radical depar-
ture from U.S. policy. Such limits could have a major impact on U.S.
space programs and would require major redirections of efforts to com-
pensate for loss of space capabilities. We must take into account the po-
tentially negative limitations that would be placed on U.S. satellite re-
connaissance programs if certain restrictive language were included in
an ASAT agreement (i.e., declaration of satellite purpose, prelaunch
on-site inspection, etc.). Limitations on satellite functions, or on the
space shuttle, should not be considered without in-depth analyses.
V. APPROACHES TO ASAT ARMS CONTROL
(S) While the U.S. and USSR will hold working group discussions
on how we might forego the capability to destroy satellite observation
vehicles, the Soviets have not yet expressed their views on the subject.
The U.S. has not yet analyzed fully the implications of all of the various
possible ASAT limitations, even though the U.S. has agreed to submit a
proposal to the Soviets. Thus, it would be unrealistic for the U.S. to
choose among finely-tuned options at this time. Instead, the issue for
decision now is the choice of a general approach for initial discussions.
(S) Arms control is one component in the overall U.S. policy to-
ward military and intelligence space activities. Other elements include
our survivability measures, our possible U.S. ASAT capabilities, and
the military utility of space to U.S. strategic and tactical forces. The gen-
eral policy problem is to weigh priorities and consider what ap-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
proaches best serve the national interest. Arms control is not a substi-
tute for survivability measures, although it could affect long-term
requirements. Even a comprehensive agreement will not affect ground-
station vulnerabilities, nor prohibit passive deception measures. In ad-
dition, it probably would not require the Soviets to dismantle their
ABM systems with ASAT capability. [2 lines not declassified] With these
considerations in mind, three approaches to ASAT arms control have
been defined and compared with the baseline case of no agreement. A
summary comparison of the approaches is provided in Table Three.
(S) The three approaches would include [6 lines not declassified]
A. Approach One: No Agreement
(S) The Soviets may not be willing to agree to any substantive and
equitable ASAT limitations. They may feel that the U.S. is merely at-
tempting to impede Soviet activities in a realm where the Soviets cur-
rently have advantages. They could respond to U.S. proposals with
counter-proposals which would not be acceptable to us.
(S) In the absence of an ASAT agreement, it would still be possible
for the U.S. to pursue some ASAT arms control initiatives. For example,
we could propose under the “Measures Agreement” that the sides
show restraint in ASAT testing, especially during crises. [2½ lines not
declassified] we could reaffirm the principal of noninterference with Na-
tional Technical Means by emphasizing that SALT obligation public-
ally and privately. DoD believes that the no agreement case should not
include these measures.
Pros and Cons for the No-Agreement Approach
Pros
Cons
—U.S. would be free to develop
—An ASAT arms competition
ASATs to counter the Soviets
could develop, or the U.S. might
threat.
not develop its ASAT; then the
asymmetries between the U.S.
—If ASAT capabilities cannot be
and USSR could widen.
controlled in a symmetric [less
than 1 line not declassified] way, it
—[4 lines not declassified]
may be preferable to pursue
other objectives [1 line not
—[8 lines not declassified]
declassified] without creating a
new negotiating forum.
—Would not reinforce the
President’s public position.
—Agreeing to a cosmetic
agreement could impede later
—Maintaining satellite
attempts to seek substantive
survivability against advanced
controls.
threats would be more difficult.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
—Development of U.S. ASAT
—Extensive development of
capabilities may provide a
advanced ASATs (e.g., lasers in
bargaining chip for future
space) could threaten the long
negotiations.
term viability of the ABM treaty.
B. Approach Two: [less than 1 line not declassified]
(S) Approach Two would not attempt to limit the capabilities of
ASAT systems; [1½ lines not declassified]
—[2½ lines not declassified]
—[2 lines not declassified]
—[5 lines not declassified]
(S) We would not designate some satellites as NTMs or as warning
systems, since that might decrease the protection afforded to those sat-
ellites not so designated. However, we could acknowledge that both
sides know that certain satellites of the other side are more relevant to
stability than others. In general, we would try to maintain a high
threshold for use of ASATs against any satellites.
(S) We could also explore the possibility of developing a wartime
sanctuary for hotline communications.
(S) The format of this approach would be more analogous to the
Outer Space Treaty and the Measures Agreement than to the ABM
Treaty. There would be no limitations on Soviet capabilities, and the
U.S. would have to develop its satellite, ASAT, and survivability pol-
icies with due regard for the realities of wartime where treaties need
not apply.
Pros and Cons for Approach Two
Pros
Cons
—May be negotiable since
—Lacks advantages of
Soviets have ASATs, the U.S.
Approaches Three and Four.
does not and the Soviets may
refuse to accept limitations on
—[4 lines not declassified]
existing capabilities.
—Would permit an arms
—Could pave the way for future
competition.
negotiations.
—Maintaining satellite
—[3 lines not declassified]
survivability against advanced
threats would be more difficult.
—Reduces the likelihood of
peacetime misunderstandings.
—[3 lines not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
C. Approach Three: Selected Limits to Control the Scope of ASAT Activity
(S) This approach would attempt to strike a balance between con-
flicting philosophies. It would prohibit types of systems which do not
yet exist, such as high-altitude interceptors, laser weapons in space,
and advanced concepts such as orbital interceptors with multiple war-
heads. However, it would not attempt to turn back the clock; low alti-
tude interceptors and ground-based lasers would be permitted; it
would permit explicitly the existing low-altitude Soviet ASAT systems
and low altitude systems for the U.S.
(S) Approach Three would also include “rules of the road” and a
[less than 1 line not declassified] Fundamentally, however, it would be an
attempt to limit the scope of ASAT activities. It might include qualita-
tive or numerical limits on low-altitude ASAT systems as well as the
ban on high-altitude interceptors and exotic weapons in space.
Pros and Cons for Approach Three
Pros
Cons
—Would place a cap on the
—Could lower the threshold for
competition and preclude some
use of low altitude ASATs by not
of the most worrisome
explicitly prohibiting them.
possibilities (i.e., high altitude
interceptors, lasers in space).
—[4 lines not declassified]
—Would permit the U.S. to
—It would allow arms
attack low altitude Soviet
competition in low altitude
satellites [1½ lines not declassified]
ASAT systems.
—Would avoid some of the
—Could lead to complacency,
[less than 1 line not declassified]
failure to institute survivability
most risky aspects of the
means and increased
comprehensive propos-
vulnerability.
als by permitting some
ASATs.
—May not be negotiable since
most high-altitude satellites are
—Would decrease the likelihood
American.
of physical attacks on U.S.
satellites most critical to crisis
—Creating a partial sanctuary
stability (e.g., warning and
for high altitude systems may
communication satellites in
encourage the redesign and/or
high-altitude orbits).
replacement of some low altitude
systems to become high altitude
—May be more negotiable than
systems.
Approach 4 since it would not

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
require the Soviets to give up
this existing capability.
—Reduces likelihood of
peacetime misunderstandings.
D. Approach Four: Relatively Comprehensive ASAT Arms Limitations
(S) Approach Four would attempt to preclude a significant arms
competition in ASAT systems. It would prohibit testing or deployment
of any ASAT for physical attack upon satellites, e.g., direct ascent inter-
ceptors and any ASAT laser weapons. [1 line not declassified] It would
include rules of the road and a ban on [less than 1 line not declassified]
with satellites. Testing of ASATs would be prohibited.
(TS) The Agreement would not include the Galosh ABM system
(although “tests in ASAT mode” would be prohibited), and electronic
warfare capability such as jamming and interference (although [less
than 1 line not declassified] would be prohibited). [4½ lines not declassified]
(S) This approach would seek strict limits on ASAT capabilities,
tight definitions, collateral constraints, and a mechanism for coopera-
tion such as the Standing Consultative Commission. We would con-
tinue ASAT R&D, and develop hedges against Soviet noncompliance
or breakout. The treaty would be subject to review and amendment at
five-year intervals.
(S) Some believe that a comprehensive approach (Approach
Four-A) should also include a ban on [4 lines not declassified] Therefore
Approach Four-A [less than 1 line not declassified]
Pros and Cons for Approach Four
Pros
Cons
—Closes off a potential realm of
—Precludes a U.S. ASAT
arms competition.
interceptor for defense.
—May improve satellite
—[3½ lines not declassified]
survivability against long-term
threats by making advanced
—The Soviets would retain the
threats less likely.
advantage of the nuclear-armed
Galosh [1½ lines not declassified]
—Assuming compliance, prob-
ably works to U.S. advantage
—[3 lines not declassified]
in the use of space since the
U.S. will be more dependent on
—Satellites would have
space than the Soviets.
sanctuary even when they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Reduces likelihood of
perform same missions
peacetime misunderstandings
as ground and airborne support
and of attacks on satellites
systems (surveillance,
during peacetime.
reconnaissance, etc.).
—[2 lines not declassified] more
—There are verification risks
difficult under Approach Four
because some forms of cheating
than Approach Three.
would be relatively easy and
incentives to cheat could be high;
—[4 lines not declassified]18
assumption that both sides
would be denied ASATs could
—Enhances the long term
be naive.
viability of the ABM Treaty.
—Could produce complacency,
and impede implementation of
survivability measures.
—May be non-negotiable since
Soviets have ASATs and we do
not.
18 [footnote in the original not declassified]

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
7.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, August 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Arms Control for Antisatellite Systems
(S) At the August 4, 1977 meeting of the Policy Review Committee
on PRM–23,2 it was decided that a separate paper on antisatellite activ-
ities and arms control should be forwarded for your review and deci-
sion. That Decision Paper is enclosed along with an Issues Paper3
which contains a more detailed discussion of the issue.
(S) Because of the importance of this issue and the widely differing
views on the approach we should take in our proposal to the Soviet
Union, you may wish further discussion of this subject at the NSC level
prior to your decision.
Harold Brown
Attachment
Decision Paper4
Washington, undated
ASAT ARMS CONTROL5
THE ISSUE
What should be the U.S. policy on antisatellite (ASAT) activity and
ASAT arms control?
BACKGROUND
The U.S. has offered to propose ASAT arms limitations to the So-
viet Union. In developing approaches for the discussions, a funda-
mental consideration is the need for a U.S. ASAT capability.
2 See Document 5.
3 Attached but not printed.
4 Top Secret; Talent Keyhole; Comint.
5 The term ASAT includes any physical or [less than one line not declassified] on space
systems. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
MAJOR FACTORS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM
Both the U.S. and the USSR have and are further developing satel-
lite capabilities in space for a range of activities spanning peacetime,
crisis and wartime. These include treaty verification, national and mili-
tary intelligence, weather, navigation, communications and attack
warning. Both sides are increasing the use of satellites as sources of tac-
tical intelligence to provide near-real-time photography, electronic fer-
reting, and radar targeting of military assets.
The Soviet Union currently has an advantage over the U.S. in anti-
satellite capabilities. They have an orbital interceptor which has been
judged to be operational [8½ lines not declassified]
The U.S. has no ASAT capability. A nuclear interceptor system was
operational until 1975 at Johnston Island. Currently, the U.S. is devel-
oping a new interceptor which is planned for testing by 1981. [3½ lines
not declassified]
SUMMARY OF THE ISSUES
On the one hand:
• Limitations on Soviet capabilities to attack U.S. satellites would
be desirable since the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on its
space assets, and relies on a smaller number of more sophisticated sat-
ellites than the USSR.
• There has never been a confrontation in space and treaties have
tended to give space a special status as a peaceful arena where both
sides can work cooperatively.
• ASAT limitations might preclude a potential arms race in space
with its attendant action-reaction cycles, public concerns, increased de-
fense costs and potential instabilities.
On the other hand:
• The U.S. must assess the need, independent of Soviet ASAT
capabilities, for a U.S. ASAT system to counter threatening Soviet
satellites.
• There are difficult treaty verification problems in this area.
• Incentives to cheat may be greater than under previous agree-
ments. Because each side has a small number (6–15) of critical satellites,
small numbers of ASATs could be decisive. This is in contrast with cur-
rent treaties limiting ICBMs and ABMs, where stability is not affected
by small numbers of weapons.
APPROACHES
Under all of the approaches discussed below, U.S. ASAT research
and development activities will continue, and be modified to con-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
form with any agreements reached during negotiations. The four ap-
proaches are:
1. No Agreement: Do not seek an agreement limiting ASAT systems.
This does not preclude initiatives to further limit the likelihood of
peacetime interference. For example, the U.S. could propose under the
existing Agreement on Measures to Reduce the Risk of Outbreak of
Nuclear War, to show restraint in ASAT testing during crises.
2. Emphasis on Peacetime Problems: Do not attempt to limit the capa-
bilities of ASAT system but focus on peacetime problems and on estab-
lishment of thresholds for use. We would propose a peacetime sanc-
tuary for all satellites.
3. Selected Limits: Seek bans on types of systems which do not yet
exist, such as high-altitude interceptors and laser weapons in space, but
permit each side to test and deploy low-altitude ASAT interceptors,
electronic warfare, and ground-based laser ASAT systems.
4. Relatively Comprehensive Agreement: Seek a relatively comprehen-
sive agreement which would ban all ASAT capabilities except elec-
tronic warfare. Electronic warfare is excluded because of verification
difficulties. The ban would prohibit testing, deployment or use of any
ASAT for physical attack on satellites. The current Soviet orbital inter-
ceptor would be dismantled.
—A variant (4A) would be a fully comprehensive ban on all forms of
ASAT including electronic warfare.
AGENCY POSITIONS
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
State and ACDA favor a comprehensive ban on ASAT systems in
order to avoid cycles of action-reaction competition. Such an agreement
would enhance the survivability of U.S. satellites, on which we increas-
ingly depend for intelligence collection, verification, early warning,
and communications. A ban on testing, deployment, and use of ASAT
systems would contribute to stability by easing concerns about pre-
emptive attack on critical satellites. The present Soviet interceptor is
relatively unsophisticated; future Soviet ASAT systems would be much
more difficult to counter. Measures short of a comprehensive approach
would permit an expansion of Soviet ASAT capabilities, which would
make maintaining the survivability of U.S. satellites more difficult. Ver-
ification would be difficult, but testing and in some cases construction
of an ASAT system would be subject to observation. State and ACDA
favor Approach 4.
In the OSD view, antisatellite negotiations should be directed
toward a ban on peacetime interference. Such a ban would reinforce the
principle of noninterference in peacetime and establish a threshold be-
yond which specific actions will be considered hostile. This approach

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
recognizes that we must assume the Soviet Union could retain its ex-
isting capability even in the presence of a comprehensive ban. Elimina-
tion of these capabilities could not be reliably verified and confidence
in the system in the absence of testing could be quickly regained. This
system would be effective against such critical low altitude systems as
the current near-real-time imaging system. In such a situation it would
not be prudent to assume an ASAT agreement would be a suitable sub-
stitute for survivability measures. Furthermore, U.S. counteractions in
survivability and ASAT development could take several years. There-
fore, the OSD feels the U.S. should develop an ASAT capability. To-
ward these ends, OSD favors Approach Two.
In the JCS view, a ban on ASAT activities would concede existing
Soviet capabilities, since their elimination cannot be verified. Con-
versely, such a ban would deny the U.S. the capability to develop a
counter to military-related USSR space systems, particularly those
which may constitute a direct threat to U.S. forces. Arms Control agree-
ments cannot be used as a substitute for survivability of U.S. space
systems; to do so would be to invite denial of U.S. use of space systems
for a critically long period during a war given the likelihood of unilat-
eral treaty abrogation at the outset of conflict. An agreement to prevent
testing of an orbital ASAT has two drawbacks. First, Soviet confidence
in their current system would not be appreciably reduced. Second, the
U.S. would be unable to overcome the current Soviet advantage. There-
fore, the JCS believe the U.S. should develop an ASAT capability and
further that the U.S. should not enter into any agreement that would
ban ASAT research, development, testing, and deployment.
8.
Letter From the Special Advisor to the President for Science
and Technology (Press) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, September 8, 1977
Dear Harold:
Attached is a report prepared by the Office of Science and Tech-
nology Policy Space Advisory Group on the anti-satellite issue. Their
“SEC DEF HAS SEEN.” In the upper right-hand corner, Brown wrote “9/10. AF should
also get a copy. HB.”

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
recommendations are that the US acquire an electronic as well as a
non-nuclear interference capability. In light of current discussions, you
will likely find the report of interest. This group also has completed its
review on space based radars that you requested.2 I will forward this
report to you separately.
Yours sincerely,
Frank Press3
Director
Attachment
Memorandum From the Chair of the Advisory Group on
Space Systems (Buchsbaum) to the Special Advisor to the
President for Science and Technology (Press)4
Washington, August 26, 1977
SUBJECT
US Anti-Satellite Capability
The growing Soviet use of satellites for military functions has
heightened the need to revise US policy with respect to a US anti-
satellite capability. The Group believes that the Soviets should not be
allowed a one-sided sanctuary in space for critical space systems that
directly support their military forces. [4 lines not declassified] These
systems would be appropriate targets for attack under some condi-
tions. The number and types of such space systems are expected to
grow.
The Group believes it is undesirable for the US to remain incapable
of interfering with Soviet militarily-related space-systems, particularly
those space systems which would constitute a direct threat to Allied
forces during a conflict. These satellites are limited in number and at
low altitudes. [5½ lines not declassified]
[2½ lines not declassified] However, we believe that the most effec-
tive way to assure the survival of valuable US space assets in time of
crisis is, first, to reduce through appropriate technical measures the
electronic and even the physical vulnerability of US satellites and,
second, to have substantial alternative mission capabilities for the con-
2 Not found.
3 Press signed “Frank” above this typed signature.
4 Secret. The date is handwritten.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
duct of war. Approaches for achieving greater survivability were ad-
dressed in NSDM 333.5 The Group believes that expeditious implemen-
tation of enhanced survivability measures for critical space assets
should be given high priority.
There are two broad alternatives for an anti-satellite capability:
(1) physical destruction or damage, and (2) electronic interference.
[4 lines not declassified] However, such a capability is likely to be
perceived as more provocative than electronic interference for two
reasons: (1) its effect is irreversible and unambiguous and (2) the polit-
ical consequences of its use are likely to be more severe. Moreover, such
a physical destruction system is likely to be more expensive than an
electronic interference system.
Physical damage by radiation such as laser, microwave, or pos-
sibly particle radiation has characteristics somewhat intermediate be-
tween explosive kill and electronic interference. Its effects would not be
reversible, but could be ambiguous and the political consequences less
severe than in the case of explosive kill.
The Group recommends that first priority be given to developing
an early capability for electronic interference. Different satellites have
vulnerabilities to different electronic warfare techniques. The generic
techniques which may in principle be employed include noise jam-
ming, deception, command link capture, uplink jamming, delayed re-
peater jamming, and RF burnout of electronic components. Not all of
these techniques can be employed effectively against all satellites.
Some of these techniques would be realized most effectively with co-
orbital jamming satellites, while others could be best achieved from
ground-based jammers. Specifically, some types of radar, ELINT, and
navigation satellites could be negated by another satellite nearby which
emits a noise barrage or rebroadcasts their signals with small random
time delays.
Since the operation of many satellite systems is dependent on the
frequent receipt of commands from ground stations, command link
capture or jamming represents a particular vulnerability of satellite
systems. The possibility of interfering with this link depends strongly
on the altitude of the satellite. The command link of a low altitude satel-
lite, such as a photo-reconnaissance satellite, is normally only turned
on to receive when the satellite is over the Soviet ground station and is
out of view of possible jamming sites. As a result, it is more difficult to
interfere with low altitude satellites than it is to interfere with satellites
in synchronous operational orbit which are always in view.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
The Group cautions, however, that the operational problems asso-
ciated with electronic interference must be carefully controlled. US
testing of such a capability can compromise its effectiveness and would
be provocative if exercised against Soviet systems.
[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
In general the nature of the US development program should be
influenced by potential arms control agreements as well as military re-
quirement. However, in this case it may not be easy to negotiate a
useful and verifiable agreement limiting anti-satellite activities. It is not
clear what kind of agreement would be in the US interests. Given the
nature of present assets, it would seem that an agreement that would
limit both the US and the Soviet Union to low-altitude ASAT capability
would be desirable. Such an agreement may be difficult to reach at
present. In contrast to the Soviets, we have no low altitude intercept ca-
pability while their high altitude space assets are more limited than
ours. In addition, because of the limited number of targets, there is no
real distinction between an effectively deployed ASAT system and one
that is still in the test stage of development. Further, the Group does not
believe that it is practical to obtain a verifiable and useful agreement
limiting electronic interference. These various factors must be clearly
and fully understood before entering into negotiations on ASAT
limitations.
[1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified]
This target list places enormous technical and operational de-
mands on a US system. The size and composition of the targets and the
time requirements imply a substantial system deployment including
non-conus basing, in the southern hemisphere. While the Group is not
in a position to present a definitive target list, we believe a more modest
system aimed at the critical military threat is appropriate. [2½ lines not
declassified]
The size of this target set and the time requirements must, of
course, be reassessed as the composition of the Soviet satellite fleet
evolves.
A system aimed only at low-orbit interception is also suggested by
the fact that a demonstration of a high-altitude capability by the US
would encourage the early development of a similar capability by the
USSR. This would negate the current US superiority of high altitude. In
summary, proceeding with development of a low-orbit intercept sys-
tem is appropriate. The decision to undertake flight testing at a suitable
time in the development cycle should consider the status of arms con-
trol negotiations or agreements. At present, it would be premature to
develop or demonstrate a high altitude intercept capability.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
9.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 19, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM/NSC–23 Issue: Arms Control for Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Systems
Harold Brown, as Chairman of the PRM/NSC–23 Policy Review
Committee, has forwarded (Tab A)2 for your review and decision the
subject issue. At Tab B is a decision paper which summarizes the issue,
discusses the options and provides agency positions. The more detailed
paper done by the PRM/NSC–23 study group is at Tab C.
Arms control is but one aspect of overall U.S. policy toward mili-
tary, civil and intelligence space activities. Other elements include our
survivability measures, our ASAT capabilities and the military utility
of space to U.S. strategic and tactical forces. Arms control is not a sub-
stitute for survivability measures, although it could affect long-term re-
quirements. As we have discussed before, there is a definite interrela-
tionship between arms control of ASAT and many other space related
issues. With these considerations in mind, the PRM–23 study devel-
oped four approaches to ASAT arms control as follows:
Approach One: No Agreement: This approach is important because
the Soviets may not be willing to agree to any substantive and equitable
ASAT limitations. They may feel the U.S. is merely attempting to im-
pede activities in a realm where they have advantages.
Approach Two: Emphasis on Peacetime Problems: This would not limit
the capabilities of ASATs, but would focus on peacetime problems,
proposing “rules of the road” and a ban on peacetime interference to
emphasize the importance of satellites to strategic stability.
Approach Three: Selected Limits to Control the Scope of ASAT Activity:
This would in effect create a partial sanctuary by prohibiting ASAT
systems which do not yet exist.
Approach Four: Relatively Comprehensive ASAT Arms Limitations:
This would attempt to preclude significant arms competition in ASAT
systems.
A useful summary comparison of the approaches is provided at
Tab C in Table 4 including possible provisions and problems.
ment 6.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Conclusions
While the JCS supports Approach One, OSD supports Approach
Two. (Their views are at the red tags at Tab B) On the opposite end of
the spectrum, State, ACDA, OSTP and OMB support Approach Four. I
recommend you support the most comprehensive approach—Ap-
proach Four. [5 lines not declassified]
There will probably not be a better time to seek an ASAT arms con-
trol agreement. The Soviets probably believe they are temporarily
ahead in the ASAT race; however, their present system is limited. The
U.S. has a better system in development, and we will have a Space
Shuttle after 1979. They respect our space technology and our ability to
rapidly deploy advanced weapons systems, and may see the logic of an
arms control agreement now.
Approach Four would prevent any further testing or deployment
of the present Soviet ASAT interceptor, and the testing or deployment
of any additional destructive Soviet ASAT system. It would ban the
testing or deployment of any destructive U.S. ASAT system. Obviously,
there would be an asymmetry: the USSR would have an unsophisti-
cated but tested system for use at lower altitudes, and we would not.
This should encourage Soviet interest in such an agreement. However,
the U.S. will enjoy an asymmetrical advantage in another potential
anti-satellite system—the Space Shuttle—and the Soviets are well
aware of this. [2½ lines not declassified]
In addition to these advantages, Approach Four would have addi-
tional arms control benefits that the other approaches lack. A ban on
peacetime use only (Approach Two) would encourage unrestrained
development of more sophisticated ASAT systems for both sides. Es-
sentially, it does not add—except cosmetically—to what presently
exists.
A ban on advanced systems (Approach Three) would encourage
development of ASAT systems at low altitudes. Confidence developed
in programs at low altitudes could be extended in the future to a high
altitude capability. It would, however, place limitations on advanced
systems such as lasers in space for which the U.S. has considerable con-
cern and a promising development effort.
During any negotiations that might ensue with the Soviets on any
of the approaches adopted to place limits on ASAT systems, we should
vigorously and publicly pursue research and development on all U.S. ASAT
systems, carrying to production only those elements which we cannot
get the Soviets to include in a treaty. I do believe that, short of opera-
tional testing, some R&D should be continued as a hedge against Soviet
breakout.
Harold has suggested that because of this issue’s importance, and
the widely differing views, that an NSC meeting might be held to further

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
discuss the subject. On the other hand, I believe there has been ade-
quate debate. All the material necessary for a decision is in this
package. Moreover Harold does not feel strongly that a meeting is
necessary.
RECOMMENDATION:
Approve Approach Four as the desired goal for the purposes of
developing terms of reference for our negotiating team. I will notify the
PRC.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE, schedule NSC meeting first for further
discussion
OTHER
3 Carter checked “Approve.” Underneath he wrote “a) Continue our own R&D on
ASAT pending agreement b) Insist on strict terms in any agreement re Soviet testing, use,
dismantling. J.C.”
10.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs (Slocombe) to the
President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Aaron)1
Washington, September 22, 1977
SUBJECT
ASAT
Dave—
Normally, I’d pass this through Bob Rosenberg, but he’s out today:
As you know, Secretary Brown would prefer to have an NSC
meeting prior to final decision on the ASAT issue. I believe the prin-
cipal point he would want to have discussed at such a meeting is the
verifiability of comprehensive ASAT prohibitions, taking into account
the scale of violation necessary to have a significant military capability,
ASAT Arms Control. Top Secret. The salutation is handwritten.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
etc. Our suggestion to include in the PD a sentence saying in effect that
there would be a review of verification problems before the idea of a
comprehensive ban was broached with the Soviets in any detail was to
provide a mechanism for appropriate high-level consideration of the
issue without pressing for a meeting now. If you feel that such lan-
guage can’t be included in the PD, I think I should advise him and give
him a chance to seek an NSC meeting, or talk to you, Zbig or the
President.
Walter Slocombe
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
International Security Affairs
11.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), the Director of the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke), the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Brown), the Director
of Central Intelligence (Turner), the Administrator of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Frosch), and
the Special Advisor to the President for Science and
Technology (Press)1
Washington, September 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Arms Control for Antisatellite (ASAT) Systems
The President has reviewed the subject decision paper submitted
by the Chairman, PRM/NSC–23 Policy Review Committee,2 and has
approved Approach Four as the desired goal for our negotiations with
the Soviets. This approach seeks a relatively comprehensive agreement
which would ban all ASAT capabilities except electronic warfare. The
ban would prohibit testing in space or against objects in space, deploy-
2 See Document 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ment, or use of any ASAT for physical attack on satellites. The current
Soviet orbital interceptor would be dismantled.3
Further, the President has directed continuation of our own re-
search and development (R&D) on ASAT systems pending an agree-
ment. These programs should be vigorously pursued with a compre-
hensive R&D program short of operational or space-based testing,
carrying to production only those elements which we cannot get the So-
viets to include in a treaty. Beyond that, some R&D should be con-
tinued as a hedge against Soviet breakout. The policy for public release
of information on U.S. ASAT development will be to enhance the likeli-
hood of Soviet acceptance of the U.S. proposals.
Finally, the President directs that the U.S. Government insist on
strict terms in any agreement regarding discontinuance of testing, use
and dismantling of projected or current Soviet ASAT capabilities. Em-
phasis is to be placed on the verifiability of the specific agreement to be
proposed pursuant to this directive, with vigorous pursuit of a pro-
gram to insure the capability to verify agreements reached. The first
order of business with the Soviets should be to seek a prompt end to
their ASAT testing.
An SCC Working Group including members from ACDA and
DOD should develop detailed terms of reference and negotiation work
packages for Special Coordination Committee review.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
targets such as reconnaissance aircraft and, potentially, satellites. See memorandum to
19, 1971. The text of the memorandum is in the CIA FOIA Electronic Reading Room
(www.foia.cia.gov).

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
12.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Arms Control Issues: SALT, ASAT, Conventional Arms No. II of IV
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
The Secretary
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
Marshall D. Shulman
Dobrynin came in Monday afternoon, October 17, at the Secre-
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite capabilities.]
2. Anti-Satellite Systems—The Secretary said he wanted to let Do-
brynin know that a proposal would soon be transmitted to the Soviet
Union regarding limitations on ASAT systems. He underlined the im-
portance of the subject, saying that in his recent testimony before the
Congress2 on SALT, he had been interrogated at length about the con-
tinuing capability of the US to monitor compliance with the SALT
agreement by satellite observation. He had replied that this was very
important and this had led to the question of the effect on satellite
monitoring of the development of an ASAT system. Dobrynin asked
whether the American communication would add further concrete
thoughts and suggestions. The Secretary replied in the affirmative and
said that this would have a significant bearing on the ratification of the
SALT agreement.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite capabilities.]
David Anderson (S/S) on October 31. The meeting took place at the Department of State.
The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Document 53.
2 Vance testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee about SALT and
negotiations in the Middle East on October 13.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
13.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to Secretary of State Vance1
Geneva, October 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Limits
This will acknowledge your memorandum of October 132 on
anti-satellite limits. I am happy to have your approval on pursuing this
subject with the Soviets in the Standing Consultative Commission.
I understand and agree with your desire to strengthen the Moscow
channel for exchanges with the Soviets. I believe, however, that it
would be desirable at the same time to pursue this particular subject in
Washington.
The way this issue was left with Dobrynin last summer, the next
step is for the US to make a substantive proposal on ASAT limits after
which a forum for further negotiations can be established. Our ap-
proach to the Soviets thus should include a brief exposition of our pro-
posal to ban ASAT systems, our proposal for a prompt moratorium on
testing ASAT systems while the talks are under way, and our proposal
for conducting these negotiations in the Standing Consultative Com-
mission. We will therefore be beginning a complex negotiation. The So-
viets in all likelihood will ask questions, seek clarifications, and
perhaps make counter-proposals because of the complexities of this
subject. I believe that concurrent approaches in Washington and
Moscow will avoid the difficulties and potential misunderstanding of
handling these sensitive matters entirely by exchanging cables with
Embassy Moscow.
This is, of course, a US initiative proposed by you to Gromyko in
March.3 While we don’t know yet what the Soviet attitude will be, all
signs point to an uphill struggle to achieve their consent to a compre-
hensive and verifiable agreement. The position adopted by the Presi-
dent is the one which State and ACDA recommended as a means of
dealing with one of the more important arms control problems. It will
help immensely to get these negotiations off to the best possible start
and to convey to the Soviets the impression that we consider this to be
an important issue, that our approach is fair and balanced as well as
Secret.
2 Not found.
3 See Document 3.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
comprehensive, and that the best forum for pursuing these negotia-
tions is the SCC. If possible, I believe you should take this up personally
with Ambassador Dobrynin at the same time that Ambassador Toon
talks with appropriate officials in Moscow. If your schedule won’t
permit this, perhaps Marshall Shulman and Spurgeon Keeny, who
follows this subject closely, might be designated to make the initial
Washington approach.
Paul C. Warnke
14.
Editorial Note
On November 4, 1977, President Jimmy Carter wrote Soviet Gen-
eral Secretary Leonid Brezhnev that Soviet anti-satellite (ASAT) testing
in space had become “of increasing concern to us” and had been “care-
fully noted in our country.” Carter warned that this concern “has
emerged in our efforts to build support in the U.S. Senate for a SALT
agreement. This is a seriously destabilizing development which we
have voluntarily foregone, although we have the technical capability to
build systems. A very early joint agreement not to conduct further tests
and to forego this capability,” the President said, “would be helpful.”
(Letter from Carter to Brezhnev, November 4; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69,
that he was “ready to hold consultations” on ASAT systems, but said
the discussions “would include, of course, all the systems and means
which possess such potential capability including manned space
shuttles.” (Letter from Brezhnev to Carter, November 15; Carter Li-
brary, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, USSR

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
15.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Soviet and US High-Energy Laser Weapon Programs
As you recall, a little over a week ago, [2 lines not declassified] Ha-
rold Brown has reacted by sending you an assessment of US high-
energy laser (HEL) Programs (Tab A).2 His main points are: (1) that we
are probably somewhat ahead in technology and would probably be
ahead in some applications if we chose to pursue them; [less than 1 line
not declassified] I have also had my staff examine both the US
high-energy laser program [less than 1 line not declassified] As a result of
that examination, I think that it is appropriate to make the following
points.
[less than 1 line not declassified]
—[3 lines not declassified]
—[4 lines not declassified]
—As part of the comparative technology assessment done for
PRM–10,3 [4 lines not declassified]
Concerning US Programs
A short description of US HEL research programs is given at Tab
B.4 Overall, those of our programs that are pursuing the technology
needed for tactical applications seem aggressively funded. We could
probably move more rapidly toward a space-based laser ASAT capa-
bility if we were willing to fund a program directed at this purpose. Be-
fore making such a decision, we should examine its impact carefully—
particularly in light of our ASAT arms control interests.
2 Not attached. An undated memorandum from George Heilmeier, the Director of
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, to Secretary of Defense Brown, which
was attached to a November 14 memorandum from Under Secretary of Defense William
Perry to Brown, contains information about High-Energy Laser programs. Heilmeier’s
and Perry’s memoranda are in the Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC
3 Presidential Review Memorandum 10, “Comprehensive Net Assessment and Mil-
itary Posture Review,” is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
IV, National Security Policy.
4 Tab B is attached but not printed.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Concerning Relative Progress and Its Significance
For the various tactical applications of lasers, the military signifi-
cance of being the first to deploy an operational system is probably not
very great because such systems would have to be deployed in large
numbers to make a significant overall impact.
Ground or space based ABM applications are potentially very sig-
nificant. However, a number of ground based systems would be re-
quired, and while laser radars may be practical, systems with enough
power to destroy large numbers of missiles or RV’s in very short times
are a long way off.
[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]
Nonetheless, the political consequences of a Soviet laser ASAT
system in space might be substantial. Soviet demonstration of a space
based laser ASAT system might shatter our sense of technical superi-
ority as badly as it was when the first Sputnik was orbited.5
Conclusions
The issue seems to boil down to one basic question. What should
we do to guard against the possibility of a space-based laser ASAT
“gap”?
The obvious answer would be to prevent high-energy lasers from
being put in space—or, if there are valuable legitimate uses of HEL’s in
space, to develop agreed procedures with the Soviets to govern all such
uses. Accordingly, I have asked the ASAT arms control working group
to examine the possibilities for verifiable agreements along such lines.
To hedge against the failure of efforts to limit the use of HEL’s in
space, we should pursue the technology required to do this ourselves—
as fast as reasonable levels of efficiency will allow. I therefore intend to
ask Harold whether or not there are any additional technology efforts
we should consider if we want to minimize the delay involved in
bridging the gap from tactical to space ASAT applications.
5 The Soviet Union successfully launched the Sputnik satellite in 1957.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
16.
Information Memorandum From the Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security
Affairs (Slocombe) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, December 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Arms Control Negotiations—INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM
During the past several weeks, extensive interagency effort has
been underway on initial studies to form a framework for possible
arms control negotiations with the Soviets on limiting anti-satellite
activity.
The current NSC timetable for future work on this issue proposes a
meeting of SCC principals on Thursday, 22 December. Its purpose
would be to (a) review the definition of “interference with space ob-
jects,” which would be banned under an ASAT regime, (b) set forth our
current understanding of the verification/monitoring issue, (c) con-
sider a proposed public release, Congressional approach and security
policy, (d) discuss the appropriate negotiating forum, and (e) decide on
the manner and timing of an initial approach to the Soviets.
Initially, the ASAT arms control problem seemed to be one that
would lend itself to rapid consideration within the interagency process,
involve a clear definition of choices and explanation of their effects, and
allow early discussions with the Soviets, with an understood, if not
unanimously supported U.S. position in hand. Our subsequent work
on this issue, as well as that of the intelligence community, continues,
however, to turn up unforeseen complexities. Many of them are in the
area of verification/monitoring while others involve equally signifi-
cant problems created by the current asymmetries between the Soviet
and U.S. programs, by the inherent complexity of space technology and
its application, and by the relationship of negotiations planning to our
own developing ASAT program. To insure that the technically complex
problems are understood as well as possible and innovative solution
proposals advanced (and understood), the Under Secretary of Defense
for Research and Engineering has engaged the assistance of DARPA
and its contractors for technical backup as the interagency work
progresses.
search and Engineering Ross N. Williams. A stamped notation at the top of the memo-
randum reads: “SEC DEF HAS SEEN.” Under the date stamp, Brown wrote “12/17 Dep
Sec should see. HB.”

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Broadly, the work so far has shown that, as we all expected, moni-
toring is tough—and, in contrast to many areas, there are potentially
large payoffs from small violations. More surprisingly to me as a
layman, the concepts of banning ASAT capabilities and even interfer-
ence with satellites has proven very hard to operationalize. While there
may be some in the military and intelligence space business who resist
all ASAT limits in principle, I remain impressed with the widespread
agreement that ASAT bans would be very useful if attainable, but very
hard to get in technically reliable ways, not to mention ways that would
command political support.
From this, I conclude that a reasonable prospect of a responsible
and successful outcome requires that interagency planning proceed at
a deliberate pace, that insures that all associated issues are thoroughly
examined. Until that process is complete, I believe that the pressure for
immediate negotiations with the Soviets would not serve our national
security needs over the long term—nor, indeed, the President’s com-
mitment to the most comprehensive, effective ASAT agreement we can
get. Other agencies involved, namely NASA, CIA, OJCS, and IC Staff,
also believe that a more orderly and deliberate process is required, par-
ticularly as we would be negotiating with the Soviets from a position of
relative inferiority in this area.
Because of these concerns, it may well be that the 22 December
SCC meeting will be postponed.2 In any event, the interagency effort
clearly will not be in a position to present information and analysis nec-
essary for decisions that soon. The meeting could serve an educational
function and lead to development of a work plan for the interagency ef-
fort in coming to grips with this issue on an orderly basis. Clearly,
doing the job right will take time—but a hasty proposal would only
give us time to repent (and fight off critics of the process as well as the
substance) at leisure.
Walter Slocombe
2 The SCC Meeting scheduled for December 22 was ultimately postponed until Feb-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
17.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
ASAT Treaty
PARTICIPANTS
State
OSTP
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Frank Press
Jerry Kahan, Deputy Director,
Ben Huberman
Office of Political/Military
Arthur Morrissey, Senior Analyst
Affairs
OMB
Defense
Bowman Cutler, Executive
Secretary Harold Brown
Associate Director, Budget
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Randy Jayne, Associate Director,
Walter Slocombe, Principal
National Security and
Deputy Assistant Secretary
International Affairs
for International Security
CIA
Affairs
Stansfield Turner
JCS
Sayre Stevens, Deputy Director,
Lt Gen William Y. Smith, Special
National Foreign Assessment
Assistant to the Chairman
Center
ACDA
White House
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Zbigniew Brzezinski2
James Timbie, Head, Strategic
NSC
Affairs Division
Victor Utgoff
NASA
Robert Rosenberg
Robert Frosch, Administrator
Charles Stebbins
Alan Lovelace, Deputy
Administrator
Treaty Provisions and the Initial Approach to the Soviets
It was agreed that the following general provisions are acceptable
as a framework for future negotiations:
—Prohibited (peacetime or war)
—ASAT system testing in space or against objects in space.
—Use of ASAT systems or readying such systems for operational
use.
Brown Files—General #1, ASAT Arms Control. Top Secret. The meeting took place in the
White House Situation Room.
2 In the right-hand margin, an unknown hand wrote “(Chairman)” after Brzezin-
ski’s name.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
—Interference with the operation of any of the other side’s space
systems, including (during peacetime only) electronic warfare (EW)
against satellite systems.
—Permitted
—Testing of EW ASAT systems in space and against space objects.3
—R&D and ASAT testing short of space or ground-to-space
testing.
However, the provisions will not be used in the early stage of ne-
gotiations. Rather, Secretary Vance will contact the Soviets informally,
suggesting—as a first step—that the US and the Soviets negotiate an
agreement that defines an attack on a satellite of the other side as a hos-
tile act. Secretary Vance will also suggest that, as an indication of good
faith, both sides should immediately forego further ASAT testing in
space or against space objects. Appropriate Congressional leaders are
to be briefed on the US initiative, but the initial approach to the Soviets
will be informal, unpublicized and low-key, pending indications that
these negotiations have reasonable prospects for success.
Relative Impact of a Treaty on Both Sides
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) is tasked to prepare a
study of whether it would be more advantageous to negotiate a Treaty
that would accept the current US/Soviet ASAT asymmetry in favor of
the Soviets, or let the ASAT testing continue on both sides until capabil-
ities on both sides have become more symmetrical.
Verification
Recognizing the difficulties in verifying an ASAT Treaty using cur-
rent national means, the IAWG is tasked to study whether the US
should devise new systems and procedures allowing improved verifi-
cation. Included in the study will be an examination of various satellite
survivability techniques that the US might employ to improve verifica-
tion of any ASAT Treaty provision that prohibits hostile actions against
the other side’s satellites.
Press Releases/Public Statements
The IAWG will clear all press and public statements concerning
ASAT negotiations, capabilities and other activities.
3 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “seems in conflict” and drew arrows
pointing to be the first sentence under the heading “Prohibited” and the first sentence
under “Permitted.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Forum for Future Negotiations
Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Vance and Secretary Brown will decide
later, among themselves, what forum the US will propose for con-
ducting ASAT Treaty negotiations.
18.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 24, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding Anti-satellites (ASAT)
You will recall as a result of recommendations emanating from
PRM/NSC–23, “A Coherent Space Policy,” that you established several
principles related to Arms Control for ASAT Systems. These included:
—A goal for our negotiations with the Soviets of a relatively com-
prehensive agreement which would seek to ban all ASAT capabilities
except electronic warfare.
—Discontinuance of testing, use, and dismantling of projected or
current Soviet ASAT capabilities.
—Emphasis on verifiability of our proposals and any subsequent
agreement.
—Vigorous pursuit of our own comprehensive ASAT R&D pro-
gram short of operational or space based testing, carrying to produc-
tion those elements not included in a treaty, and continuing U.S. R&D
after a treaty as a hedge against breakout.
It is on this latter point that our additional deliberations have
caused me to recommend a change in tactics. I now have concerns that
our own prohibition in our directive on U.S. space base testing may in
fact be counterproductive. No doubt the contents of the restriction in
NSC–33. Top Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig—
on something like this always get DOD & State comment. J. p.s. It’s probably o.k.” On
February 25, Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum to Vance and Brzezinski and added
“I believe the timing is such that we should modify the existing PD before the Secretary of
State has his initial talks with the Soviets to assure that they have this message.” He also
requested “your views on this approach by 1 March.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript
Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82, Brown Files—General #1, ASAT Arms Control)

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
the PD (TAB A)2 are by now known to both the Congress and the So-
viets providing:
—A disincentive to the concerned oversight committee in Con-
gress to fund an ASAT R&D program the President has restricted from
what they perceive to be realistic testing—this could put us even fur-
ther behind the Soviets unless we make a concerted effort to properly
educate the Armed Services and Defense Appropriations Committee
leadership on the complexities associated with verification, testing,
protection from breakout, etc., an effort we are now undertaking, but
which could fail to be persuasive given the mood on the Hill.
—A disincentive to the Soviets to stop their own testing in space,
knowing that you have precluded U.S. testing in space.
A useful solution you should consider as a political move is, for the
record, to remove the restriction against U.S. testing in space (which
means little technically today—as we could not do it in the near term,
with great certainty, anyway) which would be a positive sign that we
intend to seek equivalent capabilities as soon as possible unless the So-
viets are willing to take positive steps to stop testing, dismantle, and
agree to substantive verification techniques.
I believe the timing is such that we should modify the existing PD
before Cy Vance has his initial talks with the Soviets to assure that they
have this message.
RECOMMENDATION
That you direct removal of the restriction on “operational or space
based testing,” authorizing the Secretary of Defense to pursue, for plan-
ning purposes, a U.S. ASAT development program encompassing that
testing in space or against U.S. objects in space deemed essential to
demonstrate a capability.
Approve
Disapprove
Other
2 Tab A is printed as Document 11.
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
19.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 28, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding ASAT Policy (U)
(S) This memorandum is in reply to your correspondence of Feb-
ruary 25, 1978,2 requesting my views regarding the deletion of space
test restrictions from the existing Presidential Directive on Arms Con-
trol for ASAT Systems.
(TS) For the reasons which you have cited, I agree that it would be
wise to modify the Presidential Directive along the lines that you have
suggested. Our program, as currently planned, does not require a
change in Presidential guidance until 1980; however, it is necessary that
the Congress support our budget requests if we are to maintain our op-
tion for flight tests in 1981. Although I think that it is unlikely that the
FY 1979 budget requests will not be fully approved as a consequence of
the testing restrictions, the removal of these restrictions would elimi-
nate any such possibility. Removal of the testing restrictions also has
the advantage of enhancing the likelihood of Soviet acceptance of U.S.
proposals by indicating our firm intent to achieve a high-performance
ASAT capability as quickly as possible.
(S) If we are to achieve an ASAT interceptor capability of which we
are confident, we must test against targets in space. Therefore, I view
space testing as essential to the test and evaluation process and a neces-
sary phase in the weapon development cycle. It would be preferable,
then, that any authorization to test not contain a restrictive clause that
limits tests to demonstration purposes, as may have been suggested in
your memorandum. My concern is that development flight tests might
be deemed not to be allowed.
(S) If desired, as a means for impressing upon the Soviets our re-
solve and ability to develop an ASAT weapon, we could conduct an
ASAT flight test demonstration (using MINUTEMAN, as I mentioned
to you and the President) within about 12 months for about $50 M. This
effort would be quite different from the program we are now pursu-
ing. The interceptor would be assembled from available components,
NSC–33. Top Secret.
2 Not found.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
would lack the performance, and would be more costly than the ap-
proach we are now taking. While a single-shot demonstration may pro-
vide an incentive to the Soviets to accept our proposals, however, it
may also divert resources away from our present program that could
provide an effective system, if needed. I therefore do not recommend it.
Harold Brown
20.
Informal Notes on a Meeting Between Secretary of State
Vance and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin1
February 28, 1978
1. Dobrynin came in at his request for the purpose of delivering a
letter from Brezhnev to the President. He presented the Russian text
and an unofficial translation prepared in the Soviet Embassy. (He com-
mented as he did so that he was doing our work for us, and that we did
not generally prepare a Russian translation of our letters to Brezhnev.)
2. The Brezhnev letter is a reply to the President’s letter of January,2
and matches the President’s letter in its blunt tone, and round-up cov-
erage of a number of issues. However, it is in line with recent Brezhnev
speeches that express concern about the state of US-Soviet relations and
a desire to seek an improvement. It probably was written before the
Brezhnev speeches of last week, and lacks the upbeat suggestion of
steps to infuse a new dynamism in the relationship.3
The letter expresses disappointment at the lack of progress in the
SALT negotiations since the Gromyko visit to Washington last Sep-
notes are printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document
85.
2 Omission in the original. Carter’s January 25 letter is printed in Foreign Relations,
3 Reference presumably to remarks Brezhnev made during a “high level” meeting
in the Kremlin on February 24. He stated that improved U.S.-Soviet relations were
“blocked by all kinds of obstacles,” including slow progress on talks to limit strategic
arms, the neutron bomb, and trade. (“Brezhnev Claims U.S. is Blocking Improved Ties,”
New York Times, February 25, 1978)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tember,4 and protests what he sees as our use of domestic opposition to
SALT to gain bargaining advantages.
On the neutron bomb, the letter also expresses disappointment
with the President’s reply, and repeats the concern that the neutron
bomb would lower the nuclear threshold.
He remonstrates US linkage of arms control negotiations with
other issues, particularly the Horn, and repeats that Soviet objectives in
the Horn are limited to helping Ethiopia resist Somali aggression.
On the Middle East, the letter responds by saying that it is the US,
not the SU, that has departed from the common approach agreed upon
in the joint statement of October 1,5 and has encouraged separate nego-
tiations between Egypt and Israel. Other Arab states will not partici-
pate even if these bilateral negotiations succeed, he says, and therefore
only a comprehensive settlement at Geneva can resolve the situation.
3. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin had a report on the Assad con-
versations in Moscow. Dobrynin said he had not yet received the infor-
mation, but would hope to be able to convey a report shortly.
4. ASAT. The Secretary informed Dobrynin that the US is prepared
to begin discussions on this subject in April at Geneva, and covered the
other points set forth in the agreed talking points.
Dobrynin replied that, as Brezhnev had said in a previous letter,
the ASAT discussions should cover not only the satellite versus satellite
problem, but also the shuttle system versus satellite situation.
4 On Gromyko’s September 1977 visit to Washington, where he met Vance and
Times and Washington Post published the full text of the statement on Sunday, October 2.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
21.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 6, 1978
SUBJECT
US Position Regarding Anti-Satellite Arms Control
I agree in principle with the idea expressed in your memorandum
of February 25.2 I would, however, be averse to creating the presump-
tion that the US has in fact decided to test ASATs, for we have not and
should not until our development programs have reached that point at
which we need to make such a decision.
I therefore propose that the original decision memorandum be
changed to read that the Secretary of Defense should plan on testing
when our programs reach the appropriate stage of development, sub-
ject to further Presidential decision at that time. This would of course
carry the implication that whether or not we test will depend heavily
on whether the Soviets continue to test.
NSC–33. Top Secret.
2 Not found.
22.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 9, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding Anti-Satellites (ASAT)
On my previous memo to you regarding removal of the restriction
on “operational or space based testing” you called for DoD and State
comment (Tab A).2
NSC–33. Top Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 18.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Both Harold Brown3 and Cy Vance4 have responded affirmatively
to the proposal. Harold stated in his response that Congressional sup-
port for our budget requests are necessary if we are to maintain our op-
tion for flight tests by 1981. Further, and I believe a most significant
point, he states that:
“If we are to achieve an ASAT interceptor capability of which we
are confident, we must test against targets in space. Therefore, I view
space testing as essential to the test and evaluation process and a neces-
sary phase in the weapon development cycle. It would be preferable,
then, that any authorization to test not contain a restrictive clause that
limits tests to demonstration purposes, as may have been suggested in
your memorandum. My concern is that development flight tests might
be deemed not to be allowed.”
Cy, however, feels that our stance should be more cautious. While
he supports the idea in principle, he suggests that the original decision
memo (restriction highlighted at Tab B)5 be modified to read that the
SecDef should plan on testing at the appropriate stage of development,
“subject to further Presidential decision at that time.”
I would suggest that any such limitation would better be treated as
an understanding between you and Harold, rather than lessen the im-
pact of a very positive statement on testing at this time.6
I share Harold’s belief that removal of the restriction has the ad-
vantage of enhancing the likelihood of Soviet acceptance of U.S. pro-
posals by indicating our firm intent to achieve a high performance
ASAT capability as quickly as possible.
APPROVE Removal of Restriction (as per Brown)
APPROVE, Subject to Cy’s Qualification
DISAPPROVE
3 See Document 19.
4 See Document 21.
5 Tab B included a draft PRM and is not published.
6 Carter underlined the phrase “understanding between you and Harold” and
wrote “ok. Tell Harold” in the right-hand margin.
7 Carter checked the “APPROVE Removal of Restriction (as per Brown)” line and
wrote “J” at the end of the memorandum.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
23.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, March 10, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding Anti-Satellites (ASAT)
The President has signed a Presidential Directive calling for the re-
moval of the restriction on operational or space based testing. He has
authorized you to pursue, for planning purposes, a U.S. ASAT devel-
opment program encompassing that testing in space or against U.S. ob-
jects in space deemed essential to achieve an ASAT capability.
All other elements of my Arms Control for Anti-Satellite Systems
memorandum dated September 23, 1977,2 remain in effect at this time.
The President wishes, however, that prior to the actual conduct of
any such U.S. testing, you obtain his concurrence. He has chosen to
treat this limitation as an understanding between the two of you rather
than lessen the impact of a very positive statement on testing in the
more broadly distributed Presidential Directive.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC–33. Top Secret.
2 See Document 11.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
24.
Presidential Directive/NSC–331
Washington, March 10, 1978
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Arms Control for Anti-satellite (ASAT) Systems
Reference is made to National Security Advisor memorandum,
I direct removal of the restriction, cited in the reference memo-
randum, on operational or space-based testing. The Secretary of De-
fense is authorized to pursue, for planning purposes, a U.S. ASAT de-
velopment program encompassing that testing in space or against U.S.
objects in space deemed essential to achieve an ASAT capability.
Our future dialogue with the Soviets on Space Arms Control
should indicate that we intend to seek an ASAT capability as soon as
possible unless they are willing to take very positive actions to pre-
clude such a move on our part.
All other elements of the referenced memorandum remain in effect
at this time.
Jimmy Carter
2 See Document 11.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
25.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 14, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding Anti-Satellites (ASAT)
The President has signed a Presidential Directive calling for the re-
moval of the restriction on operational or space based testing. He has
authorized the Secretary of Defense to pursue, for planning purposes, a
U.S. ASAT development program encompassing that testing in space
or against U.S. objects in space deemed essential to achieve an ASAT
capability.
All other elements of my Arms Control for Anti-Satellite Systems
memorandum dated September 23, 1977, remain in effect at this time.
Zbigniew Brzezinski2
Office File, Box 123, Subject Chron File, Vance, Miscellaneous Communication With:
2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
26.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 22, 1978
SUBJECT
US and Soviet Laser Weapons Capabilities
Harold Brown has responded to your request for more informa-
tion on present and potential US and Soviet laser weapons capabilities
with his memo at Tab A.2
right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The projected dates for achieving some of the capabilities that Ha-
rold refers to are several years later than those you may have heard be-
fore. This is because while most technical reports give dates for initial
operational capabilities—Harold speaks in terms of the date at which
sufficient numbers of any given device could be fielded to achieve a
“meaningful effect.” Given an agreed definition of what a meaningful
effect is for a system, Harold’s date is probably more useful, though
somewhat harder to predict. When Harold speaks of meaningful capa-
bilities—in Table 1, he means one or two systems; in Table 2, he means
the numbers I have added in the left hand column.
Harold’s memo does not mention two other applications of high
energy lasers that may be of interest to you—space based lasers for use
against: 1) ballistic missiles in the powered portions of their trajectories
(where they are most vulnerable), or 2) bombers in the high altitude
mid-course phase of their missions. Accordingly, I asked Harold for in-
formation on these applications and have summarized it below.
—[12½ lines not declassified]
—[6 lines not declassified]
I think the whole area of high energy laser weapons bears careful
watching. As these systems develop, they may pose some significant
challenges to our arms control interests, particularly in the ASAT area.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
27.
Presidential Directive/NSC–371
Washington, May 11, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs
Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Director of Central Intelligence
Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
National Space Policy (U)
This directive establishes national policies which shall guide the
conduct of United States activities in and related to the space programs
and activities discussed below. The objectives of these policies are (1) to
advance the interests of the United States through the exploration and
use of space and (2) to cooperate with other nations in maintaining the
freedom of space for all activities which enhance the security and wel-
fare of mankind. (C)
1. The United States space program shall be conducted in accord-
ance with the following basic principles. (U)
a. Commitment to the principles of the exploration and use of
outer space by all nations for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of
all mankind. “Peaceful purposes” allow for military and intelligence-
related activities in pursuit of national security and other goals. (C)
b. The exploration and use of outer space in support of the national
well-being and policies of the United States. (U)
c. Rejection of any claims to sovereignty over outer space or over
celestial bodies, or any portion thereof, and rejection of any limitations
on the fundamental right to acquire data from space. (U)
d. The space systems of any nation are national property and have
the right of passage through and operations in space without interfer-
Folder 1, PD/NSC–37. Top Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ence. Purposeful interference with operational space systems shall be
viewed as an infringement upon sovereign rights. (U)
e. The United States will pursue activities in space in support of its
right of self-defense. (U)
f. The United States will maintain a national intelligence space pro-
g. The United States will pursue space activities to increase scien-
tific knowledge, develop useful civil applications of space technology,
and maintain United States leadership in space. (U)
h. The United States will conduct international cooperative space-
related activities that are beneficial to the United States scientifically,
politically, economically, and/or militarily. (U)
i. The United States will develop and operate on a global basis ac-
tive and passive remote sensing operations in support of civil, military,
and national intelligence objectives. Such operations will occur under
conditions which protect classified technology, deny sensitive data,
and promote acceptance and legitimacy of such activities. (C)
j. The United States will maintain current responsibility and man-
agement relationships among the sectors focused on civil, defense, and
national intelligence objectives. (C)
k. Close coordination, cooperation, and information exchange will
be maintained among the space sectors to avoid unnecessary duplica-
tion and to allow maximum cross-utilization, in compliance with secu-
rity and policy guidance, of all capabilities. (U)
2. The United States will conduct those activities in space which
are necessary to national defense. The military space program shall
support such functions as command and control, communications,
navigation, environmental monitoring, warning, tactical intelligence,
targeting, ocean and battlefield surveillance, and space defense. In ad-
dition, defense space programs shall contribute to the satisfaction of
national intelligence requirements. The following policies shall govern
the conduct of the military space programs. (C)
a. Security. The military space program, including dissemination of
data, shall be conducted in accordance with Executive Orders and ap-
plicable directives for protection of national security information, and
commensurate with both the missions performed and the security
measures necessary to protect related (national intelligence) space
activities. (C)
b. [6 lines not declassified]
c. Survivability. Survivability of space systems, including all system
elements, will be pursued commensurate with the planned need in
crisis and war, the threat, and the availability of other assets to perform
the mission. Identified deficiencies will be eliminated and an aggres-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
sive, long-term program will be applied to provide more assured sur-
vivability through evolutionary changes to space systems. For critical
missions, a distributed system architecture shall be considered for re-
ducing single, critical nodes, including highly survivable emergency
systems of limited capability for use in times of crisis and to back up the
first line systems in case of system failure or attack. Civil systems (e.g.,
communications) used for critical military functions shall have a level
of survivability commensurate with their planned use in national
emergencies. (S)
d. Anti-Satellite Capability. In accordance with applicable executive
directives, the United States shall seek a verifiable ban on anti-satellite
capabilities, excluding electronic warfare. DoD shall vigorously pursue
development of an anti-satellite capability, but will not carry to produc-
tion those elements which are included in any treaty with the Soviets.
Beyond that, some R&D should be continued as a hedge against Soviet
breakout. The progress of ASAT arms control negotiations will be re-
viewed annually to determine if negotiations with the Soviet Union
continue to be fruitful relative to the threat posed by Soviet actions in
space, and consequently to determine if the U.S. ASAT efforts are still
adequate. The space defense program shall include an integrated attack
warning, notification, verification, and contingency reaction capabil-
ity which can effectively detect and react to threats to U.S. space
systems. (TS)
3. The United States foreign intelligence program shall include a
space program to acquire information and data required for the formu-
lation and execution of foreign, military, and economic policies; to sup-
port the planning for and conduct of military operations; to provide
warning; to support crisis management; and to monitor treaties. The
following policies shall govern the conduct of this program. (S)
a. Protection of Sensitive Information. The nature, the attributable col-
lected information, and the operational details of intelligence space ac-
tivities will be classified, and as necessary to protect sensitive aspects,
will be controlled in special compartmented security channels. Col-
lected information that cannot be attributed to space systems will be
classified according to its content. Security restrictions on intelligence
space satellite products will be selectively relaxed by the DCI to imple-
ment the following changes to permit wider use of space-derived intel-
ligence information. (S)
—The fact that the United States conducts satellite reconnaissance
for intelligence purposes, without disclosing the generic type of ac-
tivity, will be classified CONFIDENTIAL (Exempt from the General
Declassification Schedule) and handled outside the special security
control system. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—The existing special product controls will be used sparingly, and
then only for those products and data that reveal sensitive aspects of
the program as determined by the DCI. (S)
—For SIGINT, the special space-related product control system
shall not be used when the DCI determines that the intelligence is pro-
tected by appropriate classification or the more general special intelli-
gence control system. (TS)
—Operational aspects of intelligence space activities shall be af-
forded strict security protection within a special access program system
as determined by the DCI. (S)
—Strict control over public statements and background con-
cerning space reconnaissance will be maintained. (C)
—Further changes to the space intelligence security policy can be
authorized only by the President. (C)
b. Support of Military Operational Requirements. Support of military
operational requirements is a major space intelligence mission. Na-
tional space intelligence assets shall provide appropriate support to de-
ployed military operational forces in balance with their primary mis-
sion capabilities. In order to ensure a proper balance between the
national and tactical missions of these assets, there will be military in-
volvement in the requirements, tasking, exploitation, and dissemina-
tion functions and in the development program. The Secretary of De-
fense will, together with the Director of Central Intelligence, ensure
that there is no unnecessary overlap between national foreign intelli-
gence programs and Department of Defense intelligence programs,
and the Secretary of Defense will provide the Director of Central Intelli-
gence all information necessary for this purpose. (S)
c. Interactions with Civil Community. Selected space-related prod-
ucts and technology shall be made available to civil agencies within ap-
propriate security constraints. The Intelligence Community may pro-
vide radio frequency (RF) mapping and surveys for the civil commu-
nity under appropriate security controls. (TS)
d. Survivability. The national intelligence program shall be config-
ured to operate in a hostile environment. The guidance set forth in
subparagraph 2c. shall be aggressively pursued by the intelligence
community. (S)
4. The United States shall conduct civil space programs to increase
the body of scientific knowledge about the earth and the universe; to
develop and operate civil applications of space technology; to maintain
United States leadership in space science, applications, and technology;
and to further United States domestic and foreign policy objectives.
The following policies shall govern the conduct of the civil space pro-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
a. The United States shall encourage domestic commercial exploi-
tation of space capabilities and systems for economic benefit and to
promote the technological position of the United States, except that all
United States earth-oriented remote sensing satellites will require
United States Government authorization and supervision or regula-
b. Federal civil earth imaging from space, at resolutions at or better
than ten meters, will be permitted under controls and when such needs
are justified and assessed in relation to civil benefits, national security,
and foreign policy. Appropriate controls on other forms of remote
earth sensing will be established. Expanded civil use of intelligence
space data and technology within appropriate security constraints is
encouraged. (C)
c. Data and results from the civil space programs will be provided
the widest practical dissemination, except where specific exceptions
defined by legislation, Executive Order, or directive apply. (U)
d. United States federal or private space systems identified as crit-
ical to the national defense may be equipped at DoD expense for use in
national emergencies or to deny their use by an enemy in times of na-
tional emergency declared by the President. Implementation will occur
as described in subparagraph 2b. The fact of or the details of such meas-
ures may be classified. (C)
e. Terrestrially-oriented federal or private radio frequency (RF)
surveys in space are prohibited except through or in coordination with
the Director of Central Intelligence under appropriate security con-
f. The United States will develop, manage, and operate the Shuttle-
based Space Transportation System through NASA in cooperation with
the DoD to service all authorized space users—domestic and foreign,
commercial and governmental—and will provide launch priority and
necessary security to military and intelligence missions while recog-
nizing the essentially open character of the civil space program. Mis-
sion control is the responsibility of the mission agency. Military and in-
telligence programs may use the Shuttle Orbiters as dedicated mission
vehicles. (C)
5. The NSC Policy Review Committee shall meet when appro-
priate to provide a forum to all federal agencies for their policy views;
to review and advise on proposed changes to national space policy; to
resolve issues referred to the Committee; and to provide for orderly
and rapid referral of open issues to the President for decision as neces-
sary. The PRC will meet at the call of the Chairman for these purposes,
and when so convened, will be chaired by the Director, Office of Sci-
ence and Technology Policy. (U)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Interagency coordinating mechanisms will be employed to review
and coordinate pertinent issues and projects, make evaluations, and
implement policy decisions where appropriate. Special areas of interest
include security and political risks involved with technology transfer
and federal and private space operations involving remote sensing and
communications Unresolved policy issues will be forwarded to the
PRC for review and resolution. (C)
Jimmy Carter
28.
Memorandum From the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
of Defense for International Security Affairs (Slocombe) to
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, May 24, 1978
SUBJECT
ASAT—Suspension of Testing During Negotiations—ACTION MEMORANDUM
As you know, there is substantial sentiment in the building to have
the SCC reconsider whether a suspension of testing during the ASAT
talks is in the United States’ interest. (See Tab A.) The NSC staff refuses,
however, to put that issue in the issues paper being drafted for the
meeting in the absence of a request to do so by a principal. Simply to
ask to have the issue discussed does not prejudge where DOD comes
out. Accordingly, I recommend that you call Dave Aaron and ask that
suspension of testing be included in the paper as an issue for the SCC.
Walter Slocombe
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
International Security Affairs
Under Slocombe’s signature, Brown wrote “5/24. Called Dave A. He will include. HB.”

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Tab A
Working Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2
Washington, undated
SCC Action
The direction to seek a “no test” agreement during the negotiations
should be retracted for the following reasons:
—The Soviets have an orbital ASAT system in hand that has:
a. An 80% reliability.
b. Has been improved—demonstrated intercept on first orbit and
may be employing a passive sensor.
c. Launch pad turnaround is estimated to be hours.
d. Launch pads available could be 4 and, with the SS–9, approxi-
mately 23.
e. Could eliminate 14 US critical low altitude satellites in 45 hours.
f. Can threaten synchronous targets using SL–12.
—With a “no test” arrangement during the negotiations, the So-
viets will have less incentive to come to terms that result in a balanced
US/USSR situation and in a quick and orderly fashion.
—They know that during this time frame, all US satellites are
threatened and vulnerable and theirs are not.
—It is clear to the Soviets that the US has done little in the way of
engineering and technology to get ready for ASAT development.
—Such an agreement could slow US programs because of DoD
budget constraints and the Soviets would have effectively gained a 3-
to 4-year advantage.
—Even if the US built an entire ASAT system ready to launch, the
Soviets would have us at a 1- to 2-year disadvantage because it would
take that long to test such a system and solve engineering problems.
—US booster options will be disappearing because of conversion
to the Shuttle.3
—In a “no test” situation, the Soviets may insist on a US equivalent
response.
—We have nothing to offer except to say we won’t test our superior
technology.
—It is questionable if they will accept such a proposal.
—They may insist that we cancel our on-going R&D.
2 Secret.
3 One of the space shuttle’s projected missions was to launch satellites into space,
eliminating the need to launch them by traditional booster rockets.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Since we have publicly advertised what we are doing (MHV,
conventional, non-nuclear ABM), they can point specifically to such
programs.
—They have previously contended that the US is the aggressor in
this area and they are not. In a public relations move, such as the neu-
tron bomb, they could probably make this view stick.
—The Soviets may insist on restrictions to the Shuttle during this
period.
—This could include no tests of the teleoperator (jeopardy to
skylab).4
—During treaty negotiations, the absence of a no test agreement
could force the Soviets to an acceptable agreement.
—A rapid moving US ASAT program could give them incentive to
come to an agreement before a US test occurs.
—Politically, a “no test” agreement during negotiations could be a
problem.
—It would be difficult to negotiate an agreement that did not in-
clude such an article.
—We are not ready to come to such a conclusion.
—The US would always face an asymmetry.
—A caveat that says the US will test if we determine the negotia-
tions are not progressing does not help the situation.
—The President would be put in a position of breaking an agree-
ment and of justifying that the Soviets were not negotiating in good
faith.
—The implications with respect to de´tente would prevent us from
ever making such a move.
ALTERNATIVES
1—Do not request “no testing” during negotiations and make it
clear to the Soviets that we are progressing as rapidly as possible.
2—Have a “no test” agreement that expires at the earliest time the
US could test the MHV.
3—Have a “no test” agreement for all other kill mechanisms except
EW and low altitude non-nuclear kill.
4 Skylab was a manned space station built by NASA that had been damaged upon
its initial launch in 1974. During the Carter administration, NASA scientists hoped that
the space shuttle could attach an experimental booster, the teleoperator retrieval system,
to the station, thereby sending Skylab into higher orbit and extending its life another five
years. These plans were preempted when Skylab reentered the atmosphere and disinte-
grated in 1979.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
29.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
ASAT Treaty
PARTICIPANTS
State
OSTP
Deputy Secretary Warren
Director Frank Press
Christopher
Art Morrissey, Senior Analyst
Leslie Gelb, Director, Bureau of
OMB
Politico-Military Affairs
Randy Jayne, Associate Director
Defense
National Security and
Secretary Harold Brown
International Affairs
Herbert York, Consultant
CIA
Walter Slocombe, Principal
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Sayre Stevens, Deputy Director
for International Security
National Foreign Assessment
Affairs
Center
JCS
White House
General David Jones
David Aaron (Chairman)
Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith, Special
NSC
Assistant to the Chairman
Victor Utgoff
ACDA
BGen Robert Rosenberg
Director Paul Warnke
Charles Stebbins (Notetaker)
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Ambassador Robert Buchheim
NASA
Administrator Robert Frosch
David Williamson, Special
Assistant
Definition of “Hostile Acts,” and Whether to Pledge Not to Be the First to
Commit Such Acts.
There was considerable discussion of these issues which resulted
in three possible approaches to the Soviets:
Approach 1: Propose that the US and Soviets regard intercepts of
and physical attacks on satellites of the other side as hostile acts, but
wait to gauge Soviet reactions at Helsinki2 before deciding whether or
meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
2 The United States and the Soviet Union were scheduled to begin ASAT talks in
Helsinki, Finland on June 8. See Document 33.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not to seek mutual pledges that neither side will be the first to carry out
such acts. (Favored by Defense and JCS and acceptable to State and
ACDA.)
Approach 2: Same as Option 1, except propose that both sides
pledge not to be the first to carry out such acts. (Favored by ACDA, but
opposed by JCS. DOD wants to examine further whether this should
apply to peacetime only.)
Approach 3: Propose that the US and Soviets regard interference
(which includes intercepts, physical attacks [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] as a hostile act, but make a first-use pledge only for physical at-
tacks. (Favored by State.)
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) was tasked on a priority
basis to study whether a hostile acts and no-first-use agreement ought
to apply in wartime as well as peacetime (like the wartime prohibition
on the use of poison gas), in particular to determine what such a prohi-
bition would mean operationally to the two sides.
Type of Agreement
With regard to the type of agreement to be reached with the So-
viets on Hostile Acts, there was consensus that we should aim toward
constructing a formal agreement in the long term.
However, there was disagreement as to the appropriate form of
any interim agreements we might reach. ACDA favored parallel state-
ments covering hostile acts and test cessation, believing this would not
require approval by Congress. DOD thought unilateral statements
would offer more flexibility.
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) was tasked on a priority
basis to examine what must be avoided in constructing interim agree-
ments in order to ensure that the President can issue a parallel or uni-
lateral statement without having to obtain the consent of Congress.
The IAWG is to consult the legal counsels of various agencies as
appropriate.
Nature of a Testing Ban
Again, there was no consensus. Two possible approaches to the So-
viets resulted:
Approach 1: Informally propose an indefinite moratorium on ASAT
tests but with the proviso that either side could give the other six
months’ notice if it decided it was necessary to commence testing. (Fa-
vored by State, ACDA and OSTP.)
Approach 2: Informally propose a high-altitude testing ban with the
proviso that either side give the other a one-year notice if it is to com-
mence any high-altitude ASAT testing (e.g., above 3000 km). In addi-
tion, ask the Soviets to stop their low-altitude testing while ASAT ne-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
gotiations are ongoing. State that the US has no immediate plans to
conduct low-altitude ASAT testing, but we will give the Soviets six
months’ notice if the pressures of the current asymmetry favoring the
Soviets require us to commence such testing. (Favored by Defense. JCS
feels that neither approach has been thought through enough and that
proposing any testing suspension at this time would be premature.)
Treatment of the Space Shuttle
There was agreement that the US would avoid discussing the
Shuttle if at all possible, but if such a discussion can’t be avoided, we
will not permit the Soviets to designate the Shuttle as an ASAT system.
30.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Systems
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
USSR
Dr. Herbert F. York
Academician A.N. Shchukin
Dr. G.W. Johnson
On Monday, June 5, Shchukin entertained Johnson and me and
our wives at the USSR Mission in Geneva, Switzerland. The most sub-
stantive part of the conversation concerned ASATs.
Shchukin started that part of the conversation by saying he was fa-
miliar with ASATs and invited me to ask any questions I wished about
them. I started by asking him why the Soviet side had undertaken such
a program in the first place. In reply he said that the program simply
consisted of experiments whose purpose was to understand the possi-
bilities and that in addition one might want to inspect some satellite up
close in order to determine if it was complying with the rules outlawing
nuclear weapons in space. At this point I noted we both have devel-
oped manned and unmanned systems for rendezvous in space, and he
agreed with that. (Neither at this point nor at any other did he once
mention the Shuttle). In this same context he also added that there were
Brown Files—General #1, ASAT Arms Control. Secret; Exdis. The meeting took place at
the Soviet Mission. Drafted by York on June 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
often enthusiasts for particular programs and he cited an entirely dif-
ferent example wherein he had successfully coped with some Colonel
who was pushing a pet but dubious idea involving balloons.
The only technical details about their program that he mentioned
were in negative terms. He said that at very high altitudes, “where the
communications satellites are,” it was too difficult to make an attack.
He also said that attacks must be co-orbital for two reasons, first, be-
cause it is too difficult and takes too much propellant to make a turn in
space, and second because orbits which intersect at large angles mean
that one must control both the time and place of intersection very ex-
actly, and that in turn is much more difficult than the ICBM accuracy
problem where only the place is important. I noted to myself that these
were all accurate statements about the limitation of their current
system, but I did not mention that fact to him.
He then asked me “what about direct attacks from the ground?” I
asked whether he meant ABMs or lasers, and he replied “yes, lasers.” I
commented that we both had a wide variety of laser development pro-
grams now under way and that lasers would be harder to verify. He
said he agreed.
He said, and I agreed, that both SALT and CTB were more urgent,
but in reply to a direct question he stated he personally believed ASATs
should be banned.
Also in direct response, he indicated that he was acquainted with
Khlestov but that he did not know Mayorskiy and (though I am not
sure of this) he seemed not even aware of him.
31.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1978
SUBJECT
US/Soviet Meeting on Anti-Satellite Matters
The SCC met on June 1, 1978, to discuss final preparations for the
US/Soviet preliminary meeting on ASAT matters at Helsinki, June
urgent action. Carter initialed the memorandum.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
action ultimately leading to as comprehensive a formal agreement as
possible, subject to the original constraints you established in your
original PD3—e.g., dismantling of Soviet ASAT capabilities, emphasis
on verifiability, and an end to Soviet testing. However, the Summary of
Conclusions at Tab A,4 as well as Harold’s memo at Tab C,5 demon-
strate that there is still considerable interagency disagreement over
some of the fundamental issues we intend to initially raise with the So-
viets. There is also some concern among several principals that, despite
over nine months of study, we do not fully understand the implications
of what we intend to propose. The disagreements are summarized
below:
Hostile Acts. Consistent with the results of an earlier SCC meeting,
Cy Vance has told the Soviets that we are interested in an agreement
that attacks on each other’s satellites would be considered “hostile
acts.” However, there is interagency disagreement over whether we
ought to consider only physical attacks as hostile acts, or interference—
a broader term encompassing both physical attacks and electronic war-
fare (EW). ACDA, DOD and JCS favor the former, State the latter. [1½
lines not declassified]
Physical attacks would be easier to verify than interference, [4 lines
not declassified] vulnerability of our fleet. State argues that “interfer-
ence” is a term already in use in other US/Soviet bilateral agreements
(concerning the operation of National Technical Means), and negotia-
tions might prove easier if there is consistency among the various
agreements.
No First-Use Pledge. ACDA, supported by State, suggested that, to
make the talks more meaningful, we ought to propose at Helsinki that
both sides pledge not to be the first to attack a satellite of the other side.
DOD and JCS prefer to await the results of the Helsinki meeting before
deciding whether to propose such a pledge. [3 lines not declassified] Ad-
ditionally, Harold Brown, who is inclined to favor some non-use
pledge in peacetime, has asked for more time to consider whether we
want a “no-first-attack” pledge in wartime.
In addition, we do not currently have a good capability to monitor
some kinds of ASAT attacks on our satellites, but we could—and prob-
ably ought to—substantially improve our monitoring capability over
the next several years by installing on-board attack sensors on all our
important satellites (long-term costs: $250–300 M).
2 See Document 29.
3 See Document 24.
4 See Document 29.
5 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Type of Agreement to be Reached with the Soviets. There was general
agreement that our ultimate goal was to reach a bilateral (or perhaps
multilateral) formal agreement, subject to Congressional ratification.
As we proceed serially from talks of an exploratory nature to step-by-
step agreements, however, no consensus was reached on the form any
interim agreements might take. ACDA favors bilateral parallel state-
ments regarding hostile acts and no first use, which in their view re-
quires no Congressional consent.
Testing Ban. This is the most contentious issue—whether and for
how long an ASAT testing ban ought to be proposed. The crux of this
issue is the existing asymmetry in orbital intercept capabilities. Because
our ability to verify the dismantling of the existing Soviet interceptors
is poor, a testing suspension could codify the current asymmetry in real
capabilities. Nevertheless, there was general agreement that it is impor-
tant to ban testing now before the Soviets run any high-altitude ASAT
tests, because many of our most important satellites are out of reach of
the current Soviet orbital interceptor. Several also felt that an imme-
diate ban on low altitude testing is appropriate because the current So-
viet interceptors do not seem very good, and because it might be diffi-
cult to verify that low altitude testing will not lead to a high altitude
capability.
As a result of an earlier SCC, Cy Vance told the Soviets we were in-
terested in a test suspension during the talks. State, OSTP and ACDA
favor proposing an indefinite moratorium on ASAT tests, but with the
proviso that tests could be commenced with six months’ notice. Harold
prefers a high-altitude test ban with a one-year “escape clause,” and a
low-altitude test ban on the Soviets, but with a promise that the US will
give them six months’ notice if the pressures of the existing asymmetry
favoring the Soviets require us to commence such testing. The JCS sup-
ports the high-altitude moratorium but opposes any low-level test ban.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. In light of the complexity and sharply divergent opinions about
how to resolve the fundamental issues, and the fact that we do not have
even a hint how the Soviets feel about the ASAT negotiations, I feel the
only prudent decision I can recommend at this juncture is that the Hel-
sinki talks be “exploratory” in nature. Harold’s memo to you (Tab C)
supports this point. Under such an approach the Soviets would be told
that we are prepared to explore with them the possibility of: (i) treating
physical attacks on satellites [less than 1 line not declassified] as hostile
acts; (ii) pledging not to conduct such attacks; (iii) placing an indefinite
moratorium on high-altitude tests with a one-year right of withdrawal;
(iv) placing a six-month moratorium on low-altitude testing while we
explore the possibilities for an agreement that will guarantee no signifi-
cant asymmetries in overall ASAT capabilities.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
We would not seek to finalize any agreement at this first meeting.
After raising the key points, our objective would be to gauge Soviet re-
actions—which will give us a better idea of where we go from here.
In the unlikely event the Soviets are interested in coming to any
sort of immediate agreement, our Delegation should seek further in-
structions. We would not put forth concrete proposals until after a sub-
stantive review in Washington.
Approve, as outlined above and specified in the PD at Tab B.6
Disapprove, develop specific proposals.
2. Recommend you approve the Summary of Conclusions at Tab
A, and sign the PD at Tab B.
Approve
Disapprove
6 Carter checked the “Approve, as outlined above and specified in the PD at Tab B”
option, and wrote “J” in the left-hand margin.
32.
Presidential Directive/NSC–391
Washington, June 6, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
transmitted the instructions to the ASAT Delegation in telegram 143176 to Helsinki, June

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
SUBJECT
Instructions to the US Delegation to the ASAT Talks with the Soviets
Commencing on June 8 in Helsinki (U)
The objective of the upcoming ASAT talks with the Soviets is to ex-
press our interest in reaching a comprehensive agreement to limit
ASAT capabilities and use (except for electronic countermeasures), to
explore possibilities for some initial steps in the ASAT area (described
below), and to gauge Soviet interests and reactions.
After making clear that the US is not making formal proposals, the
Delegation should state to the Soviets that we are interested in ex-
ploring the possibilities for (1) dealing with physical attacks on satel-
lites possibly by treating them as hostile acts, (2) pledging not to con-
duct such attacks, (3) placing an indefinite moratorium on high-altitude
ASAT tests with a one-year right of withdrawal, and (4) placing a six-
month moratorium on low-altitude tests while we explore the possibil-
ities for an agreement that will guarantee no significant asymmetries in
overall ASAT capabilities.
If the Soviets are interested in coming to an immediate agreement
on any of these ideas, the Delegation should report to Washington for
further instructions.
In discussing our interest in a comprehensive proposal and our un-
willingness to accept a significant asymmetry in ASAT capability, the
Delegation may explore with the Soviets the possibility of finding a
verifiable means for effectively eliminating their current orbital inter-
ceptor capability.
The Delegation should make clear to the Soviets that we intend to
seek an ASAT capability as soon as possible unless they are willing to
take positive actions to preclude such a move on our part.
Finally, the Delegation should minimize discussions of the space
shuttle and under no circumstances allow it to be characterized as an
ASAT system.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
33.
Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of
State1
1926. US ASAT Delegation 0017. Mil addressees handle as Specat.
NASA for Krueger. Subject: ASAT Discussions—Review of First Round.
to U.S. Delegation transmitted State 143176.2
2. The Soviet side came to Helsinki prepared to discuss anti-
satellite topics, and gave every indication that they take this subject se-
riously. They responded as follows to U.S. statements that objective of
discussions should be a comprehensive agreement to limit develop-
ment and retention of ASAT systems and to prohibit attacks on satel-
lites and to U.S. comments on an initial arrangement to prohibit
damage or destruction of satellites and to suspend testing of ASAT
systems:
—The two sides should use language concerning these talks which
would not imply constraining the scope of an eventual agreement to
concerns about the safety of satellites; we should talk about threats to
any object launched into outer space (including, e.g., objects on inter-
planetary trajectories) other than ballistic missiles;
—Soviet side argued that the two sides should focus attention ini-
tially on developing and putting into force and independent formal
agreement prohibiting specified hostile actions against space objects,
without conditions as to progress toward or terms of a future compre-
hensive agreement.
—The Soviet side did not specify unambiguously what (hostile)
actions they would seek to prohibit, but they made clear mention of
kinds of acts of lesser violence than damage and destruction. In partic-
ular, they talked about a prohibition on changing the orbit of a satellite
even though the orbit-changing operation left the satellite undamaged,
and they mentioned prohibition on unspecified forms of interference.
—The Soviet side reserved their freedom to advocate formulating
such an agreement in a way which would permit actions against “un-
lawful” space objects, although they also said that they were not men-
tioning their concern about “unlawful” space objects as a pretext for re-
taining or developing and deploying an anti-satellite system;
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent Immediate to the National Security Council, the Secre-
tary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—In elaborating their remarks about “unlawful” space objects, the
Soviet side mentioned as an example direct-broadcast television satel-
lites directing programs into the territory of a state without the permis-
sion of that state. They also mentioned, without explanation, a space
object which intrudes into the air space of a state; and there they argued
that national air space is part of national territory in which a state has a
right to take defensive actions of its own choosing.
—The Soviets acknowledged that they have been doing ASAT
testing, but provided no information on their program; and they de-
clined to discuss a test suspension understanding, saying that it was
too early to consider such an understanding at this stage in the talks.
—The Soviet side raised in a tentative way in legalistic language
the idea of including, in an early agreement prohibiting certain (hostile)
acts, a provision against doing things to “enable” carrying out such
acts. They mentioned as an example of an act of “enablement” the
launching into space of an ASAT device.
—The Soviet side said they need time to consider U.S. views on a
comprehensive agreement before they respond, and asked that the U.S.
side bring specific proposals to the next round.
3. Soviet side, at first, suggested that an initial “hostile acts agree-
ment” be formulated in a way which would identify certain specified
acts as hostile acts and prohibit hostile acts. The U.S. side pointed out
that an equivalent alternative approach would be to formulate an
agreement in a way which would prohibit those same specified acts,
with or without identification of them as hostile acts. The Soviet side
listened to this without objection, and, toward the end of the session,
began to refer to the acts alluded to as “acts incompatible with peaceful
relations between states.” This phraseology was used in the joint press
4. The U.S. side neither rejected nor accepted the suggestion of the
Soviet side that the two sides first develop an initial agreement limited
in scope to the prohibition of certain (hostile) acts against objects
launched into outer space, but explicitly advocated a two-part initial
understanding with the effect of an undertaking; (a) not to carry out
certain (hostile) acts against such objects, and (b) not to carry out ASAT
tests.
5. The Soviet side neither rejected nor accepted the U.S. view that
neither side should acquire new ASAT systems or retain existing ASAT
systems. They acknowledged that the U.S. side had put forth that view
and they limited their comments to expressions of their view that these

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
are complex matters, that the U.S. side has not described clear and spe-
cific ways to implement undertakings to that effect, and that discussion
of such undertakings could be pursued after developing an agreement
prohibiting certain (hostile) actions.
6. The U.S. side acknowledged comments of the Soviet side to the
effect that implementation of agreement to liquidate existing ASAT
systems would be complex, particularly in those cases when important
component equipments are used as parts of non-ASAT systems as well
as parts of an ASAT system. The Soviet side explicitly asked about
launch and support facilities and about radio-technical equipment. The
U.S. side suggested that adequate and verifiable implementation steps
would best be negotiated on a case-by-case basis, starting with a pro-
posal by the side owning the ASAT system in question, and asked the
Soviet side if they had any views on steps that it would be appropriate
to carry out to eliminate the Soviet ASAT system if an agreement were
to provide for such action. The Soviet side made no substantive reply.
7. The Soviet side was silent during plenary meetings on idea of
suspension of testing of ASAT systems, and reacted to specific repeti-
tion of our idea by restating their view that an understanding to pro-
hibit (hostile) acts against space objects should be the first order of
business. The closest they came to referring to a test suspension was by
way of mention of the U.S. idea of stopping development of ASAT
systems. In meeting in restricted composition, Khlestov said the Soviet
side considered it too early to talk about an undertaking to suspend
tests. He also expressed hope that, for time being, U.S. would limit dis-
cussion of testing suspension to restricted meetings rather than ple-
naries. Khlestov was told, in restricted meeting, that, if the two sides
did get into meaningful discussion of test suspension, U.S. side would
propose that high-altitude testing be suspended indefinitely and
low-altitude testing be suspended for six months. He was told that line
between “high” and “low” was related to altitudes of Soviet ASAT tests
to date, without quantitative specification of that line.
8. The U.S. side expressed general interest in being sure we under-
stood what Soviet side had in mind in referring to possible inclusion, in
an initial agreement prohibiting hostile acts, of an element which
would prohibit “enabling” action such as launching any ASAT device
into or through outer space. (If such an agreement element could be re-
alized, clearly prohibiting launching into or through space of ASAT de-
vices, it would have the effect of stopping testing of direct-ascent and
orbital-interceptor ASAT systems. This general idea might also lend it-
self to development into undertakings not to acquire new ASAT de-
vices and/or to liquidate existing ASAT systems. The possibility of ela-
borating the idea of an agreement to prohibit “enablement” was not
pressed further in this round because, when questioned a little more

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the day after he raised the idea, Khlestov recoiled into vagueness and
clearly was not going to get drawn willingly into saying anything more
about it in this round. Indeed, his approach at that time suggested
strongly that, if further discussion of the matter were pursued in this
round, he would have to make remarks prejudicial to the notion of
dealing with “enablement.” Preservation and cautious cultivation of
this potential negotiating asset should be a significant aspect of the U.S.
approach to the next round.)
9. The Soviet side raised a mixed collection of topics which they
will probably drag along for some time for tactical reasons. One was
the point noted in para 2, above, about the need to account, somehow,
for the contingency of “unlawful” operations through space objects. In
response to questions from the U.S. side they chose to say that their
concerns of this sort were directed toward possible future capabilities
of third countries rather than future behavior of the U.S. or USSR. A
second was the inconclusive state of international understanding on
the boundary between air space and outer space, and a third was the le-
gitimacy of direct TV broadcasts from satellites. The U.S. side ex-
pressed the view that these talks are not an appropriate forum for dis-
cussing such matters, and noted that opinions do differ on them. A
fourth was the general assertion that a state has the sovereign right to
take whatever “self defense” actions it deems appropriate against a
space object which intrudes into its air space. (The Soviets might view
this simply as a confortable point to talk about and keep alive in the dis-
cussions for some future use, or it might reflect an extravagant assess-
ment of potentialities lurking in space shuttle capabilities, or it might be
a retailing of air defense institutional doctrine from Soviet internal dis-
cussions. Legalities of sovereignty over air space notwithstanding, not
only is it unnecessary but it could be dangerous for the U.S. to agree in
general with the Soviet claim that a state has an unfettered right to de-
fend against a space object entering its air space because any defense
system with significant capabilities against objects of near-satellite
speeds would have substantial ABM potential, and the Soviets ought
not be allowed to erect such a system and claim it to be an “air defense”
system, free of limitations in the ABM Treaty or any prospective ASAT
agreement.)
10. The Soviet side said that in their view it would be a hostile act
to change the orbit of the other side’s satellite even though the satellite
might not be damaged in the process. The U.S. side expressed the view
that changing the orbit of the other side’s satellite, except by agreement
between the two sides, should be prohibited. (The U.S. could not go be-
yond a non-use undertaking on this kind of operation without preju-
dicing the space shuttle program.)
11. In connection with mention of interference, the Soviet side
made vague remarks which might foreshadow their arguing in

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
subsequent rounds for some kind of prohibition on electronic
countermeasures.
12. The Soviet side made frequent explicit and implicit references
to the U.S. space shuttle. (They undoubtedly would prefer to exercise
the subject of the shuttle rather than their ASAT system; however, the
extent of actual Soviet concern, if any, about shuttle use remains to be
seen.)
13. The U.S. side said that the U.S. would pursue its own ASAT
program as far and as fast as necessary to assure national security, but
preferred to avoid an arms race in the ASAT field by appropriate com-
prehensive agreement.
14. Throughout this round the atmosphere was cordial and discus-
sions were orderly and relevant to the subject. No agreements were
reached in this exploratory round, but it seems reasonable to judge that
the two sides have similar views of the main characteristics of the
subject.
15. Time and place of second round to be agreed through diplo-
matic channels.
Ridgway

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
34.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Antisatellite Treaty
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher
David Aaron (Chairman)
Deputy Secretary
NASA
David Gompert Deputy Director,
Robert Frosch Administrator
Politico-Military Affairs
David Williamson Assistant for
Defense
Special Projects
Harold Brown Secretary
NSC
Walter Slocombe Principal Deputy
Victor Utgoff
Assistant Secretary for
Robert Rosenberg
International Security Affairs
Charles Stebbins
Herbert York Member, ASAT
OSTP
Delegation
Frank Press Director
ACDA
Arthur Morrissey Senior Analyst
Spurgeon Keeny Acting Director
CIA
James Timbie Chief, Strategic
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Affairs Division
Sayre Stevens Deputy Director
Robert Buchheim Head, ASAT
National Foreign Assessment
Delegation
Center
JCS
General William Y. Smith
General David Bradburn Member,
ASAT Delegation
Dismantling the Soviet Orbital Interceptor. All agreed that complete
dismantling of the current Soviet ASAT interceptor system could prob-
ably not be verified because the interceptors are small and could be
easily concealed. Further, some participants felt that if we were to ask
the Soviets to eliminate the boosters currently used for their ASAT
system, and/or the associated launch facilities, we might have to pay
an exorbitant negotiating price, because:
—the SL–11 booster they now use is also used to orbit their ocean
reconnaissance satellites; and
—they have some 300 SS–9 boosters which we expect they would
want to use in their space program that would have to be verifiably dis-
mantled. (SL–11s are slightly modified SS–9s.)
Secret; Ruff; Talent Keyhole; [codewords not declassified]. The meeting took place in the
White House Situation Room.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
However, all agreed that we should not yet abandon the disman-
tling goal; rather the US should listen to and probe any Soviet disman-
tling procedure that is offered in response to the request we made
during the first round of ASAT talks. The US should make no proposals
of its own during this next round, since we have not yet found a pro-
posal that would satisfy our concerns, and we must be prepared to live
with any proposal we make.
The Text of an Initial Agreement. All agreed that an ASAT Treaty
would apply during peacetime; however, there were questions whether
an agreement should apply during crises or war:
—During Crises—OSD and JCS expressed concern that a hostile
acts agreement would prevent useful actions against Soviet satellites
during crises—[1½ lines not declassified] It was agreed that insofar as
treaty language is concerned, crises would be treated no differently
than peacetime.
—During War—DOD is also concerned that if the treaty language
called for the agreement to remain in effect during war, Congress
would be more likely to restrict funding for development of a US ASAT
capability.
All agreed that the Interagency Working Group, with legal advice,
should draft specific alternative formulations of the text of an agree-
ment for discussion at the next SCC meeting.2
Prohibited Acts. All agree that an initial, hostile acts agreement
should prohibit physical attacks on satellites of the other side, and pro-
hibit the unauthorized displacement from orbit of satellites of the other
side. Since the US space shuttle is the only near-term system of either
side with the ability to displace satellites, and since the Soviets have al-
ready expressed their concern about displacement, the US should make
maximum use of the negotiating leverage implicit in agreeing to pro-
hibit unauthorized displacement. The US must be careful to ensure that
treaty language allows the US shuttle to perform its normal duties (ex-
traction of US satellite from orbit, close inspection, etc.) without such
activities being labeled as ASAT testing.
[4 paragraphs (24½ lines) not declassified]
The Interagency Working Group was directed [1½ lines not declassi-
fied] for consideration in the next SCC meeting.
Interim Ban on Testing ASAT Interceptors. There was insufficient
time to fully develop this issue. The agency positions that were ex-
pressed are:
—OSD/JCS—Prepared to accept an unlimited duration high alti-
tude test ban, leaving to the Soviets to propose the boundary between
high and low altitude (per our request during the first round of talks).
2 See Document 35.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
However, DOD noted that in order to eliminate the current asymmetry
in low altitude ASAT capability between the two sides, we should con-
sider the possibility of allowing the U.S. a limited number of low
altitude tests. Additionally, DOD fears that adoption of a moratorium
on low altitude testing would inhibit funding for the US ASAT
interceptor.
—State/ACDA—Prefer a full test ban at all altitudes at least until
the US ASAT interceptor is ready for testing in FY 81–82. (ACDA leans
toward a three-year test ban; State believes a ban should last at least one
year.) Such a ban would provide the incentive needed for both sides to
work toward a comprehensive agreement, and wouldn’t hurt us since
we aren’t ready to test an interceptor anyway.
35.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Antisatellite Treaty
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher
David Aaron (Chairman)
Deputy Secretary
NASA
David Gompert Deputy Director,
Robert Frosch Administrator
Politico-Military Affairs
Philip Culbertson Member, ASAT
Defense
Delegation
Harold Brown Secretary
NSC
Herbert York Member, ASAT
Victor Utgoff
Delegation
Robert Rosenberg
ACDA
Charles Stebbins
Spurgeon Keeny Deputy Director
OSTP
James Timbie Chief, Strategic
Frank Press Director
Affairs Division
Arthur Morrissey Senior Analyst
Robert Buchheim Head, ASAT
CIA
Delegation
John Hicks Deputy Director for
JCS
National Foreign Assessment
General William Smith
Evan Hineman Director, Office of
General David Bradburn Member,
Weapons Intelligence
ASAT Delegation
NSC–45. Top Secret; Ruff; [codewords not declassified]. The meeting took place in the White
House Situation Room.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
General
All agreed that we should not use the term “hostile act” in an
ASAT agreement with the Soviets, because the term is legally equiva-
lent to an “act of war”, and we would not want to feel obliged to go to
war over a breach of the agreement. Rather, the treaty language should
involve “prohibitions” against certain acts. (S)
All agreed that the ultimate goal of the ASAT talks should con-
tinue to be the conclusion of a comprehensive ASAT agreement with
the Soviets. (TS)
All agreed that despite serious reservations about finding a verifi-
able scheme for effectively dismantling the Soviet orbital interceptor,
the US should continue to argue in favor of its dismantling, and listen
to and probe any Soviet proposal for doing so. (We requested such a
proposal at ASAT I.) (TS/R [less than 1 line not declassified])
All agreed that our talks with the Soviets should continue to be in-
formal until it becomes clear that we and the Soviets have a good un-
derstanding of each other’s negotiating aims. (S)
[2 paragraphs (12 lines) not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (11½ lines) not declassified]
Test Suspension
During round 1 of the ASAT talks, in an off the record meeting be-
tween the heads of the two delegations, we suggested an indefinite du-
ration ban on high altitude testing, plus a six-month ban on low alti-
tude testing. There remains some support (DOD, OSTP) for staying
with this position until we can gage Soviet reaction to it. However, OSD
and JCS would prefer an indefinite duration high altitude test ban (to
protect our DSP and other satellites whose loss could be very serious),
with no ban on low altitude testing (to avoid difficulties in obtaining
funding from the Congress for our ASAT programs). OSD and JCS are
concerned that a low altitude test moratorium would perpetuate the
current asymmetry in interceptor capabilities favoring the Soviets, and
that even if the Soviets stop testing their current system, they would
have a substantial breakout capability. OSD also feels that unless we
pursue our own ASAT program, including low altitude testing, we
would have no leverage over the long term to encourage the Soviets to
dismantle their orbital interceptor and get the two sides down to “zero
capability” postures. (TS/R [less than 1 line not declassified])
State would prefer a one-year ban on testing at all altitudes to give
us more time to settle our in-house differences, and to avoid our getting
so bogged down with the Soviets in technical details that we might not
be able to reach any kind of an agreement, at least in the near term.
ACDA supports the State position, but would have the ban last two
years. ACDA feels that the Soviets would be the only ones really af-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
fected by such a ban, since the US will not be ready to test its interceptor
for several years. (TS)
There is a difference of opinion whether a test ban should apply
only to interceptors [less than 1 line not declassified] other ASAT systems.
ACDA feels that the test ban should apply to any system that can carry
out the acts that are to be specifically prohibited in the initial agree-
ment. NASA fears that ACDA’s test ban formulation would inhibit our
using the Space Shuttle to retrieve our own satellites from orbit, since
retrieval would technically constitute an ASAT test. OSTP cautions
that the ACDA-favored test ban would have to be worded to per-
mit the Shuttle to perform certain safety functions. [3½ lines not
declassified] OSD and JCS want a test ban against interceptors only,
because of the Shuttle and verifiability problems. (TS/R [less than 1 line
not declassified])
The Boundary Between High and Low Altitude Testing
ACDA and State prefer to see no altitude distinction in a test ban;
however, all agreed that if there is to be such a distinction, the ban
should be based on system capability rather than target altitude. This
would, for example, prevent the Soviets from mating their current in-
terceptor with a larger booster and testing it at low altitude, since under
the system capability formulation, the larger booster would render the
interceptor capable of a high altitude intercept. (TS)
36.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Keeny) to the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 18, 1979
SUBJECT
ASAT Instructions
Following up on today’s SCC meeting,2 I have a number of com-
ments on the relative priorities of the issues which may be useful to you
in framing these issues for the President.
2 See Document 35.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Testing. The Presidential Directive3 we are operating under calls
for the prompt end of Soviet ASAT testing as the first order of business.
Any proposal, such as the one Defense recommends, which would not
halt Soviet testing is such a departure from the President’s original ob-
jectives that it would call into question what we are trying to accom-
plish. Moreover, I believe that making a distinction between high-
and low-altitude testing would introduce serious and unnecessary
problems, which a temporary test suspension for all altitudes would
avoid. You will recall that PRM-234 contained an option to ban only
high-altitude ASAT systems, and that was not the one the President
picked.
Laser ASAT systems. The suggestion that we might permit laser
ASAT testing to go forward without restriction also raised funda-
mental questions as to what we are trying to accomplish in these talks.
In the past, we have been careful to characterize the ASAT limits we
seek in general terms with no reference to any particular means for at-
tacking satellites. This policy should be continued. We have a system to
monitor tests [2 lines not declassified] For the future, we have the tech-
nology to build space-based systems to monitor Soviet laser tests
against satellites, but no present plan to do so. I believe that we should
define what additional intelligence collection assets would be needed
to monitor a ban on laser ASAT tests.
Interference. While I believe that a ban on interference with the
technical operation of satellites would be desirable for an ASAT agree-
ment, I do not believe that this issue is as fundamental as the issues dis-
cussed above which raise questions as to whether or not we are in fact
negotiating in the direction envisaged in the original Presidential
Directive.
Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr.5
3 See Document 24.
4 See Document 2.
5 Keeny signed “S.M. Keeny Jr.” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
37.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Instructions to the Delegation to the 2nd Round of ASAT Talks (U)
We are scheduled to begin the second round of ASAT talks with
the Soviets on January 23 in Bern. In preparation for this meeting the
SCC met on January 18.2 In this meeting the SCC agreed that our
strategy should be to continue to explore potential areas of agreement
on an informal basis until the main elements of a reasonable initial
agreement seem fairly clear to both sides. When this situation has been
reached—and it may not take long—we would make a formal pro-
posal. Staying informal makes talking with the Soviets somewhat
easier: there are several issues the Soviets owe us a response on, and
this approach presents the smallest risk that we will generate a formal
Soviet rejection which would reflect badly on SALT. (TS)
In the first round of talks, the Soviets suggested that we negotiate
an initial agreement banning damage, destruction or unauthorized dis-
placement of the other side’s satellites—an agreement that would stand
independent of the success or failure of any following negotiations on
other ASAT issues. Following instructions, the Delegation responded
that any initial agreement should also include a moratorium on ASAT
Since the end of round one, the SCC’s discussions have thus con-
centrated on the question of what should be included in an initial
agreement and how such an agreement should be linked to continued
negotiations toward dismantling and the comprehensive limits on
ASAT testing, deployment, and use that you originally set as our
We could negotiate an initial agreement banning just damage, de-
struction, and unauthorized displacement but this approach, in addi-
tion to allowing Soviet testing to continue, may not take full advantage
of the bargaining capital inherent in the Soviets’ demonstrated concern
that we might consider displacing some of their satellites with the
NSC–45. Top Secret. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig. J.”
2 See Document 35.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
space shuttle. The SCC thus believes we should continue to try to
achieve more in the initial agreement than the Soviets have proposed—
and has been able to agree that at a minimum, the initial agreement
should include a ban on testing high altitude ASAT interceptors. On
several other issues, however, we have not been able to agree, so you
will have to resolve our differences. (TS)
Low Altitude ASAT Interceptor Testing
In round one, we attempted to raise the testing suspension idea
with the Soviets and were told that they were not ready to discuss
testing. Later in a private meeting with the head of the Soviet Delega-
tion, Ambassador Warnke, described our original idea of an indefinite
high altitude test suspension and a six-month moratorium on testing at
low altitudes, but this suggestion is not yet part of the record. (TS)
In this next round we will probe the Soviet reaction to our sugges-
tion. But we need to decide whether to stay with our earlier suggestion,
or change to some other formulation as suggested in the SCC. (TS)
ACDA and State argue that we should pursue a testing suspension
that doesn’t discriminate between high and low altitudes—ACDA be-
lieves the suspension should last two years; State proposes only one
year. Both argue that a testing suspension that covers all altitudes will
be easier both to negotiate and to verify, and that such a suspension
would only impact on the Soviets since we aren’t scheduled to begin
testing our miniature homing vehicle ASAT until 1981. (TS)
JCS and OSD prefer no low altitude test suspension at all. They be-
lieve that the current asymmetry in ASAT interceptor capabilities is un-
acceptable, and are pessimistic about the prospects for identifying and
negotiating verifiable arrangements for eliminating the current Soviet
orbital interceptor—they see the testing of our MHV system as the only
way to eliminate the asymmetry. They further believe that a satisfac-
tory way to draw an altitude distinction can be identified and negoti-
ated without much difficulty, and that even a short suspension of low
altitude testing will inhibit Congressional funding for our ASAT devel-
opment program. Finally, they believe that there will be significant
pressures to extend such a suspension later, thereby perpetuating the
asymmetry. (TS)
I believe that a one-year moratorium is the best position for this
round of talks, primarily because it can be quickly negotiated if the So-
viets are willing to shut off their testing. While it would be nice to be
able to include an indefinite ban on high-altitude testing in an initial
agreement, our studies suggest that drawing a meaningful distinction
between high and low altitudes is a complex proposition. (TS)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Your Decision:
No low-altitude suspension; indefinite high (DOD)
One-year suspension at all altitudes (State, NSC)3
Two-year suspension at all altitudes (ACDA) (S)
[5 paragraphs (60 lines) not declassified]
Coverage of the Testing Suspension
ACDA and State believe that any test ban or suspension should
cover tests of ASAT systems rather than ASAT interceptors. They are
particularly interested in stopping possible tests of high energy laser
ASAT systems. (TS)
NASA is against such broad coverage because it could be inter-
preted as including testing of systems for displacing satellites, and thus
would cause trouble for our plans to use the Space Shuttle to retrieve
our own satellites from orbit. [2 lines not declassified] (TS)
DOD and I believe that the test suspension should only cover
ASAT interceptors because of the verification and shuttle problems. It
seems clear, however, that the pursuit of limits on high energy laser
ASAT applications should get high priority in follow-on negotia-
Your Decision:
Cover tests of ASAT interceptors only (DOD, NSC, NASA)5
Cover tests of all ASAT systems (ACDA, State)
At Tab A is a draft set of instructions to the Delegation reflecting
my recommendations on the above issues. (U)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve my issuing instructions of the form given at Tab
A, suitably modified to reflect the above decisions. (U)6
3 Carter checked this option and initialed “J” after the sentence.
4 Carter underlined the phrase “should get high priority in follow-on negotiations”
in this paragraph.
5 Carter checked this option, and drew an arrow to the previous paragraph and
wrote “Let this be known to Soviets.”
6 Carter approved this option and underlined the words “suitably modified” in this
paragraph.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
38.
Presidential Directive/NSC–451
Washington, January 22, 1979
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Instructions to the US Delegation to the ASAT Talks with the Soviets
Commencing January 23 in Bern (U)
The objectives of the second round of ASAT talks with the Soviets
are:
—To seek clarification of Soviet views regarding the possibilities
for (1) finding a verifiable means for effectively eliminating their cur-
rent orbital interceptor capability, and (2) suspending ASAT inter-
ceptor testing. (S)
—To continue informal discussions aimed at identifying and clari-
fying areas of mutual understanding that might be codified in an initial
ASAT agreement. (U)
In discussing the question of dismantling, you may draw on the
ideas contained in the interagency study.2 However, you must make it
absolutely clear that any suggestions you make in no way constitute a
proposal. (U)
In discussing the issue of a testing suspension, you should infor-
mally suggest a one-year suspension of testing at all altitudes. You
should also make it clear to the Soviets that investigating the possibility
of limits on high energy laser ASAT applications should get high pri-
ority in future talks. (S)
After discussing these specific issues with the Soviets, you should
send me your assessment of the Soviets’ interest in negotiating a
two-part initial agreement consisting of a ban on damage, destruction,
and unauthorized displacement of each other’s satellites, plus a
2 See Document 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
one-year suspension of ASAT interceptor testing. Except for the
changes implied by the above instructions, the instructions for the first
round remain in force. (TS)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
39.
Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the
Department of State1
453. US ASAT Two 004. From Buchheim. Mil addresses handle as
Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) ASAT Two Meetings, January
uary 24, 1979, at U.S. Embassy, Bern.
2. (U) Ambassador Khlestov declined offer to take floor first, defer-
ring to Ambassador Buchheim as host. Buchheim’s statement ASAT
3. (S) Khlestov, referring to prepared text, stated that we have
started bilateral negotiations on subject of anti-satellite systems and ac-
tivities. This he characterized as a further positive development from
preliminary consultations in June and as representing a higher and
more responsible level of contact between our two countries. He ex-
pressed praise for Paul Warnke as one of initiators of the negotiations
and noted with satisfaction that the leadership of the U.S. Delegation
has now been entrusted to Buchheim.
4. (S) Khlestov said he had been glad to hear in Buchheim’s state-
ment that U.S. is interested in an elaboration of the measures the sides
are studying, which is the premise from which the Soviet side also pro-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
uary 24 ASAT II plenary, in which he emphasized Washington’s desire to work with
Moscow to limit anti-satellite weapons systems and activities and urged that an agree-
ment be made that devised “practical measures to prevent an arms competition in outer
space and thus to head off the known and unknown adverse consequences that could
flow from such a competition.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
ceeds. He observed that the extensive consultations in Helsinki3 had fa-
miliarized the sides with each other’s positions and sketched the gen-
eral outlines of the problem. While not all elements had come through
clearly in Helsinki, the Soviet side’s main conclusion was that positions
of both sides coincide on a number of points and that both sides are
striving toward a more complete understanding of each other’s views.
Khlestov said he had so summarized in Moscow the results of the June
session and that this report had met with a positive response.
5. (S) Khlestov said that, although a direction and common ap-
proach had emerged as a result of the Helsinki discussions, providing a
basis for joint work, there still remain points to be clarified. Khlestov re-
called that in Helsinki there had been problems with some elements of
the US view which lacked clarity and others which were incomprehen-
sible. The Soviet side is proceeding from the premise that the work of
the session in Bern must lead to concrete, practical results and achieve
specific and tangible forward movement. In order to effectively work
toward this goal, Khlestov suggested that the sides should first work
out definitions of terminology, as well as details and nuances of the
issues.
6. (S) Khlestov repeated that Soviet side is most serious and will
apply every effort to achieve concrete results in this session.
7. (S) Buchheim expressed interest in Khlestov’s suggestion that
certain terminology should be clarified and asked whether Khlestov
had a list of terms to suggest. Khlestov replied that he did not wish to
enumerate at this time all the terms which need elucidation. However,
noting again Soviet goal of achieving concrete results and necessity for
defining terms as first step toward this end, he offered following for-
mulation for defining “space objects”, calling it “a preliminary set of
ideas” for further discussion. The term “space objects” includes the
class of objects placed into orbit around earth or launched further into
outer space, and in relationship to which one side is the state of regis-
tration under the 1975 Registration Convention.4 The term “space ob-
jects” includes the component parts of space objects, their means of de-
livery and its parts.
8. (S) Khlestov explained that this formulation reflected the Soviet
desire to find objective criteria, based upon the 1975 Conventions to
which both sides are parties, which would cover all space objects. He
3 See Document 33.
4 The Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space was
promulgated by the 37-member United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space on January 14, 1975; the United States Ambassador to the UN, John Scali,
signed it ten days later. Scali’s statement is published in the Department of State Bulletin,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
added that the Soviets had also tried to use the language of the outer
space treaty.5 As points of reference, he cited Article I, Paragraph B, of
the 1975 Registration Convention and Article I, Paragraph D, of the Lia-
bility Convention.6 Khlestov expressed the view that it would be easier
to use a formulation already internationally tested and based upon lan-
guage in legal instruments which both sides have signed.
9. (S) After first recalling the Soviet side’s preference for language
characterizing certain acts as incompatible with peaceful relations be-
tween states rather than as hostile acts, Khlestov suggested in a prelimi-
nary way the following definition of which acts would be regarded as
“hostile acts”: a hostile act is an act which the sides regard as a delib-
erate action upon a space object by any system or means, either in space
or on the ground, which can lead to the destruction of a space object, its
displacement from orbit, damage to it, or rendering unserviceable its
onboard equipment.
10. (S) Khlestov repeated several times that these two definitions
were purely preliminary attempts and not the final position of the So-
viet side, and said that the sides together can arrive at more precisely
formulated definitions. He suggested that U.S. Delegation formulate its
own versions of definitions, and also requested Buchheim’s prelimi-
nary views on those Khlestov had just read. Buchheim stated that he
would not address Khlestov’s preliminary formulations today but
agreed that a productive way to begin these talks would be to pursue a
clearer understanding of these two terms and, in the process, expose
areas of early agreement, as well as areas the sides will have to argue
about a little more. Buchheim and Khlestov agreed that next meeting
would include discussion of those two terms.
11. (S) (A) Immediately following the plenary, Buchheim and
Khlestov met, with Bradburn, Desimone, Mayorskiy, and interpreters
present. It was agreed that the second plenary meeting would be on
(B) Referring to the definitions discussed during the plenary
meeting, Buchheim informed Khlestov that the U.S. side has studied
5 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the Treaty
on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, on January 27, 1967, and it entered
into force on October 10, 1967. The Treaty prohibited the placement of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction on the moon and other celestial bodies, in orbit
around the earth, or otherwise stationing them in outer space. Testing of such weapons
on the moon and in outer space was also prohibited. The text of the Treaty is in Depart-
6 UN Resolution 2777 (XXVI) creating the Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects was adopted by the General Assembly on March 29,
1972.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
further the desirability of using the term “hostile acts”, and reminded
Khlestov that at Helsinki the U.S. side had mentioned two possible ap-
proaches, i.e., either (a) to simply list acts which the two sides would
undertake not to carry out against a space object belonging to the other
side, or (b) to list acts which should not be carried out against a space
object of the other side, and label them as “hostile acts” or as “acts in-
compatible with peaceful relations,” or identify them with some other
label. Following a longish discussion of the two approaches, both sides
agreed to be prepared to address these alternatives at the next plenary
meeting.
(C) Khlestov suggested that terminology formulations should be
submitted in writing to make future work easier. He added that, since
Moscow, and presumably Washington as well, were keeping an eye on
the Delegations, such written contributions should be treated as in-
formal working papers only and not as proposals or as documents for-
mally tabled.
(D) Buchheim then asked, as a procedural question, whether
Khlestov still wished to limit to private meetings discussion of the
question of suspending ASAT interceptor tests, as he had preferred in
Helsinki, or if this subject could now be raised in plenary meetings.
Khlestov replied that it could be raised in either forum. Buchheim said
that he would advise Khlestov in advance before raising the issue in
plenary. Khlestov expressed appreciation for this courtesy.
(E) Khlestov promised working texts on “hostile acts” and “acts in-
compatible with peaceful relations between states” at the next plenary
and expressed his hope that the U.S. Delegation would be similarly
prepared.
(F) Khlestov asked why U.S. had proposed Bern as site for this
round. Buchheim said USG had considered several possibilities and
had concluded Bern to be most appropriate for this round.
12. (S) Comment. Khlestov’s approach to definition of “space ob-
ject” (para 7 above) contains same substance as suggestion by Soviet
side in Helsinki concerning the things against which each party would
undertake not to carry out certain acts, that is, any object belonging to
the other party which is in earth orbit or in a super-orbital trajectory,
e.g., interplanetary probes, but not ballistic missiles. Our understand-
ing is that the ASAT working group recorded interagency consensus in
favor of such an approach. Unless advised otherwise by Washington,
we will, in further discussions with Soviet side on scope of definition,
adopt the view that an undertaking not to carry out certain acts would
be an undertaking not to carry out such acts against objects in earth
orbit and objects on trajectories more energetic than earth orbits, in-
cluding interplanetary trajectories. In this regard, we assume that word
“satellites” in phrase “ban on damage, destruction, and unauthorized

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
displacement of each other’s satellites” in State 0176657 is intended to
be construed in this more comprehensive way as to the trajectories of
objects that are not to be attacked. (End comment).
Warner
7 Not found.
40.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affaris (Slocombe) to Secretary of
Defense Brown1
Washington, Febrary 1, 1979
SUBJECT
PD–45/ASAT Negotiations—ACTION MEMORANDUM
Attached is PD–45,2 which I assume you’ve seen, setting forth this
round’s instructions for the ASAT negotiations. Substantively, DoD
seems to have won on interference and lost on testing. More than usual,
however, the instructions are something of a surprise, given the sub-
stance of the meeting, and deserve some comment.
1. Testing: The approach of a one-year ban with no distinction be-
tween high and low altitude satellites may make sense if one is trying
to reach quick agreement with the Soviets in order to bolster SALT rati-
fication prospects (although it could backfire with Senators concerned
about US–USSR military asymmetries). Herb York has also argued,
perhaps correctly, that a test ban of sufficient duration would be to the
United States’ advantage. A one-year ban, however, immediately raises
the question of renewal. If we do think it desirable to go ahead with
MHV testing in mid-1981, we will need to make the case soon as to why
that is so. Otherwise, we are likely to find that what is formally a
one-year ban will be continuously extended. Even the prospect of such
ASAT. Top Secret. The memorandum is stamped “SECDEF Has Seen 8 Feb 1979.”
2 See Document 38.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
renewal could present problems, as we are learning in SALT (with Pro-
tocol) and CTB.
The Delegation has been instructed to report back on the Soviet re-
sponse to our proposals. An appropriate time to raise the renewal ques-
tion would be when we see their response.
2. Dismantling: I thought we had closed this issue out, but it seems
to have raised its head again. The first ASAT SCC for this round de-
cided that the US should listen to and probe Soviet proposals for dis-
mantling the orbital ASAT but not make proposals of our own since
“we have not found a proposal that would satisfy our concerns, and we
must be prepared to live with any proposal we made.” However, in
order to draw the Soviets out on dismantling their orbital ASAT, the
PD as written allows the Delegation to “draw on the ideas contained in
the interagency study” and make dismantling “suggestions.” The Dele-
gation also is to make clear that it is not making any dismantling
“proposals.”
The PD’s statement on US suggestions (which, I am fairly sure, re-
flects an NSC staff decision) formally adheres to, but in practice may re-
verse, the SCC conclusion since the interagency study referred to is in
reality an ACDA paper whose suggestions were the ones that did not
satisfy the SCC’s concerns. Buchheim is an able negotiator, however, so
I really don’t expect anything untoward will happen in Berne. None-
theless, we should take action in Washington to reestablish the SCC
conclusion (perhaps doing this also in the context of any discussion
about the Soviet response to our proposals).
3. Lasers: The PD—reflecting, we are told, the President’s personal
initiative—says that the Delegation should make it clear to the Soviets
that investigating the possibility of limits on high energy laser ASAT
applications should get high priority in future talks. While, in the ab-
stract, I have no quarrel with “investigating” this, there is reason to be-
lieve that limitations on laser ASAT applications will be difficult to con-
struct. For this reason, the interagency ASAT working group had
agreed not to discuss lasers with the Soviets. Given the President’s in-
terest, I think it would be wise for DoD to move out smartly on seeing
whether something can be done, especially in light of our and Soviet
non-ASAT laser programs. From DoD’s point of view, there are sub-
stantial arguments for continuing our laser R&D programs as an ASAT
hedge and for non-ASAT applications and substantial doubts about the
verifiability of any limits on lasers for ASAT use. Clearly, others dis-
agree, at least at this point. Accordingly, if you agree, I will arrange
with Bill Perry to (1) survey US and Soviet current and planned laser
programs, (2) provide a menu of choices and costs (especially impacts
on those programs) necessary to get an effective ASAT laser limitation,
and (3) analyze monitoring/verification issues relevant to possible

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ASAT laser limitations. We would then have the basis for analyzing
specific proposals in the interagency group.
Walter Slocombe
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
International Security Affairs
Agree:
Other:
41.
Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the
Department of State1
720. US ASAT Two 019. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle as
Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) ASAT Two Plenary Meeting,
February 6, 1979 (Secret—Entire Text).
1. Begin summary: During three hour meeting at Soviet Embassy,
Khlestov asked, and Buchheim responded to, a number of questions on
U.S. ideas for an initial agreement. Most of the questions concerned the
details of the test-suspension idea. In addition to questions on the in-
ternals of text, Soviets wanted to know when one-year period would
start, and whether agreement would be written so as automatically to
continue or to lapse at end of one year. Buchheim emphasized that we
were discussing concept of an initial agreement, that a prohibition on
damage or destruction covered any means for doing so, and noted need
for discussion in the future of limiting ground-based lasers and other
kinds of anti-satellite systems not covered in initial agreement. End
summary.
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
2. Khlestov said preliminary discussions of U.S. texts at last
stand better U.S. ideas, however, they had more questions.
3. Khlestov said that in the Soviet text given to the U.S. (see ASAT
with peaceful relations between states.” He recalled that Buchheim had
said some such qualifying words could be included in a preamble, but
U.S. text did not contain such language. He wanted to know if U.S. side
considered it possible and necessary to have a preamble, if so, what its
contents should be, and whether they could include some qualifying
words—either “acts incompatible with peaceful relations between
states” or some other. Buchheim said the U.S. side had no objection, in
principle, to a preamble and some such words could be in one.
4. Khlestov said that a second question concerned possible con-
cluding sections of an agreement, such as listing the official languages
of the agreement and the place of signing. They would also contain the
date that the agreement would come into force. The obligation not to
text could extend: (I) 12 months from date of signing; (II) 12 months
from the exchange of instruments of ratification. The difference be-
tween the two commencement dates could be three, four, five months.
He said he would like to know the U.S. point of view. Buchheim said
this was a question on which he would need instructions and that, if
Khlestov felt that the discussion was at a point where he should ask for
such instructions, he would do so. Khlestov said he wanted to better
understand the essence of the U.S. idea. Buchheim said he would ask
for instructions on that basis.
sented the Soviet Delegation with the text of a Non-Paper consisting of two “elements”
for discussion. The first proposed that the two sides pledge “not to destroy, damage, or
change the trajectory of an object which has been placed in orbit around the earth.” The
second proposed that the two sides issue a moratorium on the launching of “for test or
any other purpose, an interceptor missile for the destroying or damaging objects which
have been placed in orbit around the earth or any other trajectories into outer space” from
the date of the signing of an ASAT agreement. Khlestov questioned both elements, in-
cluding how such objects would be identified and what the U.S. meant by the phrase “not
to destroy, damage . . . any object.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790053–0273)
tive Soviet views on defining space objects, and listing of actions which would be prohi-
bited or inconsistent with peaceful relations between states.” Buchheim replied that the
United States “was not thinking of formal proposals but was presenting a possible alter-
native approach which does not use the term ‘space object’ and ‘hostile acts’ and which
therefore does not rely on definitions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790055–0375)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. Khlestov’s next question referred to Buchheim’s statement
would, prior to expiration of the 12-month text suspension, meet to
discuss these matters further and take appropriate decisions. He re-
quested clarification of the U.S. views on this matter with respect to the
two possible interpretations: Does the U.S. believe that an agreement
which would be in effect for a specific period of time would lapse when
that period was over; or does the U.S. have the view that the agreement
would only lapse if the two sides met and agreed not to extend it?
Buchheim responded that the U.S. had no fixed views on the matter. He
said the U.S. side was talking about an initial undertaking on testing
lasting for 12 months during which time the two sides should decide
whether to continue, to extend, or to change the agreement, and that we
favored maximum flexibility in consultations during this 12-month pe-
riod. He said further that he believed that an initial agreement should
be case in terms that envision further discussions or agreements by the
parties on these matters, and that it should provide as much flexibility
in consultations as seems reasonable. He noted that Khlestov’s ques-
tion envisions the possibility that an article might specify that a text
suspension would continue or lapse depending on what the parties in
consultation agree concerning the text suspension or any other matters
or undertakings. He then asked Khlestov’s views on whether the sus-
pension should automatically lapse if the parties don’t agree to con-
tinue it or would the suspension continue until the parties do agree to
terminate it. The U.S. has no fixed views on this, he said. Khlestov said
that he had drawn two conclusions from Buchheim’s presentation:
First, that a mechanism for further consideration of this matter had
been more carefully worked out by the U.S. side than by the Soviets,
and second, that the future fate of a test suspension following the
12-month period must be more precisely formulated. Buchheim said
that a perfectly acceptable mechanism to consider the matter further is
these two Delegations. Khlestov asked for Buchheim’s thoughts on
paper. Buchheim agreed to do so but said the thoughts would not be
complicated; they would be that the parties consider the matter during
the one-year period under whatever mechanism the two sides prefer.
a day earlier at the Soviet embassy. The two sides discussed “possible prohibited actions;
expressed view that potential agreement should cover those launch vehicle states and
component parts which go into orbit; and agreed that a potential agreement should cover
objects on surface of moon and other celestial bodies.” The Soviets also “requested list of
specific actions U.S. would favor prohibiting” and expressed the need for “provisions”
that would “cover inadvertent actions and to take into account of changes, advances in
technology.” Buchheim in return suggested a “one-year all-altitude test suspension.”

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
6. Khlestov describing difficulties SovDel had had in under-
standing U.S. side’s text on test suspension, then asked whether the
words of that preliminary text, “. . . interceptor missile for destroying or
damaging . . .” were intended to describe the type of interceptor mis-
siles the sides would agree not to launch, or to describe the purposes of
those launches that were not to be made. Buchheim said the purpose of
the phrase was to be descriptive of the type of interceptor, not of the
purpose of the launch, and the U.S. would consider the question of
whether the English text should be changed.
7. Khlestov then asked what objects were included in the scope of
the words “interceptor missiles.” Buchheim said an interceptor missile
is a missile, device, rocket, or vehicle—or any other appropriate
word—which has as its purpose to strike or to come close enough to a
target object to damage or destroy that object, by whatever mechanism
of damage is built into it. In discussion it was clarified that the term re-
ferred to devices that approach their targets from orbit, by direct as-
cent, or in any other way.
8. Khlestov asked about the meaning of the words “for any other
purposes” in the text suspension text which reads “not to launch, for
text or any other purposes, an interceptor missile. . . .” Buchheim ex-
plained that the objective is to suspend anti-satellite system tests; the
implementation of that objective is to suspend launches for any pur-
poses, such as training, which could provide test information and that
“not to launch” with no reference to testing would be sufficient, but
that the longer phrase used seemed more appropriate. Khlestov con-
cluded that the U.S. text’s meaning was that interceptor missiles should
not be launched at all.
9. Khlestov then asked whether the notion of an “interceptor mis-
sile” included both the device and its launch vehicle, that is whether,
under the text suspension, only launches of the launch vehicle with the
device on it would be banned, or whether launches of the launch ve-
hicle without the device would also be banned. Buchheim explained
that in the U.S. view only launches with the device would be banned.
10. Khlestov asked why the U.S. text concerning prohibited acts,
like the Soviet text, called for obligations “not to destroy, damage or
change the trajectory”, while the U.S. text on test suspension applied
only to interceptor missiles designed to destroy or damage and did not
cover means of changing a trajectory. Why was the scope of the second
text narrower than that of the first? Buchheim said he would answer
the question more fully than it has been asked: there were two aspects
to the differences in scope between the two texts. First element of U.S.
text contains idea of undertaking not to destroy or damage the kinds of
objects described, by any means. The U.S. side did not use the words
“by any means” since it seemed inherent that a pledge not to do any-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
thing meant by any means. The second element of U.S. text (test sus-
pension) does not include all possible means for damage or destruction
of an object. Buchheim said he did not believe it revealed any mysteries
to either side to note that bringing an interceptor missile into the vi-
cinity of an object for damage or destruction is only one means for car-
rying out such an act. He said that from publications available to any-
body one could suggest in the future that other devices may be used,
including devices on ground designed for generating intense radiation,
lasers or otherwise. Buchheim said the possible undertaking not to de-
stroy or damage would include all means—by interceptor missiles,
sources of powerful radiation on the ground or any other means; it is a
complete undertaking in that sense. In U.S. judgment of technology for
systems for damaging or destroying objects in space, interceptor mis-
siles are the practical means in the near term and can properly be dealt
with now. The problem of placing limitations on systems based on
other physical principles, for example powerful lasers based on the
ground, seems to be a problem to be raised in the future whenever the
two sides believe they understand it well enough. Buchheim said the
other aspect of Khlestov’s question concerns why the second element of
the U.S. text did not limit the means for changing the trajectory of an
object in space. The U.S. would specifically not suggest any such limit,
he said, because “changing trajectories” is another way of saying “pro-
vide some means of maneuver.” Both sides in normal, everyday,
peaceful space activity make changes to the trajectories of their own
space objects. It should also be permitted to do this in cooperative pro-
grams, by agreement. The U.S. side sees no merit in placing impedi-
ments in the way of such peaceful activities and sees no point in prohi-
biting testing of means for changing trajectories.
11. Khlestov said that the Soviet side had about one and a half
hours more material to discuss and, when asked its nature, said it dealt
with the prohibited acts text. Buchheim indicated willingness to con-
tinue immediately or later in afternoon. Khlestov suggested continuing
peated his request that the U.S. side bring to the next meeting whatever
text it could clarifying its view of the consultations that would take
place before expiration of the test suspension.
12. Delegation requests answers/guidance on following points.
A. Is it U.S. view that initial agreement is a package of unlimited
duration which includes, as one element, a provision suspending
testing for one year?
B. Is it U.S. view that continuation in force of agreement should be
conditioned in some way on continuation of, or progress in, negotia-
tions on more comprehensive agreement?

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
C. What is U.S. view concerning when 12-month test suspension
should begin? Is it date of signature, date of formal entry into force if
that is different from date of signature, or some other date?
D. What is U.S. view concerning handling of test-suspension expi-
ration? Should it be described as automatically expiring or automat-
ically continuing absent any further mutual decision by the parties?
13. Assessment by Delegation mentioned in State 0176655 follows
septel.
Crowley
5 Not found.
42.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
Subject
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Negotiations
We may be able to get an initial ASAT agreement, or at least agree-
ment in principle, at the Summit with the Soviets.2 This would be well
worth doing, since the agreement we seek is strong on its merits and
would usefully complement the SALT Treaty by enhancing the security
of our verification means.
Getting agreement will require an early positive response by the
Soviets to our proposal for a one-year test ban, as well as a concerted
effort by both sides to settle several secondary issues. We learned from
the recent ASAT round that the Soviets are especially concerned about
two issues which seem to matter far more to them than us: (1) whose
satellites would be protected by the agreement; and (2) whether “hos-
tile” or “illegal” satellites (e.g. direct broadcast satellites) would be pro-
tected. We have not given the Soviets clear, firm U.S. positions on either
International Security Affairs, Negotiations, ASAT. Secret. A note in the upper-right
hand corner by an unknown hand reads “dated APPX. 12 Mar 79.”
2 Carter and Brezhnev were scheduled to meet in Vienna in June.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
issue. I think we can adopt positions which will protect our interests
and yet meet minimal Soviet concerns:
• On whose satellites are protected: We should propose that those
that are launched by either side are covered, provided the side con-
tinues at least to share in their subsequent use. This would alleviate So-
viet concerns that we might claim protection for a nominally U.S. satel-
lite which is really being used by, say, the Chinese. But it would afford
protection for satellites in which we share use with others.
• On “illegal” satellites: We should propose a general reference in
the agreement to the inherent right of self-defense contained in the UN
Charter. This would be neither an admission that we have illegal satel-
lites nor acceptance of a Soviet right to use force against any satellites
except those which present a military threat. In fact, we may have our
own reasons for such a provision, since we would not want the agree-
ment to be seen as depriving us of the right to defend ourselves against
the existing Soviet ASAT system.
I doubt that there would be any serious substantive objections
among concerned agencies about either of these positions. I propose
that we go back to the Soviets promptly with these ideas, a reaffirma-
tion of our insistence on a test suspension, and a proposal that the talks
resume immediately for the purpose of reaching an agreement in time
for the Summit.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
43.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Meeting1
SUBJECT
Anti-satellite Treaty
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher Deputy
David Aaron (Chairman)
Secretary
NASA
Les Gelb Assistant Secretary for
Robert Frosch Administrator
Politico-Military Affairs
David Williamson Assistant for
Defense
Special Projects
Charles Duncan Deputy Secretary
NSC
Gerald Dinneen Principal Deputy
Victor Utgoff
Under Secretary of Defense
Robert Rosenberg
Walter Slocombe Principal Deputy
Reginald Bartholomew
Assistant Secretary for
Charles Stebbins
International Security Affairs
OMB
ACDA
Al Burman
Spurgeon Keeny Deputy Director
OSTP
James Timbie Chief, Strategic
Frank Press Director
Affairs Division
Arthur Morrissey Senior Analyst
Robert Buchheim Head, ASAT
Delegation
CIA
John Hicks Deputy Director for
Joint Chiefs of Staff
National Foreign Assessment
LGen William Smith
Evan Hineman Director, Office of
MGen David Bradburn (Ret.)
Weapons Intelligence
Member, ASAT Delegation
Satellites Shared with Third Countries. During the second round of
ASAT Talks,2 the US took the broad tactical position that all objects in
space, regardless of their ownership or who uses them, should be
protected under an Interim ASAT Agreement. The Soviets, on the
other hand, took the narrow position that other countries should not
gain an advantage from a bilateral agreement—that only space
objects launched and used exclusively by the signatories should be
protected. (S)
The SCC feels that the Soviet position is not wholly without merit:
for example, it probably makes no sense to them to protect space ob-
jects of the PRC, so long as the PRC is not a signatory of the 1967 UN
Room.
2 See Document 41.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Treaty on Outer Space3 and will not be a party to the Interim ASAT
Agreement (at least not initially). But the Soviet position is severely
flawed in that it would exclude from treaty protection those multina-
tional satellites that either the US or Soviet Union share with third
countries. (S)
State, OSD, ACDA, NASA and OSTP agreed that the best and sim-
plest treaty formulation would be one that protects space objects in
which either signatory has an interest, but the agreement should be
worded to leave the door open for—and, in fact, encourage—multi-
lateral participation later on. Specifically, the US should insist that:
(1) All space objects launched by the signatories are automatic-
ally protected unless the launching party specifically waives such
protection. (TS)
(2) A space object that is launched by a third party is protected if a
signatory claims it has an interest in the object. (TS)
(Procedures for accomplishing the above should be drafted by the
Interagency Working Group. Such procedures should place the burden
of challenging the ownership and use of a space object on the signatory
that might want to take action against the object.) (TS)
The JCS asked for additional time to study the two-part formula-
tion; they reported back on March 14, 1979 that they prefer the earlier
US position that all objects in space, regardless of ownership or use,
should be protected under the Interim Agreement. (TS)
“Illegal” Space objects. The Soviets have stated that they do not want
“illegal” space objects that perform so-called “hostile acts” to be pro-
tected by an ASAT agreement (e.g., space objects that broadcast di-
rectly into a state without its permission, modify the environment, vio-
late airspace, etc.) No such “illegal” objects have been identified by
either side in the past, and the US has refused to discuss them with
the Soviets in the abstract. (It is probably unwise to open this subject
at all, if the real Soviet concern—and their ultimate target—is our
intelligence-gathering satellites.) (TS)
The Soviets hinted at some flexibility on this issue during the
second round of ASAT talks. They stated that the spectre of “illegal”
space objects is not a pretext for retention of specialized ASAT systems,
suggesting that the fundamental Soviet concern is to avoid any impres-
sion that elimination of such systems implies that they are willing to
forego the principle of national sovereignty. Thus, all agreed that while
we should continue to decline to discuss “hostile acts” carried out by
“illegal” space objects, we should reaffirm in the preamble of an ASAT

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
agreement each signatory’s right to defend itself as recognized in Ar-
ticle 51 of the UN Charter. (TS)
ASAT Test Suspension. All reaffirmed their commitment to a one-
year, all-altitude, orbital interceptor test suspension as part of an Initial
ASAT Agreement. (S)
Relation to SALT TWO. All agreed that being able to verify compli-
ance with the SALT TWO agreement is not dependent on our reaching
an ASAT agreement with the Soviets. However, it was recognized that
such an agreement could provide additional reassurance, and therefore
might complement the SALT ratification process. The chairman noted
that the majority had reached agreement on the issues, and suggested
that we consider finalizing an Initial ASAT Agreement with the Soviets
prior to the US/Soviet SALT summit, provided we can do so without
compromising our basic objectives. (TS)
44.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 20, 1979
SUBJECT
ASAT (U)
As you may recall, in the second round of ASAT talks in Bern2 the
Soviets argued that our bilateral agreement should not provide protec-
countries. (S)
The SCC has been studying these issues since the talks adjourned,
and met March 12 to discuss possible ways to resolve them (Summary
of Conclusions at Tab A).3 The SCC agreed to approach the first issue
by offering to recognize in the Treaty both parties’ inherent right of self
defense as stated in the U.N. Charter. At the same time we do this we
would note the statements made by the Soviets in both rounds of ASAT
talks that their concerns with “illegal” satellites are not a pretext for re-
taining ASAT capabilities. This should resolve the issue if the Soviets’
2 See Document 41.
3 See Document 43.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
purpose is to avoid any implication that by banning the use of ASATs,
they are renouncing all rights to defend themselves against a type of
hostile activity. (S)
All except JCS agreed to a DOD solution to the second issue—third
country coverage. We would insist that the treaty cover any space ob-
ject we launch (unless we specifically waive protection) or claim we
have an interest in. We would also leave the door open for multilateral
participation in the treaty. (S)
JCS prefers the position taken by the Delegation in Bern—that all
space objects independent of ownership be covered in any initial agree-
ment. They are concerned that failure to cover 3rd party satellites
would provide a basis for the Soviets to retain an ASAT capability. (S)
In our view, ultimate Soviet willingness to limit their ASAT capa-
bilities will not be significantly influenced by whether or not an initial
ASAT agreement limiting their use covers third countries. While it
would be nice to have all space objects covered in the initial agreement
as the JCS prefer, the more limited DOD proposal can lead to a useful
initial agreement, leaves us no worse off with respect to our ultimate
goal of limiting ASAT capabilities than we are today, and would pro-
vide an incentive for multilateral participation later on—a positive
feature. (S)
We need your decision on the above issue; as soon as we have it we
would like to present a de´marche to the Soviets indicating how we
would approach the problems discussed above, and suggesting that we
get the Delegations together to work out an initial agreement in time
for the Summit. (TS)
Moving along fast enough to achieve this may not be possible, of
course—and the services are unhappy at our efforts to restart the nego-
tiations so soon. In our view, however, the issues are second order,
straightforward—and our proposed solutions would not compromise
our objectives. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the Summary of Conclusions at Tab A. (U)4
That we adopt the DOD proposal for resolving the third country
coverage issue. (U)5
That we proceed with a de´marche to the Soviets outlining our
ideas, and suggesting that the Delegations reconvene to see if we can
work out an initial ASAT agreement in time for the Summit. (TS)6
4 Carter checked the “Approve” line.
5 Carter initially checked the “Approve” line, then crossed it out and wrote “Prefer
JCS position” in the right-hand margin.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” line and wrote “If the SU continues to develop
ASAT in order to destroy a rudimentary PRC satellite, what have we gained?” at the end
of the memorandum.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
45.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and Secretary
of Defense Brown to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Negotiations
You decided that all space objects, regardless of nationality, should
be protected under the interim ASAT agreement. However, we ask that
you reconsider and decide instead that the agreement should cover the
satellites of the two sides, including those in which either side shares an
interest with third parties. This will fully protect our security and for-
eign policy interests.
As nearly as we can tell, the Soviets will not agree to an ASAT
treaty that protects all (which they read as “PRC”) satellites. Especially
if we are to get a useful, if limited ASAT agreement in time to help
SALT ratification (but probably in any event), there will have to be
some compromise on the ownership question.
We know you may be concerned that the Soviets would use this
position in the future as an excuse for retaining ASAT capabilities.
However, given the multi-functional nature of most ASAT components
and the attendant verification problems, the difficulty involved in elim-
inating all ASAT capabilities does not derive solely (or, even, mainly)
from the nature of an interim agreement. To the extent the nature of the
interim agreement is a problem, we can deal with that by making clear
that in our view less-than-comprehensive coverage in an interim agree-
ment is neither a precedent nor a legitimate excuse for retaining ASAT
systems.
If you’re concerned about the foreign policy drawbacks of ex-
cluding satellites operated exclusively by third countries, we can show
those countries that an early interim agreement can benefit them as
well: (1) the test suspension will benefit them directly by impeding So-
viet ASAT development; (2) We can move from an interim agreement
to negotiations aimed at limiting ASAT systems directly; and (3) We
can invite others to join the process in the future. We should also seek
ASAT. Top Secret. On April 2, Brzezinski informed the Secretaries that “the President has
decided that the agreement need only cover satellites the two sides own or share an in-
terest in with third countries. At the same time, the President notes that his concern with
this approach remains. He stated ‘The Soviets can develop a very advanced AS (anti-
satellite) capability ostensibly just to destroy PRC satellites. What have we gained?’”
(Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 102, SCC 148, ASAT,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
provisions permitting additional countries to adhere to the agreement,
thereby protecting their satellites (and agreeing not to attack those of
other parties).
Your main immediate aims in the ASAT negotiations have been to
take a first step toward a comprehensive agreement and to stop the So-
viet testing program for one year. The change we suggest combined
with the pressure on Soviet leaders at the upcoming Summit will
present us with a unique opportunity to accomplish these aims, and
will help us with SALT ratification.
46.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget
(McIntyre), the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Seignious), the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (Brown), the Director of Central Intelligence
(Turner), the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (Froesch), and the Director of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy (Press)1
Washington, April 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Instructions to the US Delegation to the 3rd Round of ASAT Talks with the
Soviets Commencing April 23, 1979, in Vienna (U)
The current objective of the ASAT talks with the Soviets is to nego-
tiate a two-part initial ASAT agreement consisting of an initial treaty
banning damage, destruction, and unauthorized displacement (change
of trajectory) of each other’s space objects plus a one-year suspension of
ASAT interceptor missile testing.2 Except as modified below, the in-
structions for the first two rounds of ASAT talks remain in force. (S)
NSC–45. Top Secret. The Americans and Soviets actually began the third round of talks
2 On April 17, the Department of State instructed the Mission to NATO to inform
NATO members that so far, despite the Soviet Union’s “limited anti-satellite capability,”
the United States had decided to maintain only a “vigorous research and development
program in this field” rather than deploy an anti-satellite system. However, “if we do not

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
1. The US would prefer that all space objects be covered by the ini-
tial ASAT Treaty. However, the US can accept a formulation which
covers space objects in which either Party has an interest. Specifically,
the US can accept a limited approach which covers a) all space objects
launched by a Party, except for those in which the Party has no interest
and so designates to the other side, and b) space objects launched by a
third country but in which a Party has an interest and so designates to
the other side. (TS)
2. If the US comes to accept limited coverage in the initial ASAT
Treaty, the Delegation should attempt to get the Soviets to state for the
record that limited coverage is not a pretext for retaining ASAT capa-
bilities and is without prejudice to future negotiations aimed at limiting
or eliminating ASAT capabilities. Delegation should also ensure that
any notification procedures required as a result of limited coverage re-
quire a minimum of information to be provided when interest in a
space object launched by a third country is claimed, and place the
burden of proof on the side challenging the legitimacy of any such
claims. (TS)
3. The Delegation should oppose inclusion in the initial ASAT
Treaty of an exception for space objects that are “illegal” or perform
“hostile acts.” In addition, the Delegation should minimize the degree
to which the negotiating record suggests that the US recognizes the
possible existence of such space objects. The Delegation is authorized,
however, to state that in the US view nothing in the agreement is in-
tended to question a Party’s right of self-defense as set forth in Article
51 of the UN Charter, and that the US is prepared to consider language
to this effect in the preamble of the ASAT Treaty. (TS)
4. The Delegation should avoid formulations that would compli-
cate a future option to open the provisions of any final treaty reached
by the two sides to accession by third countries. (C)
5. With respect to accidental damage, destruction or displacement
of space objects, the Delegation should insure that the initial agreement
does not require and the negotiating record does not imply a require-
realize a satisfactory comprehensive agreement that removes the current asymmetry in
ASAT capabilities,” the Department warned that the United States would “remove this
asymmetry by means of its own ASAT programs.” (Telegram 96873 to USNATO, April
plied that the “only immediate comment” came from the British Permanent Representa-
tive, who “called the resumption of negotiations ‘good news’. He said he had been im-
pressed by the destabilizing impact” of the Soviet ASAT system and worried that the
Soviets “might be able to destroy US capability to detect Soviet launches in the period just
prior to general hostilities.” (Telegram 2971 from USNATO, April 18; National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ment for reporting near misses in space, either before or after the
David Aaron
Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
47.
Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of
State1
4291. US ASAT Three 010. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle
as Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) Comments of SovDel at
April 30, 1979 Reception.
1. (Secret—Entire text).
dence, Soviet Delegation members made following comments to
members of US Delegation.
3. On test suspension and comprehensive agreement:
A. Pisarev told Buchheim that Soviet side would, during this
round, state its views on a test suspension and on a comprehensive
agreement.
B. Naumov asked Buchheim how Soviet side should interpret US
text on test suspension,2 in particular what would be the regime be-
tween the date of signature and the date of exchange of instruments of
ratification. Buchheim said that it would be understood that, in ac-
cordance with customary international law, during this period neither
side would do anything inconsistent with the purposes or provisions of
the treaty. Naumov said he understood.
C. Terekhov asked Williams also about the interpretation of the
April 26 US text on test suspension. Terekhov said that there was a split
of interpretation in the Soviet Delegation, but the majority view, which
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow.
2 On April 26, the U.S. Delegation proposed that both sides agree to refrain from
testing an anti-satellite “interceptor missile for destroying or damaging objects which
have been placed in orbit around the earth or on any other trajectories into outer space”

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
he shared, was that the test suspension went into effect on the same
date as the treaty as a whole, that is, upon exchange of instruments of
ratification, and expired on a date certain, July 1, 1980. Under this inter-
pretation, the test suspension might last only one or two months, he
said. Williams confirmed this interpretation of the text standing alone
and asked Terekhov what the minority interpretation of the test sus-
pension period was. Terekhov was unable to explain satisfactorily.
4. On “hostile acts” exclusion: Mayorskiy told Bradburn that the
Soviet side feels strongly that a “hostile acts” exclusion is needed be-
cause the Soviet side is concerned with the activities carried out by
states against each other by use of space objects, and not just with the
objects as such. He said it is the actions, not the objects, which need to
be considered in an agreement.
5. Mayorskiy told Bond that if Article 51 of UN Charter were con-
sidered to be exclusive rationale for action against satellites, then the
proposed ASAT agreement was not needed. He said that various cir-
cumstances not involving the right of self defense could be foreseen
where it might be necessary to act against a satellite, such as “when a
satellite was consuming all your oxygen” or when a satellite was flying
“40 KMs above your territory”. Under those circumstances, resort to
peaceful settlement of disputes might well be too late. If phrase “hostile
acts” not acceptable, some other formulation could do, such as an ex-
ception for “gross violation of state sovereignty”, but that it was abso-
lutely necessary to obtain exception for those circumstances not in-
volving an armed attack when action against satellites might be called
for. Mayorskiy said that Soviet position on action against DBS satellites
had been misconstrued, the Soviets had not said that they would de-
stroy unauthorized DBS satellites. He could not imagine this hap-
pening, although it might occur in some unforeseen scenario. But the
Soviet Union did maintain its freedom to take other actions against
DBS satellites, such as blocking its transmissions or moving it to an-
other position without destroying it. Mayorskiy rejected analogies be-
tween Law of the Sea and Law of Outer Space, saying that the two were
different.
6. On scope of coverage: Khlestov told Bradburn that the Soviets
do not agree with the idea of protecting all space objects regardless of
ownership, because the Soviets do not want the protection to be appli-
cable to Chinese space objects.
7. On shuttle: Pisarev spoke with Darbyshire at length about the
shuttle, repeating most of what he had said on subject at SovDel recep-
tion in Bern.3 He additionally stated that he knew of many planned co-
operative space activities involving shuttle but that shuttle never-
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
theless was a very powerful and a dangerous system. It could be used
to do many things, he said, besides placing a satellite in orbit or moving
a satellite from one orbit to another. The Soviet side had to take this into
account, and the US side in his view, should understand the reasons for
the Soviet side’s concern. He sidestepped a question about what con-
nection there might be between the Soviet side’s desired “hostile acts”
exceptions and its concerns about shuttle. He stated only that the Soviet
side, in formulating its positions, had given much thought to shuttle
from the beginning and would continue to do so.
8. On Soviet expectations for current session: in numerous conver-
sations (e.g., Mayorskiy/Melanson, Khamanev/Jones, Terekhov/Dar-
byshire) Soviets made same set of points on this subject. They said So-
viet side had expected third session would not be held until summer.
They had come to Vienna at this early date at US side’s suggestion and
expected to see some movement in US positions. Instead, the US re-
peated the positions it had offered in Bern, and so far only the Soviet
side had presented any new ideas in Vienna. Unless the US side alters
its views both on third-country benefits and on an exclusion from cov-
erage for satellites committing “hostile acts,” they said, the sides will
not be able to reach an agreement.
9. Miscellaneous comments:
A. Globenko indicated disbelief when told by Jones that NASA
does not build weapons systems.
B. Pisarev told Bradburn that Soviet Delegation always brings only
one secretary because Khlestov wants it that way. The one secretary is
always from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and is picked by Khlestov.
Pisarev, who is from Ministry of Defense, seemed to be dissatisfied
with this arrangement.
fourth plenary meeting has been rescheduled for May 3 at US Embassy,
rather than May 2 as previously reported. (ASAT Three 009, Vienna
Wolf
ASAT talks. Buchheim presented a prepared statement explaining the “US side’s views
on coverage of the prohibited acts element and suggestion that the right of self-defense
could be recognized by reference to the language of Article 51 of the UN charter.”
Khlestov presented a revised version of the Soviet view of the definition of space objects
and prohibited acts, which covered “space objects used jointly by a party and other coun-
tries for peaceful purposes. It also would prohibit interference with operation of equip-
ment, although intended meaning of interference not yet clear.” (National Archives, RG

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
48.
Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to Telegram the
Department of State1
4406. US ASAT Three 014. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle
as Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) Restricted Meeting, May 4,
1979—Part Two.
1. (Secret—Entire text.)
parts.
3. Summary: Restricted meeting was held at Soviet Embassy at
burn, Darbyshire and Smith (interpreter); Soviet side: Khlestov, Mayor-
skiy, Pisarev, Terekhov (interpreter). Buchheim presented prepared
statement (see ASAT Three 013) on view of U.S. side on possible differ-
ences of approach between U.S. and Soviet sides with respect to what
we are trying to deal with in a prohibited-acts element. U.S. side seeks
prohibition of certain acts against space objects; Soviet side appears to
be trying to deal also with acts against missions in which space objects
are used. U.S. side suggested that unknown future contingencies can be
dealt with through provisions for consultation, amendment and with-
drawal, and argued against an exception for cases of “hostile acts”. So-
viet side did not agree. Soviet side asserted need to be permitted by the
terms of the agreement to take immediate steps, including the acts oth-
erwise prohibited in the agreement, to defend itself in case of a “hostile
act” against it. End summary.
4. Following Buchheim’s prepared statement, Khlestov said he un-
derstood that the U.S. side appeared to be recognizing the viewpoint of
the Soviet side, that a state whose legitimate interest had been violated
retained the right to defend itself. But, he said, he had the impression
that the U.S. was opposed to including an exception for “hostile acts” in
a prohibited-acts element. He said the U.S. had suggested a right of
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow.
a prepared statement to the Soviet Delegation that focused around the question that was
“impeding general agreement between us.” The two sides needed to decide whether they
were “seeking solely to set forth undertakings not to carry out certain acts against space
objects, or are we also trying also to deal with missions?” The United States believed that
the answer was the former and that “in these discussions we are not engaged in the latter
task, and that we should not try to deal with that task.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D790204–0313)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
withdrawal as a substitute for a “hostile acts” exception. He asked if
there was not a contradiction in the U.S. view, because if the U.S. recog-
nized the right of a state to take actions against space objects carrying
out pernicious acts, why shouldn’t that right be specified in the
agreement?
5. Buchheim said it could be viewed as a matter of scope. In the
U.S. view, there should be a complete ban on damaging, destroying, or
changing the trajectories of space objects, that is, acts against the objects
themselves. There are many other ways to render ineffective or ineffi-
cient or harmless an attempt to carry out its mission using a space ob-
ject. In the U.S. view, Buchheim said, our agreement should not address
any such measures because they are beyond its scope. As for rights
now held by the two countries, nothing would be changed except that
the two sides would have recorded an agreement not to damage, de-
stroy, or change the trajectory of a space object. The U.S. side’s specific
concern with the Soviet side’s third text3 (on hostile acts) is that it
would give, in advance, on an unspecified basis, legitimacy to dam-
aging, destroying, or changing the trajectory of a space object as appro-
priate immediate remedies if there ever were a space object which car-
ried out pernicious actions, as construed by the side undertaking the
prohibited acts.
6. Buchheim said it was the U.S. side’s view on this matter that
there is now, and for the foreseeable future will be, no reason to believe
that violent remedies are necessary or appropriate and, therefore, they
should not be provided for in the agreement. On the other hand, the
U.S. side is completely willing to include provisions in the agreement
which would provide a basis for dealing thoughtfully with future cir-
cumstances. Future circumstances are unpredictable; the Soviet side
has said that perhaps these problems may never occur. Contingency
measures should begin with consultations to determine whether one
side or the other side or both sides wanted to do something about some
new circumstance. A further measure could be to amend the agree-
ment, if appropriate, taking into account specific circumstances. These
are steps the sides could take together. They are normal measures pro-
vided for in most agreements. To take the case to the extreme, if one
side or the other decided it could no longer abide by the agreement, it
could withdraw from it under conditions of a conventional nature.
7. Khlestov said there was a difference here in characterizing the
actions; the Soviet side had one term, and the U.S. had another. In the
event of such action, a state had the right to protect itself from such ac-
tions of space objects. Khlestov said he had the impression that the

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
viewpoints of the sides coincided here. Buchheim stated that in general
this was correct, but he would state it somewhat differently. He would
say that, with regard to this agreement, the situation should be that
after signing the agreement nothing would have changed regarding the
rights now held by both sides except that they had recorded obligations
not to carry out certain specified acts against space objects. This should
be the full scope of this aspect of the agreement.
8. Khlestov said the sides seem to have a common understanding
that even with the agreement under negotiation the right was recog-
nized for a party to the agreement to protect itself against space objects
used for hostile or pernicious actions. This was the first point. The U.S.
view was that a state could use any measures for protection against
such acts except those listed in an agreement, namely, damaging, de-
stroying or changing the trajectory of space objects. Any other meas-
ures could be used. Perhaps he was inexperienced in this, but he won-
dered if Buchheim could give any examples of other measures besides
those prohibited in the agreement. Buchheim responded that Khlestov
could get a better answer to this question from his own experts.
Khlestov said he was not trying to make Buchheim say anything. He
said that there were other methods and if Buchheim did not wish to
talk about them Khlestov would ask his own specialists. Buchheim re-
plied that that would be better. He could answer only in general terms.
Since the Soviet side had thought so much on these matters, and partic-
ularly about what you call “hostile acts”, surely it had thought about
measures that might be taken against such missions. He could not be-
lieve that, with its scientific, technological and military resources, the
Soviet Union could not think of any measures other than blowing up a
space object. Soviet specialists surely knew of other examples. Khlestov
said that the U.S. viewpoint is that a state should undertake other
measures for protection against pernicious acts. The Soviet viewpoint
is that—in those instances—a state must have the right to take actions
which are prohibited in the agreement, that is damaging, destroying or
changing the trajectory of a space object. This is the difference between
the sides.
9. Khlestov said the Soviet side wanted to include in the agreement
an exhaustive list of actions against space objects which would be pro-
hibited, because such actions were effective when used against space
objects. He meant not only damaging or destroying a space object, but
all acts should be prohibited which would affect the space object and
would make it inoperative as a result of the acts. The Soviet side had in-
troduced the act of displacing a space object from orbit. The two sides
had discussed the meaning of “not to destroy” for a long time. The So-
viet side understood that a wide spectrum of instances were being
talked about, not destroying on board equipment or not interfering

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with the functioning of that equipment. In other words, the purpose of
our work is to ban any and all actions against space objects which
would impede their normal functioning. If they had left any out, they
would just have to add them. The purpose of the main provision was to
give an exhaustive list of all forms of action which could be taken
against a space object which would impede its normal functioning.
10. With such a comprehensive approach, Khlestov said, a state
could not protect itself from pernicious actions carried out using space
objects. If it took steps to interfere with pernicious actions, it would vio-
late the provisions of the agreement. The U.S. idea to include provi-
sions for making an addition to the agreement several years in the fu-
ture was not very consistent. It would not be good to wait for such an
action to occur. It was better not to have such an action. Including a
provision now was an additional guarantee that cases of a space object
being used for pernicious actions would not happen. Since there would
be full clarity in the text on space objects used for pernicious actions, no
one would want to carry out such actions.
11. Khlestov said the Soviet side proceeded from the premise that
there would not be cases when a space object would be used deliber-
ately for pernicious actions. They referred to a hypothetical case. With-
out their “hostile acts” provision, in order to carry out “prohibited” acts
a side would have to quickly withdraw from the agreement. In situa-
tions relating to space objects, the time factor would be very important.
Withdrawal from an agreement would require certain time-consuming
procedures. A question of countering a space object used to carry out
pernicious actions might take minutes or hours but no more. A ques-
tion of withdrawing from the agreement would take weeks or months.
Therefore, this is not a solution to the problem.
12. Buchheim said that the Soviet side’s concern over timing and
taking rapid measures raised questions on the U.S. side. He wondered
if the Soviet side brought this up because it foresaw some activity by
the U.S. (or for that matter the USSR) representing real and practical
problems. The U.S. side did not. He thought that an obligation not to
damage, destroy, or change the trajectories of each other’s space objects
included the presumption that both sides would be careful in what
they did with their space objects. As Khlestov had said yesterday, each
side knew how to use space objects properly. He thought that in the
spirit of the common purpose that this agreement could serve, early in-
dications of a move toward missions which one side would find trou-
blesome should lead to consultations with the other side, and not to
abrupt exercising of a provision giving a right to begin destroying,
damaging or changing the trajectories of a space object.
13. Buchheim said the U.S. side was only acknowledging a hypo-
thetical possibility, making an agreement easy to implement if unfore-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
seen circumstances should arise; but the Soviet viewpoint, involving an
explicit exemption and describing urgency in terms of minutes of time,
leads the U.S. side to wonder if the Soviet side has some specific
problem in mind, as to the present or the near future.
14. Khlestov said that both sides are talking of hypothetical possi-
bilities which might suddenly happen or might never happen. In the
hypothetical situation he was referring to, the Soviet side proceeded
from a consideration of what rights a state should have if the situation
were to happen. He was speaking only of this, of a hypothetical situa-
tion which might occur and the rights a state must have to deal with it.
15. Buchheim replied that this was encouraging. He had spoken of
consultations in the event of signs of the appearance of a real problem.
If the Soviet side sees a real problem, the time to consult is now. How-
ever, if the Soviet side is speaking only of hypothetical possibilities, this
is pleasant to know.
16. Bradburn said that the ideas the U.S. side had brought today
represented an attempt by the U.S. Delegation to find common ground
regarding the concerns about hostile acts and provisions for taking into
account these actions. The U.S. side had difficulty with the Soviet side’s
formulations because their acceptance in the agreement seemed to pro-
vide for the exercise of whatever defensive measures a side wished to
take and this seemed to be exactly what a side could do if there were no
agreement. One could say that the sides did not accept any limitations
in entering into this agreement. On the other hand, if the agreement
were made without any exceptions and if the provisions on hostile acts
were taken care of by consultations and maybe even withdrawal from
the agreement, then the sides would be accepting constraints. These
limitations might be seen as an advantage by the sides because the obli-
gations to consult would insure that if a hostile act occurred, or if a side
believed it had and raised a question, the actions taken would permit
a solution of the problem and this would be seen as preferable by
the sides as compared with the alternative of carrying out prohibited
actions.
17. Bradburn said the U.S. side thought it would be a disadvantage
in an agreement which would seem to allow the carrying out of pro-
hibited actions while the agreement was in force under cirumstances
when the sides perhaps did not understand or did not agree on the seri-
ousness of the problem. He thought the obligation to consult would
serve the interests of the two sides better than would an exemption
which would permit the carrying out of prohibited acts because this ex-
ception would lead to the possibility of taking violent measures and
would increase the seriousness of the situation. However, the obliga-
tion to consult and even to withdraw before carrying out prohibited
acts would lead to a possibility to defuse this situation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
18. Khlestov stated that he had listened with interest to Bradburn’s
ideas. He said the mechanism of consultations between sides partici-
pating in a treaty is a normal process. Even if the sides do not specify in
the treaty that they will consult, it is nevertheless presumed. Khlestov
did not know of any case in normal diplomatic relations in which a side
wished to consult about a problem and the other side said it did not
want to talk. Usually they started an exchange of opinions on the ques-
tion. What Bradburn had just said about the consultations sounded log-
ical but it did not resolve the problem at hand, namely, how to deal
with space objects used for pernicious acts. He thanked Bradburn for
his attempt to find a mutually acceptable solution to the problem, but
did not regard this way as an answer.
19. Buchheim said he wished to try to understand the essence of
the Soviet side’s viewpoint. The Soviet side’s main considerations
seemed to boil down to two. The first is the view that there is a hypo-
thetical possibility that space objects could be used for missions of such
character that they must be countered in order to preserve national in-
terests, and that no other measures that might be taken against such
missions were adequate except for damage, destruction, or changing
the trajectory of the object being used. The second consideration is that
such a hypothetical possibility could materialize into a reality so sud-
denly that it would require immediate action. Therefore, consultations
and accommodation between the sides were not feasible approaches. Is
this the essence of the Soviet side’s point of view?
20. Khlestov said that he would emphasize different things so that
Buchheim could understand his viewpoint better. First of all, an agree-
ment was being concluded and the sides would undertake obligations
not to damage, destroy or change the trajectories of space objects. In
other words, all the most effective means of countering the space object
that had been invented were included in this list. The U.S. and Soviet
sides together had listed all the effective ways of countering space ob-
jects. The Soviet side proceeded from the premise that always and in
every case the sides were committed to carry out their obligations; that
is, not to commit prohibited acts. A state did not have the right to act
otherwise. It was obligated always and in every case to observe the
“prohibited-acts” element of the agreement. He wished to direct Buch-
heim’s attention to the second side of the problem, a hypothetical case
which could arise in which a space object carried out a pernicious act. A
state must have the right to protect itself against these acts. This was the
common approach of both sides. Perhaps in practice this would never
happen, and the Soviet side did not want it to happen. However, the
sides were concluding an agreement of unlimited duration and they
did not know what might happen in practice.
21. Khlestov said that, according to the agreement’s present shape,
it was possible that suddenly this hypothetical situation could occur for

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
reasons the sides could not now see, and, if there were no exception
provisions, neither side would have the right to take the most effective
measures to counter missions of the space object. If other, permitted,
measures were not effective in protecting against the space object, and
if there were no exemption provision in the agreement, the sides could
not do anything that was on the list of prohibited acts. Therefore, the
Soviet side believed that, if a hypothetical situation were practically re-
alized, in case of necessity a state could carry out prohibited acts
against a space object and this should be so specified in the agreement.
Of course, consultations could take place but, because of the time
factor, consultations were not enough. Logically, this brought them to
the last stage of events. Khlestov said he had in greater detail para-
phrased what Buchheim had said about the Soviet viewpoint.
22. Buchheim stated that the U.S. side did not deny that it could
not predict the future and that hypothetical situations could not be
ruled out. The two sides acknowledge that they are speaking of hypo-
thetical unknown possibilities of the future. The idea that such a hypo-
thetical situation might suddenly turn into a monster which could
devour the whole city of Cleveland with one bite in a few seconds was
difficult for him to take seriously. He thought that if the Soviet Union
undertook to build such a monster, the U.S. would know about it be-
forehand because this could not be done in one day. The U.S. would
have many ideas to discuss with the Soviet side in order to head off
such a realization. It seems at present that the views of the Soviet side
on the need for quick action as compared to the more deliberate process
of diplomacy was a specific difference to be considered further. As
General Bradburn had stated, the U.S. side is uneasy with the idea that
the agreement might on the one hand specify that certain acts would
not be carried out, but, on the other hand specify that a side could carry
out any of these acts quickly if something angered it.
23. Buchheim said that the U.S. side, correctly or not, proceeded
from the premise that the Soviet side would never destroy a U.S. space
object unless it had serious reasons to do so. This is certainly true of the
U.S. side also. The U.S. side looked forward to an agreement which
would enhance stability of relations between our two countries. It is the
view of the U.S. that the undertaking should be not to carry out the ac-
tions specified—period. If circumstances change in the future, and such
an undertaking seems to be of doubtful desirability, the sides should
take steps to amend the agreement or conclude a new agreement or
agreements to remove the troublesome circumstances or take other ap-
propriate measures. He thought the two sides had made important
progress today toward bringing their viewpoints closer together and
he hoped that they would continue to do so.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
24. Buchheim said that he remembered that the question of “hos-
tile acts” had first arisen in Helsinki.4 As he recalled, at that time the
U.S. side asked the Soviet side if it had brought up this matter out of
concern about what the U.S. might do with space objects, or was it con-
cerned about third countries, or was this a general concern. The Soviet
side had replied in Helsinki that it was not concerned with U.S. actions
but with what somebody else might do. However, from the discussions
in Bern, including Khlestov’s answer to a specific question, the U.S.
side now understood that the Soviet side’s third text reflects concern
over what the U.S. might do. Is there merit in our reviewing this ques-
tion again?
25. Khlestov said that, frankly, the word “concerned” over what
the U.S. or a third country might do did not exactly convey the right
meaning intended by the Soviet side. They had spoken of a hypothet-
ical case. They realize that a hypothetical case could come from either
side or from elsewhere.
26. Khlestov said that the Soviet side would, as promised, provide
answers to the questions raised by the U.S. side at the meeting on 3 May
1979.5 Since they had been raised at a plenary meeting it was logical to
answer them at a plenary meeting.
on May 8, 1979.
Wolf
4 See Document 33.
notes only that Buchheim “read list of questions” but does not provide the actual ques-
49.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
125966. Subject: (S) De´marche to Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin on
Anti-Satellite Negotiations (ASAT).
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Gary Matthews (EUR/SOV); cleared by Joseph
Hulings (S/S–O); and approved by Shulman. Sent for information Immediate to the
White House.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
1. (S—Entire text)
2. During meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin afternoon of May
17, Secretary made following points regarding ASAT negotiations.
3. Begin text of talking points:
—The current round of talks on anti-satellite matters in Vienna is
making progress. If we can achieve agreement by the time of the
summit, we will have advanced the important cause of arms control in
this dangerous area. It would also be a concrete, positive accomplish-
ment in US-Soviet relations.
—We are pleased that the two Delegations in Vienna have begun
work on a joint draft text.2 This should help produce progress in the
weeks ahead.
—There has been a good exchange between the two sides:
We welcome your response to our proposal for a test suspension.
We think you will be encouraged by our Delegations’s reply.
There also has been progress on the question about which space
objects would be covered by an agreement. The two sides seem to be
getting closer to an understanding on this.
—The most difficult issue remaining may well be what you call
“hostile acts.”
As the US understands it, the Soviet side is suggesting a provision
which would permit either party to damage, destroy, or change the tra-
jectory of space objects without violating the agreement simply by as-
serting that it was the target of what you call a “hostile act.”
This would make the agreement hollow. It would imply that either
side can decide whether or not to respect the basic understanding.
The US side cannot accept any provision which casts doubt on the
security of space objects in which it has an interest, or which provides a
pretext for taking actions otherwise prohibited.
At the same time, the US is prepared to:
—Reaffirm the inherent right of self-defense as set forth in the UN
Charter.
—Work out arrangements for prompt consultations, for amend-
ments to deal with unforeseen circumstances, and for withdrawal if su-
preme national interests require it.
These measures should give the Soviet side confidence that the
agreement can accommodate unforeseen developments.
End text.
2 On May 16, the United States and Soviet Union exchanged draft texts in their
eighth plenary meeting of the third round of the ASAT talks. (Telegram 4845 from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4. Dobrynin responded by asking what kind of consultations the
US had in mind. The Secretary replied that the Delegations at the
present ASAT session in Vienna should set up procedures. Dobrynin
then asked what the problem was with the Soviet formulation on hos-
tile acts. The Secretary noted plainly that the formulation would totally
undermine the agreement. Dobrynin, asking personally and noting
that he was expressing no preference, asked whether the agreement
would be a treaty or an executive agreement. The Secretary replied that
this decision could be deferred for the the time being.
Vance
50.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Seignious) to President Carter1
Washington, May 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Negotiations
Considerable progress has been made in the current round of ne-
gotiations on limitations on ASAT systems. An agreement, however,
will require resolution of several differences between the U.S. and So-
viet approaches.
The U.S. has proposed an initial agreement consisting of a Treaty
prohibiting damaging, destroying, or changing the trajectories of satel-
lites, and a one-year suspension of ASAT interceptor testing. We would
pursue a more comprehensive agreement in follow-on negotiations.
The Soviets would go beyond our proposal to prohibit additional
actions against satellites, in particular the use of electronic counter-
measures. The U.S. wants to avoid this subject. Another troublesome
issue, whether satellites used by the U.S. together with third countries
are to be protected by the Treaty, is now close to resolution by the Dele-
gations in Vienna.
A potentially serious problem is a Soviet proposal to exclude from
coverage satellites which engage in “hostile” or “illegal” acts. Soviet ex-
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
amples of “hostile” satellites have been rather far-fetched (e.g., satel-
lites which harm the environment, or satellites which swoop down into
national airspace). Such an exemption could legitimize the retention
and use of ASAT systems, thus undercutting the basic objective of the
agreement. We are attempting to persuade the Soviets that provisions
for consultation and withdrawal as well as the inherent right of self-
defense provided for in the UN charter are adequate to deal with such a
contingency should it arise. Cy has made these points to Dobrynin.2
The Soviets broke their long silence on a test suspension by pro-
posing last week to suspend until January 1, 1981 testing in space not
only of ASAT interceptors (our proposal), but of any means of dam-
aging, destroying, or changing the trajectory of satellites.3 Restrictions
on changing trajectories could impair the operations of the space
shuttle, and have been rejected. The other principle difference concerns
whether or not to suspend testing of ASAT systems other than inter-
ceptors, primarily ground-based lasers. For verification reasons, the
U.S. proposed to suspend only interceptor tests since monitoring covert
tests of Soviet lasers against satellites would require U.S. intelligence
collection systems not yet in being or programmed.
Since we are aware of no U.S. plans to test a laser against a satellite
before 1981, it is tempting to consider the broader approach the Soviets
have proposed. However, given the importance of verification of
Treaty obligations, we recommend that the U.S. hold to the position to
suspend only ASAT interceptor tests. If the Soviets insist on the
broader approach, we recommend that the U.S. offer to state that we do
not plan any tests of other forms of ASAT systems before 1981, and will
notify the Soviet Union of any change in these plans. The Soviets would
have to make the same statement. This would not be an obligation but a
statement of fact. Such an exchange of statements of plans could en-
courage the Soviets to accept the U.S. approach. It could also avoid a
situation in which the Soviets circumvent the interceptor test suspen-
sion by testing a ground-based laser against a satellite, which the So-
viets may be in a position to do by 1981.
Cyrus R. Vance
George M. Seignious II
2 See Document 49.
3 See Document 48.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
51.
Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of
State1
4954. US ASAT Three 039. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle
as Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) General Summary of Status.
1. (Secret—Entire text.)
2. This round has now run for four weeks, and four main questions
are outstanding:
(A) Formulation of “prohibited acts” Article (II) and related defini-
tional Article (I).
(B) Test-suspension provisions.
(C) Soviet “hostile acts” exemption.
(D) Prospects for an eventual comprehensive agreement.
3. Question (A) is moving toward resolution, and will be ad-
dressed further in meeting May 22, 1979.
4. Delegation received from Washington instructions (State
text of the Soviet side,3 except the element on scope. Pending receipt of
instructions on the scope element, we will not express any views to the
Soviet side concerning their test suspension text in order to not show
the Soviets where to look for our point of uncertainty.
5. Recommendation: We recommend that Delegation be author-
ized to accept scope of test suspension proposed by Soviet side, incor-
porating in protocol text language in accordance with para 3 of State
1241034 adding language to the protocol text calling for review prior to
January 1, 1981, and putting the Soviets on notice with a formal state-
cret; Exdis; Niact Immediate. Sent for information Niact Immediate to the National Secu-
rity Council, the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence
Agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow.
heim to “advise the Soviets that the present US view is that the test suspension should be
recorded in a protocol to the treaty.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790220–0124)
3 Not found.
4 The Department instructed Buchheim to say that “changing the trajectory of one’s
own satellites by both internal and external means is a normal part of the space programs
of both sides, and that testing systems in such a manner should not be prohibited.” The
Department also said that “the use of the space shuttle to launch, to maintain, and to ret-
rieve US and other satellites in which US has an interest must not be circumscribed in any
Central Foreign Policy File, D790220–0124)

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
ment that experience in implementing the protocol including experi-
ence relevant to verification will be taken into account in that review.
6. Further delay in reply to Soviet test-suspension suggestion is
bound to arouse suspicions on Soviet side, and lead them into trou-
blesome speculations. Further delay could well shatter this entire
enterprise.
7. Looking a little farther ahead, we may shortly find ourselves up
against a substantial roadblock in the form of the Soviet side’s insis-
tence on a “hostile acts” exclusion to the prohibited-acts element. The
Soviet side now says this is a matter of “position” with them, and they
have been unwilling to engage in further meaningful discussion be-
yond that assertion. The policy underlying that position may be that
the Soviet side will not accept unqualified constraints on countering ac-
tions unless there are agreed constraints on uses of satellites, although
they have not suggested that they seek such constraints. Alternatively,
their position may rest simply on a policy view that they must retain
complete freedom of action in or over the motherland. Although it is
also possible that the Soviets will abandon this position when the other
questions are resolved, we must keep working on the problem.
8. Main practical significance of Khlestov’s statement of May 18,
1979,5 on a comprehensive agreement lies in two points: (a) The Soviet
side is well on its way toward concluding that the U.S. advocacy of a
comprehensive agreement is either false or represents a sincere general
view that has not been thought through as to practical implementation,
and (b) it will be necessary for the U.S. to set forth specific proposals on
dismantling if provisions for dismantling are to be worked on in the fu-
ture. The Soviet side has not flatly refused to make reference to future
negotiations; but Khlestov’s statement also suggests that any commit-
ment to continue negotiations will be couched in rather general terms.
The credibility of U.S. advocacy of progress toward a comprehensive
agreement would probably be further eroded if we do not join in the
scope of a test-suspension suggested by the Soviet side. Concerning
Khlestov’s comments about third countries retaining freedom of action,
there is no evident reason for the U.S. to refrain from raising, e.g., at the
CD, the idea of a multilateral agreement starting from the position of a
completed bilateral agreement.
9. Khlestov, in a side conversation incidental to a social encounter,
told Buchheim that he very much wanted to plan on departing Vienna
not later than June 1, 1979, because (a) Soviet Embassy is rapidly filling
“the very idea of a ‘comprehensive’ agreement has caused us to have serious doubts from
the very beginning, and we have indicated this to the US Delegation many times.” (Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with people preparing for the summit meeting and (b) hotel in which
Soviet Delegation is lodged is hounding him for a commitment on a de-
parture date.
Wolf
52.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 30, 1979
SUBJECT
ASAT Negotiations
We are at a critical point. We have the “Hostile Acts” part of our
agreement virtually completed. It is a declaration that we will not at-
tack, destroy or displace each other’s satellites so long as they are oper-
ated in accordance with international law.2 On the test suspension, the
Soviets apparently are insisting that we halt some test programs to be
equivalent to their halting their interceptor test program. In effect, they
want us to either halt the shuttle test program or some aspect of the
shuttle test program.
I believe you should now take a very strong line with Dobrynin.
You should say that this agreement is being nibbled to death by the
hamsters in the Soviet bureaucracy. The purpose of the agreement is to
give a boost to SALT II. They are completely off base if they think we
will somehow stop the shuttle in any of its aspects—particularly since
the shuttle will not be used as an ASAT system in any respect. You can
tell Dobrynin that the President will be prepared to make such assur-
ances to President Brezhnev.
However, we do have an interceptor program and, if it is not pos-
sible to get a test suspension, they can be certain that we will pursue
this program vigorously with a view toward carrying out necessary
tests.
randum. The memorandum is stamped “ZB HAS SEEN.”
2 The joint draft text containing this declaration is available in telegram 5107 from

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
The Soviets have also proposed that we divide the Hostile Acts
agreement from the test suspension and only go ahead with the Hostile
Acts agreement. This would be completely one-sided. In the Hostile
Acts agreement, both sides agree to refrain from damaging or de-
stroying each other’s satellites—something that would only be done in
event of war, in any case. In addition, we agree not to displace each
other’s satellites. That is a potential capability that only the United
States has. You should argue with Dobrynin that our open-ended com-
mitment not to displace satellites needs to be matched by their agree-
ment to a test suspension, and there is no need for further program
limits on the shuttle.
In sum,
—You should argue that there is a balance of obligations in the
Hostile Acts and test suspension agreements taken together. We will
not accept splitting them up.
—We could, if we chose, carry out an interceptor test within the
18-month period and might be compelled to do so in the absence of an
agreement.
—We will never agree to limit the shuttle in an ASAT agreement,
but the President is prepared to give personal assurances that it will not
be used in that mode.
53.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Seignious) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Antisatellite Negotiations
Considerable progress has been made in the ASAT negotiations.
We recommend that an effort be made this week to push these negotia-
International Security Affairs, Negotiations, ASAT. Secret. A stamped notation reads
“SECDEF HAS SEEN.” In the upper-right hand margin, Brown wrote “6/9. WS [Walter
Slocombe]—Doesn’t the Delegation’s proposal give up some of our highly classified pro-
grams? I suppose it depends on the language—‘destroy/damage’ might be OK. HB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tions toward the conclusion of an initial agreement which could be
signed at the Summit or closely thereafter.
The remaining issues have been described in an inter-agency
status report forwarded to you separately.2 The Soviets have agreed to
the approach the US suggested—an initial agreement prohibiting cer-
tain actions against satellites and a temporary test suspension. The re-
maining problem is how to deal with a number of additional issues
which the Soviets have raised. There is no need to reconsider our posi-
tion on many of these issues, such as the scope of coverage of the pro-
hibited acts agreement, and the Soviet proposals to ban non-destructive
interference with satellites, to limit Shuttle operations, and to permit at-
tacks on “illegal” satellites. The Delegation is pursuing solutions which
are face-saving for the Soviets but retain the substance of the US ap-
proach. Cy has discussed the most troublesome of these, the proposed
exemption for “illegal” satellites, with Dobrynin,3 and plans to take this
issue up again.
The one area where we recommend reconsideration of our posi-
tion is the scope of the test suspension. Although the US goal is a com-
prehensive ban on all ASAT systems, we proposed an initial test sus-
pension only on ASAT interceptors [2½ lines not declassified] and we
should pursue this.) The Soviets have countered with a proposal to sus-
pend testing to January 1981, of not only interceptors but any means of
damaging or destroying satellites.4 They point out, correctly, that a sus-
pension of interceptor testing would appear one-sided and aimed only
at their interceptor program. A broader suspension would appear more
evenhanded (and allay their suspicions that we plan other forms of
ASAT tests).
Since we plan no tests of any ASAT system before 1981, and the So-
viets may be in a position to test lasers as well as interceptors during
this period, we believe it would be in our interest to broaden our ap-
proach on the suspension. There are two ways we could do this:
We could replace our proposal for a ban on interceptor tests with
an offer to exchange statements that neither side plans to test in space
any means of damaging or destroying satellites before 1981, with notifi-
cation to the other side if plans should change. This would not repre-
sent an obligation not to test, so the verification problem would be re-
duced. Some SALT issues were resolved with such exchanges of
statements of plans.
The Delegation recommends a second approach—to retain a
formal test suspension and broaden it to include all ASAT means. They
2 Not found.
3 See Document 49.
4 Not found.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
believe this would be a significant step toward our objective of a com-
prehensive ASAT agreement, and it would prohibit all Soviet ASAT
tests until 1981. They recognize the verification issue but believe it can
be dealt with by citing (1) the fact that the US is giving up nothing be-
cause it plans no ASAT test of any kind during this period, (2) the lim-
ited duration, and (3) the breadth of our intelligence capability.
We recommend that we be authorized to explore a broader test
suspension with the Soviets along the lines of the two discussed above.
Depending on your preference we could try either one first (the Soviets
would probably prefer the obligation to a statement of plans). We
would make clear to the Soviets that we are prepared to take this step
towards them provided the other issues in the Treaty can be resolved
on the basis of our position.
54.
Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of
State1
5963. US ASAT Three 077. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle
as Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) Remaining Unresolved
ASAT Issues.
1. (Secret—Entire text).
viet Delegations reviewed the remaining issues that would have to be
resolved before an agreement can be achieved. A summary of these
outstanding ASAT issues follows.
A. Test suspension
The sides have agreed that the duration of a test suspension would
be until January 1, 1981. The US side suggested suspending testing only
of “interceptors of space objects.” The Soviet side has also proposed
suspending testing of “interceptors of space objects,” but only if the US
side will also agree (a) to suspend testing of any other means of de-
stroying or damaging space objects, and (b) to suspend testing of any
means for changing the trajectory of a space object including testing a
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
reusable spacecraft for such a purpose. The Soviet side has explained
that their proposal for suspending testing of means to change the trajec-
tory of or to displace from orbit a space object would not require a party
to suspend testing of means internal to a space object for changing that
space object’s orbit, but that it would require suspension of testing of
anyternal [external] means, particularly of reusable spacecraft, for
changing the trajectories of space objects. The US side has said a com-
plete suspension of tests of all external means for changing trajectory,
including reusable spacecraft (i.e., shuttle), is unacceptable. The US
side has also said the test suspension should only cover interceptors of
space objects since these are the only means for damaging and de-
stroying a space object which the sides currently understand fully and
for which practical measures can be taken which would not adversely
affect other programs. The question of format for a test suspension also
remains unresolved: the Soviet side has proposed a joint statement; the
US side has suggested a protocol to the treaty.
B. Article III “hostile acts” exclusion
The Soviet side has characterized this as the most important unre-
solved issue. Although they have deleted the phrase “hostile acts” from
their proposed language, the Soviet side continues to insist that space
objects which are deliberately used to commit acts against the national
sovereignty of a party, including damage to its territory and national
environment, be explicitly excluded from the coverage of the Article II
provision banning certain acts against space objects. They have stated
that no such hostile acts have been committed to date but that it is es-
sential to them as a matter of principle to include such a provision in
the text of an agreement. The US side has explored without success
various ways of addressing the concerns which may lie behind this So-
viet position by suggesting language affirming a party’s right to self-
defense as set forth in the UN Charter and language affirming the ex-
isting commitment in the Outer Space Treaty to carry out space activ-
ities in accordance with international law. The US side has made clear
that Article III exclusion proposed by the Soviet side would seem to
grant them the right, which we believe they do not now have, to use
anti-satellite systems at their discretion, and is therefore unacceptable
to the US side.
C. Article I definition of “interest”
Concerning the definition of “space objects in which a party has an
interest,” that is, regarding the class of space objects which would be
covered by the agreement. The sides are in agreement on the criteria of
entry on the national registry and use by a party (subject, on the US
side, to satisfactory resolution of other outstanding ASAT issues).
However, the Soviet side also insists, as a third criterion, that a space
object must be launched by a party to be covered. The US side has said

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
this is unacceptable since it would exclude space objects launched by a
third country which the US uses.
The Soviet side also insists on including the stipulation that a space
object registered, launched, and used by the US but also used on a co-
operative basis by a third country must be used solely “for peaceful
purposes” if it is to be included in coverage. As reflected in the negotia-
ting record of the Outer Space Treaty, use of this same phrase in the
Outer Space Treaty involved extensive debate between the Soviet
Union, which has interpreted this phrase to mean “for non-military
purposes,” and the US, which has interpreted the phrase to mean “for
non-aggressive purposes.” The Soviet side has declined to explain
what this phrase would mean or why they consider its inclusion neces-
sary in this agreement, and indicated that they prefer that a satellite
used jointly with a third country for military communications of any
sort would not be covered. It appears, for example, that all NATO satel-
lites could be excluded from coverage by the Soviet interpretation of
this phrase. The US side has said that inclusion of this phrase in the lan-
guage of Article I is not acceptable.
D. Article I definition of “space object”
The sides have agreed that the definition of a space object in para-
graph one of Article I is logically connected with whatever definition of
a “space object in which a party has an interest” the sides may ulti-
mately adopt in paragraph two. The sides have therefore agreed to set
this issue aside until the “interest” definition is resolved. Nothing sig-
nificant is involved in the bracketed language of this definition.
E. Articles II, IV, V and VI
The Soviet side has stated that there are no significant differences
between the sides on the contents of the Article II prohibited acts provi-
sion, the Article IV accidental or unforeseen acts provision, the Article
V consultations provision and the Article VI nonsupersession provi-
sion. However, the Soviet side has said they are unwilling to discuss
these articles further until the major issues concerning Article III, Ar-
ticle I, and a test suspension have been resolved.
The US side has agreed that the differences between the sides on
these three articles appear to be minor and may at this point be only
drafting problems. The US side has repeatedly suggested that the sides
continue to work on resolving these issues.
F. Title
On a title for the treaty, the Soviet side has proposed “Treaty on the
Prohibition of Destruction, Damage, and Changing the Trajectories of
Space Objects.”
The US side has suggested “Treaty on the Limitations Against
Space Objects and on Other Measures to Strengthen such Limitations
and to Contribute to the Preservation of Peace in Outer Space.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
G. Preamble
The language for the preamble has been agreed between the sides,
except that the Soviet side has reserved the option of reintroducing
bracketed language concerning “acts incompatible with peaceful rela-
tions between states.”
Wolf
55.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Vance-Gromyko Discussion of Joint Communique´
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Marshall Shulman
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
Foreign Minister A. A. Gromyko
First Deputy Foreign Minister G. M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A. F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.]
ASAT
The Secretary turned to the next item—to what would be said in
the Communique´ about the ASAT negotiations. We could not under-
stand why the language dealing with an issue of such major impor-
tance was still bracketed in the draft of the Communique´.
Gromyko felt he had to tell the Secretary that on this question there
was a substantial difference between the positions of the sides. It did
not look as if this was something that could result in agreement here
during the summit. Since this was so, what could they say about it in
Drafted by Krimer on June 26. The meeting took place at the Soviet Embassy. Vance was
in Vienna from June 15–18, accompanying Carter at the U.S.–USSR Summit.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
the Communique´? The only alternative would be to say that the sides
would continue to seek measures that would resolve this problem.
The Secretary asked what did Gromyko consider to be the substan-
tive difference that we could not bridge?
Gromyko replied that, first, there was the difference on the ques-
tion of prohibiting the destruction of objects in space. Then, of course, it
was also a question of the ownership of such objects. To whom did they
belong? Did they belong to our two states or to everybody? There was
also a difference between our positions here. All this was not men-
tioned in the draft of the Communique´. We did have ongoing negotia-
tions on ASAT and could continue them.
The Secretary said that it followed that discussion should be con-
tinued, and that could be reflected in the text of the Communique´. As
for destruction of objects in space, we had no such plans and the Soviet
Union had no such plans. Why not say so?
Gromyko thought that was too bold a statement to make. The two
sides did have a difference in views and he agreed that they wanted to
make progress, but this was not the time or place to discuss these
matters.
The Secretary said that was unfortunate. Inclusion of a mention of
ASAT in the Communique´ would have added strength in terms of reas-
suring the world.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.]
2 The final communique´ for the U.S.–USSR Summit issued on June 18 ultimately in-
cluded language on ASATs. Carter and Brezhnev “agreed to continue actively searching
for mutually acceptable agreement in the ongoing negotiations on anti-satellite systems.”
(“Joint U.S.–U.S.S.R. Communique´,” Vienna, June 18, 1979, Department of State Bulletin,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
56.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Third Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev
Topics: SALT III and other arms control issues
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
General David Jones
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
General G. Seignious
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Joseph Powell
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
President L.I. Brezhnev
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Marshal D.F. Ustinov
Mr. K U. Chernenko
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
Mr. L.M. Zamyatin
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.M. Vavilov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.]
The President said we were ready to sign a partial agreement with
the Soviet Union on anti-satellite systems, an agreement to bar any
damage or destruction of satellites and announce publicly that neither
side has plans to test anti-satellite missiles or systems.
by Krimer on June 20; and approved by Aaron. The meeting took place at the Soviet Em-
bassy. The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 203.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.]
Turning to anti-satellite systems, Gromyko said that Secretary
Vance and he had discussed this matter just two days ago.2 He did not
believe it necessary to repeat what he had said to Secretary Vance. The
President was well aware of the Soviet position. The difference be-
tween our respective positions was very great indeed, and he would
ask the President to take a more objective look at this matter. An agree-
ment could not possibly be one-sided, benefiting the United States
alone.
When Gromyko turned to conventional arms transfers, the Presi-
dent interjected a few comments on the anti-satellite talks. We had not
complained about the Soviet-manned Soyuz/Salyut flights, and had
not asserted that they were anti-satellite systems. Our space shuttle will
not be designed as an anti-satellite system. It was the very center of our
space effort in the future. The President hoped that this would not be
allowed to block progress in the talks because we are going to continue
developing this vehicle. This was not a departure from our overall
space effort, and if the Soviets took the position that the shuttle was
being developed as an anti-satellite system, we would only assure them
that it definitely was not.
Gromyko said that the Soviet Union was in favor of continuing
these negotiations, but it would be impossible to reach agreement on
the basis of the US position.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.]
2 See Document 55.
57.
Editorial Note
On January 10, 1980, Richard Burt of the New York Times reported
that anonymous U.S. officials said that “President Carter has instructed
ACDA to stop arms control negotiations in the wake of the Afghanistan
invasion.” However, Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter
III denied that President Jimmy Carter had issued a memorandum con-
taining such instructions. In his press guidance, Carter conceded that
“the adverse political climate engendered by Soviet actions on Afghan-
istan already will have an impact on arms control. But as we have done
in the past we will determine our policies in each arms control negotia-
tions in accordance with our national interests. Where we see the possi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
bility for progress which will enhance our security we will move
ahead.” Regarding anti-satellite negotiations, the Spokesman said “no
date has been set for resumption of other negotiations in which we
have been involved (The Spokesman was asked specifically about
ASAT, CAT, and Indian Ocean. He repeated that no dates have been set
for them.)” (Telegram 7624 to All NATO Capitals, January 11; National
George Wilson of the Washington Post, meanwhile, “quoted Air
Force Chief of Staff Lew Allen as predicting that current chill in
U.S.–USSR relations will accelerate development of weapons to wage
war in outer space. Allen, in making that prediction in an interview
yesterday, said ‘there will be pressure on us to move out more quickly’
on weapons designed to knock down Soviet satellites used for spying,
navigation and communication. Wilson said Allen ‘sounded regretful
as he predicted Air Force will yield to that pressure.’ Allen said ‘I
would still hope for reasonably strong agreement on continued nonin-
terference’ with satellites U.S. and USSR have in space to check on com-
pliance with SALT Treaty. Allen said ‘expectation of little progress’ in
ASAT talks, together with ‘more concern about fragility’ of noninterfer-
ence pledges, are sources of ‘pressure to proceed faster’ on antisatellite
weapons.’ Allen said ‘we have capability to do that,’ adding that Air
Force would exercise it in response to changed relationship with Soviet
Union. Wilson said a four star general indicated extra money would go
for anti-satellite weapons already well along in development rather
than more distant possibilities such as lasers.” (Telegram 8435 to the
Foreign Policy File, D800020–0155)

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
58.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
91540. Subject: Meeting of Assistant Secretary Vest With Soviet
Minister Counselor Vasev, April 4: ASAT, SALT.
1. C—Entire text.
2. Summary: Soviet Minister Counselor Vasev called briefly on As-
sistant Secretary Vest April 4 to provide notification of the simulta-
neous launch of two Soviet ICBM’s on April 5. Vest took the occasion to
urge the Soviets not to conduct a test of an anti-satellite interceptor.
End summary.
3. Soviet Minister Counselor Vasev asked to see Assistant Secre-
tary Vest on April 4. He read and handed over following message:
“Guided by good will and in order to avoid any misunderstanding
we deemed it necessary to inform the US side that a planned simulta-
neous launch of two strategic ballistic missiles within the national terri-
tory of the USSR will be conducted on April the 5th in the Soviet Union.
The impact area of reentry vehicles is Kamtchatka Peninsula.”
Vest expressed appreciation for the notification and noted that the
US has provided notifications of ICBM test launches to the USSR.
4. Vest used Vasev’s call to draw in general terms on talking points
in para 5 regarding apparently imminent test of Soviet anti-satellite in-
terceptor. Vasev replied that in the course of exploratory ASAT negoti-
ations “all indications from the US side” were that the United States is
not seriously interested in them. Vasev noted a “spate of reports” since
the start of the negotiations, including official records of the Congress,
showing that the function of the planned US space shuttle is “60 per-
cent military”. Vest reiterated our continuing interest in the negotia-
tions and said that we are seriously studying the remaining unresolved
issues. Vasev said he would report Vest’s comments to Moscow.
5. ASAT talking points:
—Both sides stated at the Vienna summit that we would “continue
actively searching for a mutually acceptable agreement” in the ASAT
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to USNATO. Drafted by McClean;
cleared by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA), William Shinn (EUR/SOV), and Suzanne Butcher
(S/S–O); and approved by Vest.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
negotiations.2 The Secretary reiterated this commitment to the negotia-
tions in his recent testimony before the SFRC.3
—Since the talks began neither side has engaged in ASAT inter-
ceptor testing. This is an important indication of the seriousness with
which both sides have viewed the pursuit of these negotiations and of
our shared interest in preventing an arms race in space.
—However there is evidence that preparations are underway for
an ASAT test. Specifically I am informed that you now have in orbit a
target satellite.
—Should either side proceed to conduct anti-satellite tests, it
would call into question the seriousness of that side’s interest in
achieving an agreement in this important new area of arms control.
—As you know we have tried to insulate our arms control negotia-
tions from other aspects of our relationship with you. This action
would add to the burdens on the already strained relationship between
our two countries.
(—If asked: While we are not prepared now to suggest a time for
scheduling a resumption of ASAT talks, we are seriously studying the
remaining unresolved issues, including the proposals tabled by both
sides at the last round of talks on a suspension of ASAT tests. We trust
you are doing likewise.)
Vance
3 In a March 27 statement before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Vance
said “we will continue to pursue balanced and verifiable arms control agreements at
other levels—in the mutual and balanced force reduction talks, on anti-satellite warfare,
on banning nuclear weapons tests, on chemical warfare, and in other areas.” (Depart-

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
59.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
ASAT (U)
State
ACDA
Reginald Bartholomew, Dir., Bur.
Spurgeon Keeny, Dep. Dir.
of Polit.-Milit. Aff.
James Timbie, Strategic Affairs
Charles Henkin, Dep. Asst., Polit.
Division Chief, Intl. Security
Milit. Aff.
Programs Bureau
Stephen Bond, Asst. Legal
Amb. Robert Buchheim, Head,
Advisor for United Nations
ASAT Delegation
Affairs
JCS
Ray McCrory, Chief SALT
BGen Joseph Skaff, Dep. Dir. for
Support Staff
International Negotiations
[name not declassified], ACIS Staffer
Col Frank Jenkins, Chief, Strategic
OSTP
Negotiations Div. (J–5)
Ben Huberman
NASA
Art Morrisey
Phil Culbertson, Asst. for Special
NSC
Transportation Systems
Jasper Welch
Gen. Frank Simokaitis, Dir. of the
Victor Utgoff
DOD Affairs Division
Michael Berta
WHITE HOUSE
David Aaron
OMB
Al Burman
OSD
Walter Slocombe, Dep. Under
Secretary for Policy Planning
Kent Stansberry, Staff Analyst
Edward Melanson, Dep. Dir. for
Intel. Policy (Intl. Negotia-
tions Foreign Intel.
Exchanges)
A Mini-SCC was held to discuss what we might do in another
round of ASAT negotiations with the Soviets that might lead to making
some progress. The first question discussed was: Should we consider
making explicit exceptions in treaty coverage for satellites engaged in
activities one or both sides might find unacceptable? (TS)
Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
After a short discussion of various ways for defining what would
be covered and our own possible interests in taking defensive actions
against clearly unacceptable satellite activities such as dispensing
noxious gasses into the atmosphere, the chairman asked for agency
views on this issue. (TS)
OSD said it found the idea of a general formula defining excep-
tions without legal reference attractive. ACDA argued that the agenda
option2 (no coverage for space objects causing significant physical in-
jury, destruction or damage to a party to the agreement) protects what
we want. The chair questioned the precise meaning of significant phys-
ical injury. OSD, NASA, JCS, and the head of the ASAT Delegation ex-
pressed concerns about the difficulties involved in constructing lists
precisely defining what was covered and what was not. (TS)
The chair then summarized the group’s apparent position as fol-
lows: (1) we recognize for ourselves the principle that seems to be both-
ering the Soviets, (2) we must know for ourselves what we want to
protect and what we are willing or interested in having protected,
(3) whatever specific formula we choose must be tested against such
understanding, and (4) there is useful work to be done on this issue in
another round of negotiations. There were no objections. (TS)
The chair then opened up discussion of the second agenda ques-
tion: Should we consider broadening the test suspension from ASAT
interceptors only, to all means for damaging space objects? After a
short discussion of various techniques for broadening the suspension,
the chair asked for agency views on this question. (TS)
State favored expanding the suspension to include lasers on the
basis that we aren’t going to be doing any laser testing in the next year
to 18 months, while the Soviets might. State noted that its concerns
about limits in our capability to monitor Soviet laser ASAT testing were
largely offset by the intelligence community’s judgment that the So-
viets would not likely be motivated to cheat during the short suspen-
sion period being considered. JCS expressed concern about our low
confidence in monitoring a laser test suspension, and added that it
hated to rule out tests for an unknown period (the starting date of the
12–18 month suspension is uncertain). JCS admitted, however, that it
would have no laser ASAT program requiring tests for at least the next
several years. OSD noted that adding a laser test suspension actually
toughens our position in principle—but noted his concerns over the
2 Not attached.

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
verification issue and said it needs more analysis. State noted the possi-
bility of adding a collateral constraint to prohibit launch of ASAT test
satellites. The chair expressed interest in this idea and called for devel-
opment of a short paper summarizing the monitoring issue. (TS)
The group reaffirmed our current position on the shuttle, and
agreed to the chairman’s suggestion of January 1, 1982 as a more mean-
ingful ending date for the test suspension. Finally, the JCS noted that
the PD-50/ASAT analysis3 should be coordinated to reflect completely
the views of all agencies. (TS)
In summary, the group agreed that useful work could be done in
another round of negotiations with the Soviets, certainly on the first
main issue, and possibly on the second. (S)
3 Not found.
60.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, August 7, 1980
Soviet Interests in ASAT Talks
If US-Soviet talks on limiting antisatellite (ASAT) weapons resume, the
Soviets would have several specific objectives beyond reviving the arms control
dialogue and putting Afghanistan farther behind them. They especially wish to
extend to their other satellites legal protection akin to that afforded to satellites
involved in monitoring SALT. In addition, they want to curtail or slow down
US development of ASAT weapons while retaining the right to take action
against satellites whose missions they consider inimical to Soviet interests.
They would probably be willing to alter their positions somewhat on some of
the remaining unresolved issues in order to obtain an accord. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
fied]. A note at the bottom of the page reads: “This memorandum was prepared by the Of-
fice of Political Analysis and the Office of Scientific and Weapons Research. It has been
coordinated with the Office of Strategic Research, the National Intelligence Officers for
the USSR and Eastern Europe and for Strategic Programs, and the Arms Control Intelli-
gence Staff. [Omitted here is information on where comments and queries may be
addressed.]”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Status of the Talks
Three sessions of the US–USSR bilateral talks on limiting ASAT
weapons have taken place since the United States proposed such nego-
tiations in March 1977. So far, tentative agreement has been reached on
two substantive elements of a possible accord:
—An article that would prohibit either party from destroying,
damaging, or changing the trajectory or orbit of a space object in which
the other party had an interest.
—An article requiring notification by either party in case of acci-
dental or unforeseen risk to a space object of the other party.
The key issues that remain unresolved are:
—The definition of what space objects are to be covered by the
agreement.
—Whether space objects that engage in hostile or illegal actions are
to be excluded from coverage.
—The scope, duration, and format of a test suspension. [handling
restriction not declassified]
The ASAT arms control negotiations are not regularly scheduled,
and the beginning date and location for each session are decided by
mutual agreement. At the close of the most recent session in Vienna in
June 1979 (at the time of the US-Soviet summit meeting during which
the SALT II treaty was signed) the Soviets indicated their interest in re-
suming the negotiations in Vienna in the fall of 1979, and it was agreed
that there should be no unnecessary delay in setting up the next ses-
sion. The talks, however, have not resumed. The atmosphere in US-
Soviet relations worsened in the late summer and early fall, and the So-
viet invasion of Afghanistan in December further clouded the future of
ASAT talks by causing postponement of Senate consideration of SALT
II and curtailment of other aspects of the bilateral relationship. [han-
dling restriction not declassified]
Activity Since the Last Session
Soviet Diplomacy. Since the last session there have been indications
of continued Soviet interest in resuming ASAT talks. In September 1979
and again in February 1980 the second-ranking member of the Soviet
ASAT Delegation indicated to a US official that the Soviets had ex-
pected to hear from the United States regarding resumption of the ne-
gotiations. In April a Soviet Embassy official in Washington—after
being told that a test of the Soviet antisatellite interceptor (against a re-
cently launched target satellite) would be considered by the US to indi-
cate a lack of Soviet seriousness toward the negotiations—complained
that all indications pointed to a lack of serious US interest in ASAT
talks. [classification not declassified]

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Soviet Public Commentary. Shortly after the diplomatic conversation
in February, Soviet press and radio commentaries seemed to indicate a
growing Soviet concern over the expanding US military space effort.
They cited in particular the increased US budget for space weapons
and a potential military role for the US space shuttle. A Red Star article
in March called for international talks as a means of curbing the US mil-
itary space programs. A Warsaw Pact declaration issued in mid-May
and an editorial published in Pravda on 17 June called for the resump-
tion of all disarmament negotiations that had been suspended or
broken off. [3½ lines not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (25 lines) not declassified]
Soviet Objectives
Protecting Soviet Space Systems. A main Soviet objective is to extend
to other important satellite systems, especially those that serve national
security purposes, legal protection akin to that afforded satellites in-
volved in monitoring SALT. From the outset of the talks the Soviets
have expressed a willingness to sign a relatively simple treaty having
satellite protection as its principal operative provision. To this end
Moscow has tentatively agreed to a provision that would mutually
prohibit damage, destruction, or changes in the trajectory of any
space object in which the sides have interests. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Moscow insists that a comprehensive agreement, which would in-
clude a requirement to dismantle existing ASAT systems, a ban on
ASAT development and deployment, and a test suspension, is unreal-
istic. Implementation of an agreement to liquidate existing ASAT
systems would be difficult for the Soviets to accept because equipment
used in their ASAT system is used in other important space systems as
well. [handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviet dependence on space systems for a variety of purposes,
including military, will grow in the future, and the legal regime of mu-
tual protection sought by Moscow would help assure that its invest-
ment in space will return maximum benefits. A simple treaty would
allow the Soviets to maintain their orbital interceptor as a contingency
against possible abrogation of the treaty, the use by other nations of
space objects for hostile acts, or war. [handling restriction not declassified]
Preserving Soviet Sovereignty. The Soviets remain distrustful of cer-
tain activities the United States could undertake in space. They want
the treaty to limit the definition of “space objects in which a party has
an interest” to those used exclusively by either of the two sides and
those used jointly by either side with other states “for peaceful pur-
poses”—that is, for non-military purposes. If adopted, this provision
could be used by the USSR to claim that a potentially wide range of sat-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ellites is excluded from the treaty’s jurisdiction. [handling restriction not
declassified]
They also insist on reserving the right to take action against activ-
ities they consider inimical to Soviet interests. The Soviets insist that an
ASAT treaty exclude from its protection provision those satellites that
deliberately engage in “hostile” or “illegal” actions against the other
country. Such actions, according to Moscow, include non-weapons-
related activities and are defined as acts that violate a state’s sover-
eignty, its air space, or its territory, or that damage its environment. The
Soviets have cited several examples of activities that would render a
satellite legally unprotected according to their position, including the
use of direct broadcast satellites without prior consent. A similar
issue—which has not been discussed at the ASAT talks but has been
raised repeatedly by the USSR in the UN Outer Space Committee—is
the sharing of information about a country from a civilian program
such as LANDSAT if that country regarded the information as not
serving a peaceful purpose. This Soviet approach, stressing the mis-
sions of satellites, contrasts with the US approach, which focuses on
space objects themselves, and has implications for US space coopera-
tion with its allies and other countries, including China. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
Constraining US Programs. The Soviets are aware that the United
States is developing a “miniature homing vehicle” ASAT weapon
system that is designed to be considerably more capable than their own
orbital interceptor. They are also aware of the superior US technology
base that would enable the United States to outpace them in devel-
oping future ASAT weapon systems, including laser systems (they
know about the efforts of the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency to develop space-based and land-based laser ASAT systems).
[handling restriction not declassified]
They are concerned too about the ASAT potential of the space
shuttle, in particular about its capability to change the trajectories of
space objects. Although they have raised in the ASAT talks their con-
cern about the shuttle, they probably realize that the United States
would never agree to significant limitations on its testing, and they are
in any case probably more worried for the long term about the specific
US ASAT weapons programs. [handling restriction not declassified]
Since they already possess a usable ASAT interceptor weapon that
has been successfully tested and the United States does not, the Soviets
have resisted US efforts to limit a test suspension to interceptors of
space objects. Instead, they have argued that the test suspension should
accord with the treaty provision on prohibited acts by applying to “any
means” of damaging, destroying, or changing the trajectory of a space
object, not just interceptors. [handling restriction not declassified]

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
Reinforcing the USSR’s “Superpower” Status. As demonstrated in the
recent series of manned Soviet space flights involving nationals from
various “socialist” countries (including most recently a Vietnamese
cosmonaut), the USSR sees its space program serving important polit-
ical as well as technical military purposes. The bilateral nature and
highly technical subject of the ASAT talks underscore the “super-
power” status of the USSR and its image as an equal of the United
States. (In arguing that they cannot accept a test suspension that would
affect only their ASAT interceptor program, the Soviets have main-
tained that the provision must “look” good as well as be good.) These
same features of the talks, the Soviets hope, will serve to remind the
United States that it must look to the USSR—not to China or other
powers—for resolution of certain critical security problems. [handling
restriction not declassified]
Maintaining the Arms Control Dialogue. The Soviets almost surely
view ASAT negotiations as a useful part of the overall arms control dia-
logue with the United States. Aside from its indirect contributions to
the overall economic and political relationship, the entire arms control
process, including ASAT, contributes a measure of predictability to the
Soviet security environment. In a period when the centerpiece of the di-
alogue, SALT, is in trouble, and when the overall strategic arms compe-
tition appears to be increasing, talks on other questions such as theater
nuclear forces or ASAT are seen by the Soviets as a means of keeping
the dialogue from languishing. [Classification not declassified]
Outlook
The Soviets would welcome resumption of the talks and probably
still actively desire a bilateral ASAT accord. They probably feel that
their private inquiries in late 1979 and early 1980, combined with their
public call for resumption of interrupted talks, remain sufficient indica-
tions of their interest. [handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets probably realize that alterations in their positions on
some of the unresolved issues will be necessary. The most likely area
for change is the test suspension. The current Soviet position on this
issue, which addresses “any means” of damaging, destroying, or
changing the trajectory of a space object, was probably adopted to
counter and perhaps even to remove what they regarded as a one-sided
US position. They seemed taken aback when told that this position
would limit some of their own current systems used for, or in support
of, manned missions (i.e. Salyut, Soyuz, Progress). A long-term test sus-
pension, combined with an exception for manned or reusable systems,
might come to be viewed in Moscow as suited to the Soviet aim of con-
straining the long-term, potential, US ASAT threat. Even if a long-term
suspension could not be agreed upon, the Soviets might still hope that
such a proposal would cause the United States to drop its insistence on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
having a test suspension. This could enable the sides to agree to the sort
of minimal treaty Moscow has sought from the beginning. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
Prospects for change are less clear for the sovereignty issues,
where the Soviets have shown little flexibility. Their longstanding
record of applying a very broad definition to what is encompassed in
state sovereignty suggests no likelihood for Soviet compromise in this
area.2 [handling restriction not declassified]
2 The ASAT negotiations were not resumed during the last five months of the
Carter administration.

Chemical and Biological Weapons;
The Sverdlovsk Incident
61.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Sloss) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons Study
The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that a study be
conducted, on an urgent basis, of US chemical weapons policy.
Current Situation
When the Geneva-based Conference of the Committee on Disar-
mament (CCD) reconvenes on February 15, 1977, it can be expected to
center its attention on chemical weapons limitations and a comprehen-
sive test ban, the two items of highest priority on its agenda. There is a
general expectation among CCD members that detailed consideration
of CW limitations will continue and indeed intensify during 1977. A
short delay in advancing US CW positions may be understood due to
the change of Administration, but US participation in the Committee’s
CW work this year is clearly anticipated.
It is also very likely that at the outset of the CCD session the So-
viets will again approach the US about resuming bilateral consultations
concerning a joint initiative on chemical weapons limitation. (The US
and USSR agreed at the July 1974 Moscow Summit to discuss the possi-
bility of such an initiative at the CCD.)2 At the end of the first round of
consultations, held in Geneva in August 1976, it was agreed to hold an-
other round at a later date to be determined.3 During last fall’s UNGA,
the Soviets inquired at a high level as to US views on resuming the
PRM–27 [1]. Confidential.
2 At the summit, the two sides “reaffirmed their interest in an effective international
agreement which would exclude from the arsenals of States such dangerous instruments
as chemical weapons.” (“Joint American-Soviet Communique´, July 3, 1974, Documents on
released on August 30 that announced that talks would resume at a later date. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
talks; we suggested that the two countries’ CCD Representatives
would take up the question of scheduling at the spring 1977 session.
Present US Policy
The United States is firmly committed to the objectives of complete
and effective prohibition of all chemical weapons. This commitment
has been reiterated on many occasions by past Presidents and other se-
nior officials. It is consistent with the US commitment in the 1971 Bio-
logical Weapons Convention to continue negotiations toward that end.
Pending Policy Issues
The National Security Council has had under study two broad
issues in the area of chemical warfare policy. NSSM 1574 addressed
possible treaty alternatives for achieving restraints on the possession of
chemical weapons, and NSSM 1925 examined alternatives for the US
chemical warfare posture, mainly aimed at the question of whether or
not to proceed with the acquisition of binary CW munitions.
Two Senior Review Group meetings were held to consider the al-
ternatives developed in these two NSSM studies, but no consensus
emerged on the closely-linked issues of the military need for moderni-
zation of the US CW stockpile and acceptable CW treaty restraints
where the verification of compliance is incomplete. Rather than moving
these issues to the President for resolution and decision, it was decided
to await the outcome of an internal DOD reassessment of its position on
binary acquisition and acceptable arms control approaches. This reas-
sessment has recently been concluded, and the results are reflected in a
memorandum sent to Mr. Scowcroft by Secretary Rumsfeld on De-
—A specific arms control approach for international CW re-
straints, involving a phased total ban on CW stocks and limited on-site
verification;
—deferral for a reasonable time of binary production, pending the
outcome of international negotiations on CW restraints;7
—FY 1978 funding of a standby binary production facility.8
ments on Arms Control and Nonproliferation, Document 263.
6 Not found.
7 There has been no US production of lethal or incapacitating CW agents since 1968.
[Footnote is in the original.]
budgets. No request was included in the FY 1977 budget. [Footnote is in the original.]

Chemical and Biological Weapons
After a Senior Review Group meeting was held December 299 to
discuss the last item, President Ford decided that this issue could be
handled more appropriately by the new Administration. Since the
arms control issue was considered to be a matter for the new Adminis-
tration, it was not addressed.
ACDA believes that the chemical weapons field provides an excel-
lent opportunity for this Administration to further demonstrate the in-
terest of the United States in arms control by undertaking an initiative.
Recommendation
In view of the need to address the issue of chemical weapons limi-
tations in multilateral and bilateral US-Soviet discussions in the near
future, it is important to attempt to resolve pending CW arms control
policy issues. ACDA recommends, therefore, that a study be con-
ducted, on an urgent basis, using as a point of departure the proposals
made by DOD last December. Attached are suggested terms of refer-
ence for such a study.10 In parallel with this study I believe it would be
useful to ask the intelligence community for a new assessment of for-
eign CW capabilities and policies.
Leon Sloss11
Acting
9 The Senior Review Group Minutes is scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations,
10 Attached but not printed is the list of terms.
11 Sloss signed “Leon” above this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
62.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom1
35924. Subject: Geneva Protocol and Biological Weapons Conven-
1. Please inform appropriate Foreign Ministry officials that USG is
approaching states which are not already parties to the Geneva Pro-
tocol of 1925 (Ref. A) and the Biological Weapons Convention (Refs. B
and C), to encourage their adherence. We believe this is particularly op-
portune time in view of resolutions at recent UNGA urging states to be-
come parties to these agreements.4
2. For London: You should note that the US welcomed the refer-
ence to the Biological Weapons Convention by Lord Goronwy-Roberts
in his speech at the CCD on 1 July 1976: he stated that “my government
feels they have a special responsibility—and I am sure my Soviet and
United States colleagues agree—to work for greatly increased member-
ship of this Convention.” You should inquire informally whether the
UK has already made approaches to encourage adherence. If not, you
should suggest informally that, in view of key British role, both in ne-
Confidential. Sent for information to Geneva, USUN, and Paris. Drafted by Robert Mi-
kulak (ACDA/NTB/WT); cleared by Tuchman, David Anderson (DOD), Homer Phelps
(PM/DCA), Jon Glassman (EUR/SOV), John Shumate (EUR/NE), Floweree, John
McNeill (ACDA/GC), and Peter Sebastian (S/S); and approved by Thomas Davies
reminded the ambassadors to some three dozen nations that their host countries had not
ratified the Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poi-
sonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare. The U.S. Government
believed that adherence to the Protocol “would be a significant and constructive contri-
bution to the broadly-supported effort to prevent chemical or biological weapons from
ever being used” and directed the ambassadors to “approach host government at appro-
priate time and level to encourage adherence to protocol and then report reaction.” (Na-
that their host nations had either signed but not ratified the Convention on the Prohibi-
tion of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
Weapons and on their Destruction which entered into force on March 26, 1975 (Telegram
34003 to Buenos Aires and other posts) or not signed/acceded to the Convention (Tele-
gram 33992 to Algiers and other posts). The instructions mirrored those of telegram 34014
to Kabul and other posts, and added that the United States wanted other nations to ad-
here to the Convention’s “requirement for destruction of existing stocks” of biological
D770054–0986 respectively)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
gotiation of the Biological Weapons Convention and as one of the three
depositaries, UK may wish to consider doing so. You may inform them
that we are also approaching the USSR on this question.
3. For Moscow: You should suggest informally that, in view of key
Soviet role, both in negotiation of the Biological Weapons Convention
and as one of the three depositaries, USSR may wish to make similar
approaches to encourage adherence to the Convention. At your discre-
tion, you may also suggest that USSR consider approaching states to
encourage them to become parties to the Geneva Protocol.
Hartman
63.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization1
61090. Subject: Consultations With Allies on Chemical Weapons.
1. This message transmits text of paper promised Ref A, in re-
sponse to recommendations contained Ref B, para 3 (C) and Ref C.
2. Please communicate following US paper to PolAds: Begin text.
In response to the discussion paper on chemical weapons (CW) limita-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to the Mission at Geneva, USUN, Moscow,
London, and Paris. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/NTB/WT); cleared by Tuchman,
Homer Phelps (PM/DCA), John Hawes (EUR/RPM), Leo Reddy (S/S), David Ahlberg
(DOD), George Humphrey, and Floweree; and approved by Thomas Davies (ACDA/
NTB).
structed the Embassy in Bonn to inform the West German government that the United
States believed that “it would be premature to discuss CW issues in broad NATO forum
at this time when US policy study has not yet been completed.” (National Archives, RG
3 In this March 8 telegram, the Mission to NATO advised that the United States con-
sult all the NATO allies about its chemical weapons policy while it simultaneously nego-
tiated with the Soviets. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy, [no film
number])
4 In this March 10 telegram, the Mission to NATO advised the Department of State
that many of the NATO allies had expressed interest in consultations with the United
States on chemical weapons policy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy,
[no film number])

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tions circulated by the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany5
the United States Delegation wishes to convey its views and to inform
other Delegations of several recent developments in the CW field.
At this time the new US administration is taking a fresh look at CW
policy with a view to resolving longstanding issues. As part of this re-
view we are examining CW policy alternatives, including arms control
and military posture options, as well as the future direction of CW arms
control discussions in both the bilateral (US-Soviet) and multilateral
(CCD) arenas.
The United States, like the Federal Republic and other allies, be-
lieves that the military and political implications of a CW prohibition
make consultations among NATO member states important prior to
negotiation of a chemical weapons agreement. Because our policy re-
view is as yet incomplete, we are not at present prepared to take a defi-
nite position on some of the principles presented in the FRG discussion
paper, though they are generally consistent with our own views. We
will, of course, welcome full discussion in NATO once our policy re-
view is completed.
For its part the United States is firmly committed to the objective of
complete and effective prohibition of chemical weapons. To this end
the United States has entered into discussions of the prohibition of
chemical weapons both at the Conference of the Committee on Disar-
mament (CCD) and with the Soviet Union.
In the US view, for any approach to chemical weapons prohibition
to be effective, it must be a balanced one. Satisfactory assurance must
be provided to a state that it is not increasing the risk to its national se-
curity in becoming a party and that opportunities are not created for
any state to gain a unilateral advantages over others. For this reason
any CW agreement should provide for independent, international
verification.
We also wish to inform our allies that a second round of US-Soviet
bilateral consultations on CW limitations, pursuant to the July 1974
Summit communique´,6 will be held in Geneva during the period March
28–April 8. At that time specialists from both sides will be present for
informal meetings of the CCD with chemical weapons experts. The US
representatives taking part in the consultations will be instructed to
focus on technical issues related to CW limitations and will not be in a
position to begin negotiating a joint initiative.
5 An official from the West German Embassy handed his Government’s proposal
for chemical weapons consultations to Sloss on March 3. The text of the proposal is in
eign Policy File, D770076–0819.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
In our view it might be possible to undertake consideration of a
joint US-Soviet initiative during further consultations, to be held before
the summer session of the CCD; however, a final decision on this
matter cannot be taken until our review is completed. We will keep our
NATO allies informed of developments along this line.
For this reason and because CCD expectations appear to be rela-
tively high regarding prospects for the start of negotiations on the text
of a CW convention during the CCD’s 1977 summer session, we believe
that every effort should be made to complete initial Alliance consulta-
tions on CW before the beginning of the summer session.
The United States notes that chemical weapons is one of the prin-
cipal topics on the agenda of the disarmament experts’ meetings sched-
uled for late April. During these meetings the U.S. representative will
provide a report on the status of our policy review and on the bilateral
US-Soviet consultations. End text.
Vance
64.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Berlin, Cyprus, Arms Control, CSCE, Bilateral Matters
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Paul Warnke
Assistant Secretary Arthur Hartman
Mr. William Hyland
Deputy Assistant Secretary Slocombe
Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter
12; reviewed in draft by Hyland; and approved by Twaddell on April 12. The meeting
took place at the Kremlin. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
USSR
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Deputy Foreign Minister Georgiy Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. O. Sokolov
Mr. V.M. Sukhrodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]
CHEMICAL WEAPONS
Gromyko said that he would like to instruct his representatives in
Geneva to suggest that the CCD start drafting the text of an agreement
on chemical weapons, provided the United States agreed of course. In
the process of drafting, some problems might simply disappear. So far
the CCD had indulged in philosophical discussions. This is all he had
to say on the subject. (He remarked that this was the briefest statement
he had ever made on any issue.)
The Secretary agreed that some progress had been made through
discussions between technical people in this area. We were ready and
willing to join with the Soviet Union in this initiative. We would see if
working on the text of an agreement might not change our respective
stand on issues on which we had different views, although our goals
were the same.
Gromyko said we should instruct our representatives to get to
work.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]

Chemical and Biological Weapons
65.
Telegram From the Department of State to the United States
Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1
tions for USDEL. Ref: USNATO 1134.2
1. Following are instructions for the US Representative to the
NATO Disarmament Experts, Spring 1977 meeting. Talking points are
arranged according to agenda items as listed Reftel:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]
IV. Chemical Weapons
—The U.S. is currently reviewing CW arms control issues. We ex-
pect this review to be completed in the near future and, after consulta-
tions with our allies, possibly to provide the basis for a proposal to the
—A second round of consultations at the expert level on CW was
These consultations were pursuant to the agreement to consider a joint
initiative reached at the July 1974 summit, but the US Del was not au-
thorized to begin negotiations on a treaty. The Soviets are clearly impa-
tient and appear anxious to begin preparing a joint initiative. The tone
of the consultations was courteous and businesslike.
—The consultations focused on technical questions related to CW
arms control, particularly in the areas of scope of prohibition and of
verification. In this respect the consultations represented an extension
of the first round, which was held in August 1976.
—Little new ground was broken in the consultations. Because our
review has not been completed, the U.S. was not in a position to present
a proposal. For their part, the Soviets reiterated their well-known views
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to the Mission at Geneva, USUN, the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency, the National Security Council, and the Department of Defense.
Drafted by Michael Congdon (ACDA/IR); cleared by Lyall Breckon (PM/DCA), Flow-
erree, Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P), John Hawes (EUR/RPM), Giles Harlow (DOD/ISA), Jon
Glassman (EUR/SOV), and Margot Mazeau (ACDA/GC); and approved by William
Stearman (ACDA/IR).
State that NATO’s spring disarmament experts meeting would meet on April 21 and 22.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
both April 7, relayed the U.S.-Soviet CW discussions. (National Archives, RG 59, Central

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
on verification and maintained their negative position on technical ex-
change visits. Overall, progress was slight.
—During the consultations, the U.S. suggested that any joint initia-
tive take the form of agreed key elements of a CW agreement, rather
than a draft treaty text. (If asked: the preliminary reaction of the Soviet
side was that while a full treaty text was not necessarily required, they
preferred to have the key elements in treaty language.)
—It was agreed to continue the discussions, although no date was
set. We have indicated to the Soviets that further discussions could be
held before the CCD summer session, which begins July 5. This will
however depend upon the state of our review and subsequent consul-
tations with allies.
—During Secretary Vance’s recent visit to Moscow,4 it was agreed
to establish a U.S.-Soviet working group on CW. No decision has yet
been made on how to proceed with this group, although it is likely that
this group will provide the forum for continuation of the bilateral con-
sultations already underway.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]
66.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 18, 1977
SUBJECT
A PRM on Chemical Warfare
Background
The United States is publicly committed to the objective of a com-
plete prohibition of chemical weapons. The Biological Weapons Con-
vention which we signed in 1971 contained a specific commitment to
continue negotiations toward that end.
Chemical/Biological Weapons. Secret. Sent for action.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
This year, the two main issues on the agenda of the CCD (The UN
Comprehensive Committee on Disarmament) are CW and CTB. The US
more or less promised last year that it would have new proposals in
1977, and expectations are very high. Both the Japanese and the British
have already presented draft treaties which propose a total prohibition
of CW.2 The Soviets approached us at the beginning of the last CCD
session in February, again seeking to set a date for bilateral talks on this
issue. We agreed only to talks on technical issues, but had to put off
their request for talks on terms of a treaty, since we did not have an
agreed interagency position. A CW group was one of the eight working
groups agreed on during Vance’s Moscow trip,3 lending added ur-
gency to the need to develop a US position.
Current Situation
We had originally thought that a coordinated US negotiating posi-
tion could be worked out at the staff level without a formal PRM but
that effort has failed. Defense, and especially the Joint Chiefs, are deter-
mined to do a broader review covering questions of force posture and
modernization, and military risks, before they will agree to discussions
on an arms limitation approach. The attached PRM draft is more nar-
rowly focused than Defense originally wanted, but it satisfies DOD as
well as State and ACDA.
Timing is now urgent. The next CCD session begins in early July,
but the US agreed in Moscow to bilateral CW talks preceding that Con-
ference. Those talks would have to begin in late June, and we would
need about three weeks for consultations with NATO Allies before
then. So we will need to have an option paper ready for your decision
by the end of the first week in June.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the issuance of the attached PRM.4
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File; and the British proposal is in telegram 2622
4 Carter checked the “Approve” line.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
67.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–271
Washington, May 19, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Chemical Warfare
The President has directed that the Special Coordination Com-
mittee undertake a review of the US chemical warfare (CW) posture
with a view toward developing CW arms limitation options.
The review shall include:
1. An assessment of the nature and trends of the CW threat, to be
prepared by the Intelligence Community.
2. A definition of alternative military strategies for deterring CW,
and limiting its effect if deterrence fails. Each strategy description shall
include an evaluation of:
—supporting force postures and programs, including costs.
—associated military risks
—US and allied technological capabilities, and military and social
constraints
—impact on US allies
—effect of use on military operation including incentives for first
use of chemicals
3. An evaluation of arms limitation options. Analysis shall include
consideration of:
—net effect on US security, including impact on US Allies
—contribution to US-Soviet relations and to other foreign policy
interests
—verification and compliance requirements
—possibilities for successful negotiation
Chemical/Biological Weapons. Secret. Sent for action. Carter wrote “ok, J” in the upper
right corner of the memorandum. Underneath, Brown wrote “5/20. ISA—Since our mili-
tary are so concerned about the CW threat, we should look carefully at the possibility re-
ducing the threat by CW arms limitation. HB.”

Chemical and Biological Weapons
The review shall be completed by June 1 and shall not exceed 25
pages.2
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 “Response to PRM/NSC–27: Chemical Warfare” was submitted to the SCC on
June 1 and is available in Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC
68.
Summary of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, June 8, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Warren Christopher
Spurgeon Keeny
Reginald Bartholemew
Robert Mikulak
Defense
NSC
Charles W. Duncan
David Aaron
Lynn Davis
Jessica Tuchman
JCS
OMB
Lt. Gen. William Smith
Bert Lance
Randy Jayne
The meeting opened with a brief review of CW diplomatic history
by Keeny, who also reviewed verification issues. Our information base
on CW is very poor: a result not only of a lack of access to Soviet activ-
ities, but also of a relative lack of effort devoted to CW intelligence col-
lecting. An acceptable treaty should include more than national tech-
nical means of verification, since these are inherently inadequate for
verifying production and stockpiling programs. A general discussion
followed on the question of verification and whether accepting a CW
treaty with relatively weak verification provisions might set any prece-
dent for other more critical negotiations such as CTB and SALT. Aaron
argued that this would not set a precedent, since what we insist upon is
what is necessary for our security in each individual case. Several par-
ticipants noted that we had accepted the Biological Warfare Conven-
tion with no verification provisions, because we believed that the risks
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
of non-compliance were far outweighed by the benefits of the treaty
both from the point of view of superpower activities, and to prevent
spread of biological warfare programs to other nations.
Duncan briefly reviewed the US-Soviet military imbalance in the
CW area. Compared to the Soviets we have virtually no CW offensive
capability and our defensive capability is far inferior to theirs. Bartho-
lomew raised the point that this was precisely why the Soviet interest
in CW is so important. They know that we have a very inadequate ca-
pability, and that congressional and allied opinion are strongly against
additional CW development, and yet, though the status quo is all in
their favor, they are the ones who have been pushing for a treaty. One
would have expected precisely the opposite. No one has the answer to
why they are so interested in a treaty, but it is important to note.
Duncan seconded this argument and made the additional point that
with our small capacity now, we are at risk already, and that trying for
a CW treaty can therefore only improve our position from the point of
view of national security.
On the type of treaty desired, there was unanimous agreement in
support of a comprehensive treaty. The proposed key elements of such
a treaty were then reviewed. All agencies approved the proposed ele-
ments as written. Keeny noted however that a ban on defensive activities
is not included in these elements. Such a ban has been studied in the
past and thought to be politically impossible. It was agreed that it
might be useful to look at this question again, but Christopher stipu-
lated that this should not hold up the negotiations in any way. Duncan,
Keeny and Smith strongly concurred.
Duncan opened the discussion of military options by saying that
Defense was badly split. The Joint Chiefs and DDR&E support Option
eral Smith said that the Joint Chiefs believe that construction of a new
CW facility would provide us with additional negotiating leverage.
Also, the JCS is concerned over the size of the Soviet CW capability, and
believe that CW may play an important role in Soviet military doctrine.
In expressing State’s support for Option 3, Christopher noted that our
allies would be very upset if the US were to proceed with either of the
force improvement options (Options 1 and 2). ACDA and OMB also
support Option 3.
2 Option 1 called for the “modernizing” of the chemical retaliatory stockpile. See
“Talking Paper for the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
at the SCC Meeting, June 8, 1977,” undated, Washington National Records Center, OSD
3 Option 3 called for the retention of the current chemical weapons stockpile. (Ibid.)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
69.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Chemical Warfare
The SCC met on June 8 to review the results of PRM–27 on Chem-
ical Warfare. A summary of the discussion is at Tab A.2 This memo re-
views the issues involved, and presents to you the recommendations
reached by the SCC concerning both a CW arms limitation posture and
CW military programs.
Principal Issues
Discussion in the SCC focused on four issues:
—International Background: There is considerable support for a
comprehensive CW treaty; the USSR continues to press strongly for a
joint US–USSR initiative. CW and CTB are the two main issues on the
agenda of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD)
this year. The British, Japanese and Soviets all have draft treaties for
comprehensive CW limitations on the table, and the US indicated last
year that we would have specific proposals ready this year. In 1974 the
Soviets passed us a draft treaty3 for consideration and the same year we
agreed at the Moscow Summit to seek a joint CW initiative for submis-
sion to the CCD. There have been three meetings of US-Soviet technical
experts on the issue—the last in May4 in response to the commitment
for a CW working group made at Vance’s Moscow meeting.5 The So-
viets have hinted at possible flexibility in their longstanding position
that verification be based on national technical means.
—Domestic Background: Several times Congress has defeated
budget requests to build a new binary chemical facility. Congress has
of the memorandum.
2 See Document 68.
3 In July 1974 the Soviets proposed that the “development, production, and stock-
piling of all lethal CW” be banned. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet
of mass destruction weapons between the United States and the Soviet Union, “there was
virtually no discussion of specific issues” regarding chemical weapons. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
passed laws restricting the transportation, disposal and open air testing
of chemical weapons, and requiring the recipient’s approval before
chemical weapons are deployed overseas. There is also a law requiring
the President to certify that lethal chemical weapons are in the national
interest before funds can be authorized for their production. Finally,
the Environmental Policy Act established additional measures to pre-
vent environmental damage from chemical munitions. All in all, Con-
gressional opinion is very hostile to CW.
—US and Soviet CW Capabilities: [1 line not declassified] it is they—
not we—who have been pushing for a CW ban. While there is a con-
sensus that the Soviets are doing much more than we in the CW area,
[4 lines not declassified] This large Soviet effort and their apparent ea-
gerness for a treaty may derive from Russia’s huge CW casualties in
World War I (Tab B)6—in addition to the good politics of taking a
leading role on this issue.
—Verification: Although some types of CW activities—such as the
destruction of declared stocks—can be verified independently, [2 lines
not declassified] On the other hand, the risk from a violation is related to
the military significance of the weapons system involved and, in this
case, the US has an insignificant CW capacity. Moreover, a nation con-
sidering whether to violate a CW treaty will realize the consequences if
a violation is detected. Most important, adequate verification does not
require absolute certainty that a violation will be detected but rather
really means enough verification to ensure that a side’s security is not
endangered, and that confidence in the agreement is maintained. Fi-
nally, we would make clear to the Soviets that the verification proce-
dures we may accept in a CW treaty do not set any precedent as to what
we may consider necessary in a SALT or CTB agreement.
Results of the SCC Meeting
I. Arms Limitation
There was unanimous agreement that the US should seek a com-
prehensive treaty banning development, production and stockpiling of
chemical weapons, and requiring the destruction of existing stocks,
rather than any type of more limited agreement. The agencies also ap-
proved unanimously the draft of proposed key elements for such a
treaty (Tab C).7 If you approve these elements, they will form the basis
for our initial negotiations with the Soviets.8
6 Not attached.
7 Not attached.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” line.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
II. Military Programs
Only JCS supported a force improvement option (Option 1 in the
PRM) which would cost anywhere from $500 million to $2 billion, and
involve building the binary facility that Congress has rejected on sev-
eral occasions. All other agencies recommend that we continue the CW
force as it now is and review this decision in mid-1978 on the basis of
the progress or lack thereof in the CW negotiations.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the status quo military option, with the proviso
that you will review the situation on the basis of progress made in arms
limitation talks.9
Where We Go From Here
If you approve the arms limitation posture presented here, the US
will immediately undertake consultations with the British, French,
Germans and Japanese. Then, at the opening of the CCD conference on
July 5, we will begin our long-promised bilateral talks with the Soviet
Union with the goal of developing an outline of the principles of a com-
prehensive treaty. This would be presented as a joint initiative to the
membership of the CCD, which would then work from that base in de-
veloping the detailed text of a comprehensive international CW
treaty.10
9 Carter checked the “Approve” line.
10 Carter wrote “ok” underneath the last paragraph of the memorandum.
70.
Presidential Directive/NSC–151
Washington, June 16, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Director of Central Intelligence
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
SUBJECT
Chemical Warfare
The President has directed that a United States Delegation under
the direction of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency should im-
mediately initiate bilateral consultations with the United Kingdom,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Japan, to be followed by
negotiations with the Soviet Union on the subject of a comprehensive
treaty to ban chemical warfare.
Talks with the Soviet Union should seek to reach agreement on a
joint US–USSR initiative to be presented to the Conference of the Com-
mittee on Disarmament along the following lines:2
—Definitions of important terms would be incorporated in the
agreement.
—To the extent possible, low-risk, more easily verified actions
would be undertaken at the earliest possible stage.
—Production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of chemical
warfare (CW) agents and munitions would be prohibited.
—Development of CW agents or munitions would be prohibited,
but development of means of protection against chemical attack would
be permitted.
—Existing stocks of CW agents and munitions would be destroyed
over a period of at least eight years according to an agreed schedule. All
CW stocks would be declared at the time a State became a Party. As an
alternative to destruction, dual-purpose agents could be diverted to
peaceful purposes, subject to appropriate controls. Precursors would
be treated in the same manner as agents.
—All facilities designed or used for production of single-purpose
chemicals would be declared and immediately closed down. However,
under appropriate controls such a facility could be used for agent/
munition destruction operations. All declared facilities would be de-
stroyed or dismantled within two years after stockpile destruction had
been completed. Establishment of new production facilities would be
prohibited.
—The disposition of declared facilities and the destruction of de-
clared stocks would require on-site verification under independent, in-
ternational auspices.
—The agreement would contain agreed procedures for the car-
rying out of an investigation by representatives of a Consultative Com-
2 An unknown hand underlined the phrases “Talks with the Soviet Union should
seek to reach agreement” and “the following lines.”

Chemical and Biological Weapons
mittee of treaty parties in the event that suspicious activities were
reported.
—The following types of chemicals would be subject to the provi-
sions of the agreement: lethal and other highly toxic chemicals, inca-
pacitating chemicals, and precursors.
—The principal criterion for application of the provisions of the
agreement to specific chemicals would be whether the specific activ-
ities in question are justified for peaceful purposes (“purpose crite-
rion”). To assist in applying the purpose criterion, two supplementary
toxicity criteria would be adopted.
—Transfer of CW agents or munitions to others would be prohi-
bited, as would any other effort to help others obtain CW agents or
munitions.
—Provisions would be included for confidence-building purposes.
—Any State Party would have the right to withdraw if it decided
that extraordinary events, related to the subject matter of the agree-
ment, had jeopardized the supreme interests of its country. Appro-
priate notice would be required.
—All States would be eligible to become Parties.
The President has also directed that US chemical warfare forces be
maintained without force improvement. This decision will be re-
viewed, beginning with the start of the FY 1980 budget cycle, on the
basis of the progress made in arms limitation talks.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
71.
Editorial Note
The United States and the Soviet Union resumed negotiations over
chemical weapons consultations on July 7, 1977, in Geneva. In the first
session, the U.S. representative, Ambassador Adrian Fisher, proposed
that rather than trying to write a draft treaty, the two sides should in-
stead issue a set of “agreed key elements” on a chemical weapons con-
vention. This would allow “other states an opportunity to play a con-
crete role in development of specific treaty conventions” in order to
“ensure broad acceptance of the convention.” The Soviet repre-
sentative, Viktor Likhatchev, said the U.S. proposal “deserved careful
study.” (Telegram 5558 from the Mission at Geneva, July 8; National
second session, the U.S. Delegation proposed a ban on the “develop-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ment, production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of CW agents
and munitions.” The Soviets “asked several questions for clarification,
but made no substantive comments.” (Telegram 5643 from the Mission
at Geneva, July 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770246–0173)
Fisher turned to the issue of verification in the third session. “Be-
cause of the deficiencies of non-intrusive methods” of verification, the
United States wanted a system that provided for “on-site” confirmation
that stockpiles had been destroyed and that facilities were not being
used for prohibited activities; for “fact-finding investigation” of sus-
pected treaty violations; and for the monitoring of the “production and
use of super-toxic chemicals for peaceful purposes.” Again, Likhatchev
made no substantive comments, but said he would pose questions at
the next session. (Telegram 5644 from the Mission at Geneva, July 11;
In a brief opening statement at the fourth session, Likhatchev said
that the Soviet Union wanted “the prohibition of incapacitating chem-
ical warfare agents,” and asked whether the United States “now
wanted to expand” the scope of an agreement “to include incapaci-
tants.” Fisher replied that the United States “desires a comprehensive
treaty, which would not be limited to ‘the most dangerous, lethal
means of chemical warfare’.” (Telegram 5722 from the Mission at Ge-
neva, July 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
In their penultimate session, after another discussion about which
chemical incapacitants would be covered under a convention, Likhat-
chev turned to the issue of verification. The Soviet Union, he said, fa-
vored a system “based on national control (i.e. ‘self-policing’). This
could be supplemented by: “(A) information exchange among parties
on questions related to compliance, (B) cooperation and consultation
among states in situation where doubt about compliance exists, and ex-
amination by the UN Security Council of complaints of treaty viola-
tion.” He argued that the Soviet Union “believed that the very fact of a
state’s participation in a convention is sufficient guarantee that the state
will ensure compliance,” and “that the system of control should not vi-
olate the sovereign rights of states or lead to disclosure of military or
commercial secrets.” In a “preliminary response,” Fisher said that in-
ternational control would “check national control as both must have
the ability to satisfy ourselves that the agreement is being followed.”
(Telegram 5834 from the Mission at Geneva, July 15; National Archives,
In their final meeting on July 18, the two sides repeated their posi-
tions on which chemical agents would be covered under an agreement
and on verification. The U.S. Delegation proposed that the talks resume

Chemical and Biological Weapons
on August 16. The Soviets, however, said they needed instructions
from Moscow before they could commit to a date. (Telegram 5978 from
Geneva, July 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
“first step toward the complete and effective prohibition of chemical
weapons.” The two sides also agreed to meet “in the near future to
continue the consultations.” (Telegram 5967 from the Mission at Ge-
neva, July 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
72.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
Secretaries of the Military Departments1
Washington, August 22, 1977
SUBJECT
“Chemical Warfare”2 (C)
(C) Guidance provided to the Secretary of Defense in PD/NSC–15
states: “The President has also directed the U.S. chemical warfare forces
be maintained without force improvement. This decision will be re-
viewed, beginning with the start of the FY 1980 budget cycle, on the
basis of progress made in arms limitations talks.” This guidance is to be
implemented as follows:
1. (C) All efforts related to upgrading the U.S. protective posture
against chemical/biological warfare will continue. This will include
Chiefs of Staff, the Director of Defense Research & Engineering, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense (Comptroller), the Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Af-
fairs), the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower, Reserve Affairs & Logistics), the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Program Analysis & Evaluation), the Assistant Secretary
of Defense (Public Affairs), the General Counsel, OSD, the Assistant to the Secretary of
Defense (Atomic Energy), the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense (Legislative Affairs),
and the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency. David McGiffert, the Assistant Sec-
retary of Defense for International Security Affairs, forwarded this memorandum under
cover of an August 17 memorandum to Brown in which he noted that “some elements in
DOD have misinterpreted” parts of PD/NSC–15 and were “questioning the current
guidance to continue efforts for upgrading the defensive posture of U.S. forces against
chemical warfare.” (Ibid.)
2 See Document 70.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
RDT&E and procurement of appropriate equipment and apparatus to
insure the survivability of personnel and equipment in a toxic environ-
ment. Training, doctrinal developments, chemical defense manpower
improvements or manpower additions necessary to provide an effec-
tive CW protective posture should also continue.
2. (C) Surveillance and maintenance of the present retaliatory
stockpile including any necessary actions required to maintain the
retaliatory readiness posture will continue. This should include main-
tenance of the required amounts of ancillary items such as fuzes,
bursters, and other necessary components. Current planning for de-
ployment of chemical munitions under emergency conditions should
continue. Research and development of improved chemical agents and
munitions will continue.
3. (C) To insure that this Department can provide a timely re-
sponse at the next review period, the start of the FY 1980 budget cycle,
the planning requested in the FY 1979–1983 Planning and Program-
ming Guidance for an integrated binary facility should be completed
by the Secretary of the Army not later than September 1977. Addition-
ally, appropriate criteria to judge progress in the forthcoming arms lim-
itations talks should be developed by the Assistant Secretary (Interna-
tional Security Affairs).
Harold Brown
73.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
7358. Subj: CCD: US-Soviet Chemical Weapons Consultations:
Fifth Round Wrap-up, Message No. 9.
1. Summary: Principal feature of fifth round of US-Soviet negotia-
entation by USSR of detailed position on basic provisions to be in-
cluded in possible convention. Soviet presentation, which responded to
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Moscow.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
US presentation made in fourth round (July 1977),2 contained few sur-
prises; however, it represented most detailed and concrete exposition
of Soviet position to date. It incorporates US proposals in certain points
and suggests a Soviet willingness to enter into a phase of serious nego-
tiations now that both sides have presented their basic position. A basis
to begin negotiations in the next round now appears to exist.
2. As regards form of joint initiative, USSR appears to have moved
towards US concept that joint initiative to CCD should take form of
agreed key elements, through some differences possibly remain. Re-
garding the content of the basic provisions, there appears to be substan-
tial degree of convergence in US and Soviet positions on scope of con-
vention (types of weapons and activities to be banned) and disposal of
prohibited weapons and facilities, although some important differ-
ences remain and Soviet text is unclear on others.3 On issue of verifica-
tion, two sides remain far apart. Despite some minor positive elements
in Soviet presentation, position on the key issue of international verifi-
cation involving on-site inspection remains basically unchanged. Re-
garding entry into force of the treaty, unclear wording of Soviet basic
provision no. 23 raises the potentially troublesome possibility that they
may insist on ratification by all permanent UN security council
members as a precondition. End summary.
3. US and Soviet Delegations held six meetings in Geneva from
ments of a convention prohibiting chemical weapons, with the purpose
of preparing a joint initiative for submission to the CCD. This was the
fifth round of bilateral negotiations held in accordance with the US-
Soviet communique´ of July 1974,4 and the third meeting of the joint
working group established as a result of the Moscow discussions be-
tween Secretary Vance and Foreign Minister Gromyko in March 1977.5
The atmosphere of all meetings was cordial and workmanlike.
23, Soviet rep (Likhatchev) made a detailed presentation of Soviet posi-
tions on content of possible convention prohibiting chemical weapons
which he characterized as supplementing proposals contained in So-
viet 1974 draft CW convention and as, in effect, a response to the US
proposal presented in the fourth round in July 1977.6 At the end of his
presentation, Amb Likhatchev handed over a working paper contain-
2 See Document 71.
3 The basic provisions of the Soviet text are in telegram 7212 from the Mission at
5 See Document 64.
6 See Document 71.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ing 23 basic provisions as the basis for a possible joint initiative. At the
fifth meeting USRep (Fisher) presented preliminary US comments on
Soviet presentation, summarizing apparent points of agreement and
differences between two sides and presenting a number of questions
designed to clarify Soviet position. Soviet Del answered some of these
questions at sixth meeting. US side proposed Sept 26 for resumption of
next round of bilateral talks. Soviet Delegation informally indicated
that this seemed reasonable but did not formally agree to it, pending
instructions.
5. Salient points of Soviet basic provisions are summarized and
commented on below.
6. Form of the joint initiative. Although Soviet rep emphasized in
his initial presentation that USSR continues to seek a joint initiative in
form of negotiated text of draft convention or main articles thereof
which would be presented to CCD, the “basic provisions” tabled by the
USSR bear a strong resemblance in form to the “key elements” pre-
sented by the US in July and would appear to represent a major step in
the direction of the US approach. It appears unlikely that Soviets will
continue to advocate tabling a full-fledged jointly agreed treaty text.
However, whereas the US approach envisages agreement on principles
or key elements to be subsequently elaborated upon by the CCD, USSR
may continue to favor tabling a set of agreed provisions in treaty
language.
7. Scope of the convention. The two sides appear to be in substan-
tial agreement that development (including testing) production, stock-
piling, acquisition, retention and transfer of the chemical weapons
should be banned by a confidential convention: that ban should in-
clude lethal and other highly toxic chemicals and incapacitants as well
as munitions, and that main criterion for including specific chemicals
or activities should be that of purpose supplemented by toxicity. So-
viets accepted approximate values for toxicity criteria discussed by US
in round one. The two sides disagreed, however, as to whether irritants
should be included. (The US position is that they should not). Other po-
tential points of disagreement concern use of lethal chemical agents in
military field exercises with troops, and the definition of precursors.
8. Disposition of chemical weapons. Soviet presentation indicated
a general acceptance of US concept that stocks of agents and weapons
as well as plans for their destruction and for the elimination of corre-
sponding facilities according to an agreed schedule be declared. Fol-
lowing explanations presented by USDEL, Soviets accepted US expla-
nation as to why a minimum of eight years would be required for
destruction of US stocks of agents and munitions. USSR also agrees that
production facilities could temporarily be used for destruction of
agents and munitions. Major point of difference was that Soviet would

Chemical and Biological Weapons
permit conversion of production facilities to peaceful uses whereas US
would require destruction or dismantling of all facilities.
9. Verification. Although the Soviet presentation contained some
points of interest, there was no change in the essentials of the Soviet po-
sition which underlined basic Soviet unwillingness to allow on-site in-
spection under independent international auspices, whether to verify
destruction of stocks and dismantling of facilities or for clarification of
suspicious activities. Soviet working paper stated as basic principle
that national means of verification should be the main form of verifica-
tion. (In bilateral presentation, Soviets made no attempt to defend the
adequacy of the national means described in their CCD working group
paper. Also, criticisms of US verification proposals appeared to skirt
issue of verification of destruction of declared stocks). However Soviet
presentation did go further than previous ones in elaborating their pro-
posed international procedures. Soviets accepted concept of consulta-
tive committed composed of representatives of States-parties, although
with severely restricted mandate. The committee proposed by Soviets
would in essence be a clearing house for requesting, receiving and
transmitting information, without any authority to make recommenda-
tions or to draw conclusions.
10. The most interesting part of Soviet presentation on verification
was their basic provision no. 20 which states that “there should not be
precluded the elaboration of a compromise basis of agreement which
would permit to have a possibility of ascertaining on a voluntary basis,
the real state of affairs on site in case doubts emerge with regard to the
fulfillment of obligations on the prohibition of chemical weapons,”
with the arrangements to be determined by the host country. This pro-
vision is similar to Article II, para 3 of Soviet draft treaty for a nuclear
weapons test ban what precisely the Soviets are prepared to accept will
doubtless not emerge until a later state in the negotiations.
11. At the conclusion of USSR presentation and in final session, So-
viet rep stressed forthcoming nature of Soviet proposals on verification
and called on US to make “equivalent” compromises in interest of
reaching agreement. At best it can be said that within the narrow limit
imposed by the Soviet objection of principle to any form of independ-
ent on-site inspection, Soviets appear to have made a modest effort to
meet some US concerns. What possibilities for compromise, if any, are
inherent in basic provision no. 20 remain to be seen, but given the past
history of the Soviet position on this issue, it is clear that verification is
likely to be the principal obstacle to agreement.
12. Entry into force. One unexpected and potentially troublesome
feature of the Soviet presentation is the stipulation in basic provision
no. 23 that a convention would enter into force “when a sufficiently
wide number of States participate in it, including permanent members

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
of the Security Council”. It is not clear from the Russian text whether
this should be interpreted to mean some members of the Security
Council or all. If the latter, the Soviets would have interjected a new
precondition they have not previously mentioned. At best, this could
represent an effort to create a bargaining chip which could be traded
for US concessions. At worst, it would imply that the Soviets have no
real interest in reaching an agreement since its practical effect would be
to make a convention impossible. Given the generally responsive char-
acter of the Soviet presentation, this seems unlikely. However, no de-
finitive judgment can be made until the Soviets have provided the re-
quested clarification. Although the Soviet Del provided answers to
some of the questions asked by the US side in the fifth meeting, they
did not offer an explanation of this point.
13. Confidence-building measures. Soviet presentation did not
refer directly to US proposals for confidence-building measures to be
undertaken between signature and entry into force, except to stipulate
that all States-parties should declare their stocks simultaneously at an
agreed date after entry into force. However, in answer to a question
from USDEL, Soviet Rep formally stated in final session that it was un-
acceptable to the USSR to undertake obligations before the entry into
force of a convention.
Vanden Heuvel
74.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Report on Bilateral Consultations on a Chemical Weapons (CW) Ban (August
We have recently concluded a further round of discussions with
the Soviets in Geneva on the question of a treaty prohibiting chemical
PRM–27 [1]. Confidential.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
weapons.2 The major feature of the round was the presentation by the
Soviet side of an essentially complete response to a US proposal that
had been tabled during the July session setting forth key elements of a
multilateral treaty.
The atmosphere during the three CW rounds this year has been
consistently cordial and businesslike. The Soviets have adopted our ap-
proach of drawing up “key elements” of a joint US–USSR CW initiative
as the basis for discussion, rather than attempting to work on treaty
language. Regarding substance, the Soviets have moved closer to us on
scope (types of weapons and activities to be banned). They also have
accepted the basic idea of a Consultative Committee composed of all
states party to the agreement, although with a much more restricted
mandate than we would like.
A major area of disagreement is verification. The “working paper”
the Soviets passed to our delegation contains no provision for interna-
tional verification of the destruction of CW stockpiles or the cessation
of production of agents. We regard some form of international inspec-
tion as vital, especially regarding the destruction of stocks.
Another troublesome aspect of the Soviet position is that they have
included a condition that permanent Security Council members ratify
the treaty as a prerequisite for its entry into force. This is the first time in
seven years that such a provision, obviously aimed at the PRC, has
been included in a Soviet proposal related to CW. It parallels their cur-
rent position on entry into force of a Comprehensive Test Ban.
The Soviets have also proposed that declaration of stocks take
place at some agreed time after the treaty enters into force. This pro-
posal is in contrast to our position that stocks should be declared when
states become parties and that destruction be internationally observed.
The Soviet formula would, if they so chose, permit them to state—at the
time when declaration of CW stocks was required—that the USSR had
no CW stockpile and therefore was in compliance with that aspect of
the treaty, the implication being that they had disposed of whatever
stocks they may have had between the time of entry into force and the
time of their declaration. There would be no effective means of veri-
fying such a declaration by the Soviets.
Somewhat less troublesome elements in the Soviet proposal in-
clude the authorized use of lethal agents in military field exercises (fur-
ther complicating verification difficulties), conversion to peaceful uses
(rather than dismantling as we have proposed) of military CW produc-
tion facilities, and extension of the scope to cover riot control agents.
2 See Document 73.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Obviously, verification will be the critical issue to be dealt with
when negotiations resume. Current Soviet formulations make refer-
ence to the possibility, on a voluntary basis, of some form of on-site in-
vestigation (again, analogous to their CTB posture), but I anticipate that
hard and possibly protracted bargaining will be required to reach a sat-
isfactory outcome on verification. We expect that the next round of
talks, which is scheduled to begin September 26 in Geneva, will last for
several weeks and will give us a better reading of the extent of Soviet
flexibility.
Paul C. Warnke
75.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Secretary of Defense
Brown1
Washington, October 23, 1977
Dear Harold:
I recently reviewed Congressional action on the FY 78 Defense
budget and noted that funds were again included for the R&D of bi-
nary chemical munitions. I also understand that plans exist for re-
questing funds for a production facility. I am concerned that we do not
hinder our efforts to work out a CW ban with the Soviets by seeking a
binary production capability.
The Presidential guidance contained in PD–15 concerning the di-
rection of our CW limitation proposals is quite clear. We are striving for
the prohibition of not only the production and stockpiling of CW muni-
tions, but their development as well. In addition, the President has di-
rected that our CW forces be maintained without improvement.
I recognize the need to maintain binary munition technology as a
hedge against the possible failure of our efforts to obtain a CW ban.
Thus, I currently support a limited R&D program. At the same time, I
believe that pilot production of binary munitions should not be
planned at this time.
SEEN.” In the upper right-hand corner, Brown wrote “10/25. Dave McG—I believe that
to get Congressional support for production we must first make a real try at a verifiable
CW ban. To that end I lean toward the CV view. HB.”

Chemical and Biological Weapons
I believe that if we were to forego plans for production we will
have achieved a significant psychological advantage over the Soviets.
This would force them into the position of having to respond to a US
initiative by taking a positive step toward reducing their own CW pro-
gram. Additionally, such restraint would serve to demonstrate our
sincere intent to limit offensive weapons thereby improving the overall
climate for our arms control efforts. By maintaining our R&D program
while curtailing production we would retain a certain amount of
leverage at the negotiating table. To forego for now production of bi-
nary munitions seems a small price to pay for the potential gains that
might accrue from such action.
While I oppose the production of offensive binary weapons, I sup-
port the enhancement of our CW defensive measures and the limited
R&D necessary for these programs.
Sincerely,2
2 Vance signed the memorandum “Cy.”
76.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
9346. Subject: Briefing of Allies on US–USSR Arms Control
Working Groups on Chemical Weapons and Radiological Weapons.
Ref: Geneva 91302 (Notal).
fidential. Sent for information to Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Canberra, Copenhagen,
London, Moscow, Oslo, Ottawa, Rome, The Hague, Tokyo, Wellington, USNATO, and
USUN. The United States and the Soviet Union held ten meetings on chemical weapons
between September 26 and October 21. A record of these meetings is contained in tele-
from the Mission at Geneva; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
2 This October 25 telegram from the Mission at Geneva informed USNATO about
the state of discussions between the United States and the Soviet Union on radiological

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
neva on present rounds of US–USSR negotiations on chemical weapons
and on radiological weapons. End summary.
2. On October 26, Ambassador Fisher (head of USDEL) briefed
CCD western group (FRG, Italy, the Netherland, Canada; no reps from
UK and Japan were present) on present round of US–USSR negotia-
tions on chemical weapons (CW) and on radiological weapons (RW).
3. Fisher presented points on RW along lines of Reftel, stressing
that the Soviet proposal to include reduced blast/enhanced radiation
weapons (the so-called neutron bomb) in the definition of radiological
weapons was unacceptable to the US side. He said that other than the
RB/ER weapon issue, which the Soviets had introduced late in the
game, the two sides were very close to an agreement on an RW joint ini-
tiative. He noted that no date had been set for the resumption of negoti-
ations on RW, but if after the UN disarmament debate it appears useful
to continue talks, it would be possible to do so in the margins of the
US–USSR negotiations on CW when they resume on January 10.
4. With respect to the CW negotiations, Fisher said that both sides
had made a full presentation of positions and that a drafting group had
been established and had started its work on a joint initiative for the
CCD.
5. On the scope of prohibition of a possible CW convention, Fisher
said that the two sides were not far apart except for three issues:
A. Irritants—the US side does not want to include irritants used as
riot control agents in the prohibition; the Soviet side does.
B. Precursors—the US side would like to have the convention
apply to chemical substances extending back down the production
chain from the actual production of chemical agents; the Soviet side
would like to have the concept of precursors apply to chemicals used in
the final stage of production of chemical agents.
C. Carcinogens and teratogens—the Soviet side has proposed spe-
cifically including chemicals causing cancer and birth defects in the
treaty; the US does not think such chemicals would be suitable for
chemical warfare purposes and would be covered by the general pur-
pose criterion without being specified.
6. Fisher said that the key difference in the US and Soviet positions
is in the area of verification. Perhaps the toughest question is the verifi-
cation of the destruction of declared stocks of CW and of the disposi-
tion of declared facilities. The US side is insisting that there be manda-
tory on-site inspection; the Soviet side is suggesting that there be
inspection by national committees (self-inspection).
7. Fisher noted that the Soviets have accepted the concept of a con-
sultative committee, but that they have a problem with the committee

Chemical and Biological Weapons
requesting an inspection. The Soviet side has insisted that any request
for an on-site inspection come from a state party. However, he said that
the Soviets may not have any problem with the consultative committee
carrying out an inspection if a state receiving a challenge invites it to
do so.
8. Fisher said that the two sides have not agreed to the final format
of the joint initiative. The common language being developed is not
treaty language, but is not too far from treaty language. With respect to
entry into force, he noted that the Soviets have apparently come off of
their earlier position that all permanent members would be required,
by indicating that this issue would present no problem once everything
also is settled.
9. Fisher stressed the importance of taking into account how a fu-
ture CW convention might impact on industry. He indicated the impor-
tance of consulting with the chemical industry on the question at an
early date.
10. In response to a question about the trilateral (US, UK, USSR)
negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear test ban (CTB), Fisher said
that he understood that the issues regarding PNE’s, verification, and
treaty versus moratorium still remain to be resolved. He said that after
the current round of CTB negotiations the US and UK will probably be
briefing the allies at NATO rather than in Geneva.
11. On October 25, alternate head of USDEL (Turrentine) gave sim-
ilar briefing to group of allies who are not members of the CCD (Den-
mark, Norway, Greece, Belgium, New Zealand and Australia).
Vanden Heuvel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
77.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
United Nations1
265333. Subject: 32nd UNGA: Resolution on Chemical Weapons.
Ref: USUN 4183.2
1. US Del is authorized to join consensus adoption or vote for reso-
lution on Chemical Weapons (CW) along the lines of revised Cana-
dian/Polish draft reported Reftel.
2. If explanation of vote is deemed necessary, Del may note the ef-
fort that the US and USSR have devoted to developing a joint initiative
on CW and may indicate US commitment to continuation of this effort.
However, US Del should avoid suggesting when joint initiative may be
completed.3
Christopher
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Arch Turrentine (ACDA/MA/IR); cleared by David
Macuk (IO/UNP), David Carlson (PM/DCA), Edward Melanson (DOD/ISA), and Alan
Neidle (ACDA/MA); and approved by Robert Barry (IO).
2 The Canadian and Polish draft resolution discussed in telegram 4183 from USUN,
October 29, called for the “effective prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of all chemical weapons” and urged all states to accede to the 1925 Geneva
gram 4373 from USUN, November 5, the Mission predicted that the resolution would be
adopted by the UN General Assembly by November 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D770407–1101)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
78.
Letter From Secretary of Defense Brown to Secretary Vance1
Washington, November 22, 1977
Dear Cy:
I have read your letter of October 23, 1977,2 regarding chemical
munitions with great interest and share your concerns in the critical
area of chemical warfare (CW). As you know, I have issued policy
guidance to implement PD–15, which supports the current CW negoti-
ations while preserving our potential ability to produce our own binary
chemical weapons if negotiations fail to show progress.
First, let me assure you that there are no funds included in either
the FY 1978 or FY 1979 defense budget for facilities for production or
pre-production of binary chemical weapons. We have included some
limited research and development funding for binary weapons. The
only plans that we are developing for production are contingency plans
of the sort we have for any conceptual weapons system, not firm plans.
To place our CW program in perspective, I want to emphasize that
the major effort of our present programs is to provide improvements in
our protective posture, both in research and development of new items
and procurement of standard equipment. These programs have been
fully supported by Congress and I plan to continue them. We would be
pleased to provide you and your staff a complete briefing on the pro-
grams and the DOD assessment of the CW threat at your convenience.
Even while we are negotiating a treaty to ban chemical warfare,
the threat of the use of chemical warfare against our forces remains
great. Several of our Unified Command commanders have recently
communicated to me personally their concern about the minimal na-
ture of our protective posture and about the need for improving our
CW posture in line with the threat facing US forces and our Allies. Nev-
ertheless, we have already demonstrated considerable restraint in our
own offensive capability. I hope this will provide a favorable climate
for negotiations. Since 1973, we have unilaterally demilitarized more
than 7,000 tons of chemical agents and a large number of munitions.
This stockpile reduction, coupled with the fact that no chemical weap-
ons have been produced since 1969, should have already achieved the
psychological advantage you mentioned. Perhaps it will elicit a Soviet
response to the US initiative. However, our combined intelligence
replied that he was “pleased to know that no funds are programmed in the FY 79 defense
budget for the production of binary munitions.” (Ibid.)
2 See Document 75.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
analysis has continued to show no abatement of the rather significantly
expanded Soviet activity in the chemical warfare field.
I do not feel it would be prudent to forego the necessary long-lead
planning required for the research, development, and pilot production
of binary munitions. We do plan to follow the guidance provided in
PD–15, supporting to the fullest the on-going negotiations, and pre-
paring for a review and reassessment at the beginning of the FY 1980
budget cycle unless significant progress is made in Geneva prior to that
time.
Sincerely,3
3 Brown signed the memorandum “Harold.”
79.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
4353. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
Seven: Guidance for US Delegation. Ref: State 153939.2
State CW message no. 5
1. The seventh round of US–USSR bilateral negotiations of a joint
initiative dealing with a prohibition on chemical weapons (CW) is
scheduled to start on January 10, 1978, in Geneva. The US objective in
these bilateral negotiations is to reach agreement with the Soviet Union
on a common approach to an adequately verifiable prohibition of
chemical weapons, which will enhance the security of the US and its
allies. Once all the key elements (along lines presented during round
four) are agreed, a joint initiative on CW would be presented to the
CCD for elaboration into the actual convention. While it would be de-
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Arch Turrentine (ACDA/MA/IR); cleared by Les
Denend (NSC), Alan Neidle (ACDA/MA), Adrian Fisher (ACDA/D), Alexander Aka-
lovsky (State), Avis Bohlen (EUR/SOV), Homer Phelps (PM/DCA), Robert Weekley
(OSD/ISA), [name not declassified], Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA), and Lawrence Finch
(ACDA/MA); and approved by Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA). Sent for information to
USNATO, Moscow, London, Bonn, Paris, and Tokyo.
U.S.-Soviet consultations on chemical weapons limitations. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770236–0111)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
sirable to complete work on the joint initiative at an early date (if at all
possible prior to the UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD)
scheduled for May/June 1978), we do not wish to set a deadline for
completion of our bilateral negotiations. It is not clear how long it may
take to resolve the differences between the US and Soviet positions on
several important issues, in particular verification. While we are not
unmindful of the potential political benefits which we and the Soviets
would share if the joint initiative were completed by the time of the
SSOD, our primary interest is in establishing the basis for an effective
CW convention which will attract broad support and contribute to in-
ternational security.
2. The Delegation should coordinate with the Soviet side the text of
a press release, along the lines of previous releases, announcing the
opening of the bilateral negotiations. Also, at the end of round seven,
the Delegation should coordinate a joint press communique´ with the
Soviet side on the results of the round.
3. Detailed guidance for this round is contained in the cleared posi-
tion paper for round four as supplemented and amended in the cleared
position papers for rounds five, six and seven.3 In addition, the Delega-
tion may draw upon other interagency-approved documents, in-
cluding those cited Reftel.
4. During round seven, the Delegation should continue to work
with the Soviet side in drafting, on an ad referendum basis, language
for the joint initiative in the form of agreed key elements which consti-
tute the main provisions of a future convention in treaty-like language.
Delegation should explore further the possibility of presenting supple-
mentary provisions in a separate joint working paper that would be
submitted to the CCD with the joint initiative.
5. Given the interest of the CCD members in starting multilateral
negotiations on a CW convention during the 1978 spring session (be-
ginning January 31), Delegation should emphasize the diligence with
which the US is pursuing the CW initiative with the USSR. Delegation,
therefore, should brief allies (both CCD members and non-members in
Geneva who follow arms control issues), in general terms, on the
progress being made in the bilateral negotiations, but should avoid
specifying eventual format or exact timing of CCD submission of the
joint initiative.
6. It is likely that round seven will continue after the CCD session
starts. If the negotiations reach a point where there seems to be little
prospect for further progress without additional review in capitals or
reach a deadlock on one or more critical issues, the Delegation may
3 None of the position papers were found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
propose that designated members, as appropriate, return to capitals
for consultations. Delegation should brief allied reps in Geneva dur-
ing course of round seven. In addition, consultations with the UK,
FRG and France should be offered in London, Bonn and/or Paris as
appropriate.4
Christopher
4 U.S. representatives spoke with the British, French, and West Germans on Feb-
80.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
1092. CW message no. 13. Subject: US–USSR Negotiations on
Chemical Weapons, Round Seven: Fifth Plenary Meeting, January 20,
1. Summary: At fifth plenary, January 20, US Del made strong
statement questioning regressions in Soviet position in the areas of
scope and verification. US Del also challenged Soviet side for using lan-
guage which US side had repeatedly said was unclear (e.g., “including
governments of states permanent members of the security council”)
without providing sufficient explanation. Del also stated that US will-
ingness to study and discuss new Soviet draft convention3 was no indi-
cation of a change in US position that joint initiative should be in form
of agreed key elements rather than complete draft convention. Soviet
Del deferred comment on substance of US statement, but questioned
US “reproach” of Soviet Del for not adequately reflecting, in Soviet
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow. Fisher had already informed the
NATO allies that “the two sides were no closer to agreement than they had been at the
end of round six and that the Soviet Del had, in fact, ‘regressed’ on some points.” (Tele-
nary meeting between the United States and Soviet Union that occurred on January 17.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
presentations of January 16 and 17,4 changes in US position presented
January 12.5 Brief reports on progress in drafting group were presented
by alternate reps of both Dels. End summary.
2. The fifth plenary meeting of the US–USSR negotiations on
Chemical Weapons (CW) was held afternoon January 20 at Soviet
mission.
3. Ambassador V.I. Likhatchev (head of Soviet Del) asked for re-
port from drafting group. A.R. Turrentine (alt. head of US Del) re-
ported that the drafting group had met three times and that discussions
had centered on scope, particularly the issues of irritants and important
precursors. Actual drafting on ad referendum agreed language, he
said, had not yet begun this round, but he thought drafting group
might be ready to begin working on ad referendum language in area of
scope once both sides had completed discussions of remaining ques-
tions. B.P. Krassulin (alt. head of Soviet Del) characterized atmosphere
of drafting group meetings as businesslike and said that extensive ex-
change of views on the question of scope proved that differences in ap-
proach still remained. He added that Soviet Del believed that drafting
group should conclude question/answer stage of its work as soon as
possible and get down to the business of “formulating the provisions of
the future convention,” beginning with the section on scope.
4. Ambassador A.S. Fisher (head of US Del) said that in studying
the January 17 Soviet draft convention, US Del had noted language
which had been initial Soviet proposal in round six. Pointing out that
different language had been agreed to ad referendum in drafting
group, Fisher questioned whether ad referendum agreed language still
stood or had been superseded by language contained in Soviet draft
convention. He said, in US view, US–USSR understanding on ad refer-
endum agreed language remained in force. He added that US will-
ingness to study and discuss Soviet draft convention should not be un-
derstood to imply any change in US position that joint initiative should
be presented to the CCD in the form of agreed key elements. Likhat-
chev stated that “without prejudice to our position as to the form of the
joint initiative,” the previously arranged agreement for conduct of the
drafting group (i.e., drafting ad referendum agreed language) re-
mained in force.
4 The Soviets were referring to the third and fourth plenary meetings. The third
meeting held on January 16 is described in Telegram 681 from the Mission in Geneva,
fourth meeting is referenced in footnote 2.
5 The Soviets were referring to the second plenary meeting, which was held on Jan-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. Fisher presented extensive statement questioning Soviet Del on
round seven positions which appeared, to US Del, to be regressions
from Soviet end of round six positions. Salient points of US presenta-
tion contained paras 6 thru 8 below. Fisher noted particularly the areas
of scope and verification. Before concluding age had been included
again without clarification. If the Soviet Del was proposing that the
convention require adherence of all permanent members of the security
council, he stated, “we can expect postponement of the fruits of our
work for a considerable period of time—perhaps indefinitely.” Soviet
Del did not offer clarification of this point during meeting. Fisher also
reiterated US view that there should be exchanges of general informa-
tion on stockpiles, at signature. These would not need to be provided
for in the treaty, but could be arranged on a bilateral basis. He stressed
the fact that such an exchange between the US and USSR would be a
prerequisite, in his view, for US to obtain ratification of the convention.
6. Scope—Fisher stated that the US side had believed that both
Dels had agreed in round six that quantities of otherwise prohibited
chemicals to be produced or diverted for nonhostile purposes should
be limited under the convention and that equipment for troop training
in chemical defense would be such as to preclude any possibility of of-
fensive chemical warfare training. Now, however, it appeared that the
Soviet Del was advocating complete freedom for parties to determine
unilaterally means of chemical warfare to be retained. He stated that, in
the US view, a convention based on such an approach would not be
viable.
7. Verification—Fisher stated that he believed the US was in basic
agreement with the principles of verification put forward by the Soviet
Del during the fourth plenary (see para 7, Ref A), but added that the So-
viet draft convention seemed to emphasize the second principle (non-
interference) at the cost of the first (verification must assure compli-
ance). He pointed out that the US was prepared to agree that a request
for challenge inspection should come only from a state party and that a
challenged party would have the right to refuse a request for on-site
verification, although it would be obligated to make a reasonable effort
to resolve the doubts that led to the challenge. He stressed that this
should be a legal obligation provided for in the convention, not merely
a matter of political expediency. Fisher also stated that the US placed
great importance on required verification, under international aus-
pices, of stockpile destruction and disposition of facilities. He asked
how the US-proposed verification scheme (international inspection,
agreed to in advance in the convention, of stockpile destruction and
disposition of facilities, with each state party declaring where and
when they are to be destroyed) could possibly contravene the second
verification principle (para 7, Ref A). Fisher pointed out that the US ap-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
proach on this issue was similar to the on-site inspection provisions of
the PNE Treaty.
8. Fisher said that the revised Soviet position on declaration/dis-
position of facilities compounded the difficulties of verification in pro-
viding that only facilities designed or used exclusively for prohibited
production would be subject to elimination or dismantling; the US side
viewed this position as creating a loophole and as contrary to the mutu-
ally agreed purpose of the convention. Furthermore, he pointed out,
the Soviet-proposed arrangements where only the chemical warfare ca-
pability of a facility would be disposed of, would require extensive
on-site verification while total elimination of prohibited facilities,
which the US proposed, would not. He continued his criticism of the
Soviet verification proposals by stating that omission of the super-toxic
toxicity threshold from the Soviet draft convention seemed to be incon-
sistent with the Soviet “expressed wish” to avoid “maximizing verifica-
tion”. He pointed out that this threshold simplified many verification
procedures by coupling the degree of verification with the relative im-
portance of the activity; and said that the US, in providing for such a
threshold, had sought to isolate that area requiring particular attention
with respect to verification and, thereby, avoid unnecessary, extensive
verification procedures for areas of lesser importance.
9. Likhatchev said that he would defer commenting on substance
of US statement until Soviet Del had studied its content. However, he
noted that it seemed to him that most of the questions raised by the US
Del had already been answered by the Soviet Del in the course of its
earlier presentations. He took exception to what he characterized as a
US “reproach” for not reflecting revised US positions in Soviet presen-
tations on January 16 and 17, confirming US Del view that Soviet state-
ments had been prepared in Moscow prior to beginning of round
seven. Fisher responded that he had not intended his remarks be taken
as a “reproach”, “question? Yes. Criticism? Perhaps. But, reproach?
Never”. Likhatchev concluded his remarks by calling for prompt con-
clusion of question/answer sessions and initiation of actual drafting,
specifically in the area of scope.
10. The next plenary meeting will be afternoon of January 25. Next
meeting of the drafting group will be held afternoon of January 24.
Vanden Heuvel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
81.
Presidential Directive/NSC–281
Washington, January 25, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Director, Federal Preparedness Agency
SUBJECT
United States Policy on Chemical Warfare Program and Bacteriological/
Biological Research Program (C)
Following consideration by the National Security Council, the
President has decided that:
1. The term Chemical and Biological Warfare (CBW) will no longer
be used. The reference should be to the two categories separately—The
Chemical Warfare Program and The Biological Research Program. (U)
2. With respect to Chemical Warfare:
a. The primary United States objective will be to negotiate a com-
prehensive treaty to ban chemical weapons. U.S. policy on these negoti-
ations is contained in PD–15.2 The objective of the U.S. Chemical War-
fare Program will be to deter the use of chemical weapons by other
nations and to provide a retaliatory capability if deterrence fails. (C)
b. The renunciation of the first use of lethal chemical weapons in
accordance with the Geneva Protocol of 1925 is reaffirmed. (U)
c. This renunciation is also applied to incapacitating chemical
weapons. (U)
d. This renunciation does not apply to the use of riot control agents
or herbicides. Executive Order 11850 provides guidance on authorized
e. Existing overseas stockpiles of chemical weapons can be main-
tained without additional consultations. If the matter is raised by the
FRG, we will agree to consultations about the future of stockpiles lo-
cated in Germany. (S)
PD–28. Secret. Carter wrote at the top “ok J.C.”
2 See Document 70.
federal-register/executive-orders/1975.html)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
f. The Secretary of Defense shall continue to develop and improve
controls and safety measures in all chemical warfare programs. (C)
g. The Director of Central Intelligence shall continue to maintain
surveillance of the chemical warfare capabilities of other states. (S)
h. An Ad Hoc Committee chaired by the NSC shall conduct a peri-
odic review of United States chemical warfare programs and public in-
formation policy, and will make recommendations to the President. (C)
3. With respect to Biological Research:
a. The United States renounced the use of all methods of bacterio-
logical/biological and toxin warfare in accordance with the terms of
the Biological Weapons Convention.4 (U)
b. The United States has destroyed all stockpiles of bacteriolog-
ical/biological and toxin materials and associated weapons sys-
c. The United States bacteriological/biological programs will be
consistent with the provisions of the Biological Weapons Conven-
d. The Secretary of Defense shall continue to develop controls and
safety measures in all defensive biological research programs. (C)
e. The Director of Central Intelligence shall continue to maintain
surveillance of the bacteriological/biological warfare capabilities of
other states. (S)
f. An Ad Hoc Committee chaired by the NSC shall conduct a peri-
odic review of United States biological research programs and public
information on policy, and will make recommendations to the Presi-
NSDM 355 is hereby rescinded.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
4 The draft text of the Biological Weapons Convention is available in Department of
and the Soviet Union signed the Convention on April 10, 1972, and it entered into force
on March 26, 1975.
5 National Security Decision Memorandum 35, “United States Policy on Chemical
Warfare Program and Bacteriological Research Program,” November 25, 1969, is printed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
82.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
2411. CW message no. 31. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons
Negotiations, Seventh Round: Summary of Developments to Date.
1. Summary: As of February 13, the activity level of the seventh
round of the US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations was reduced
so experts would return to capitals for consultations. So far the round
has been devoted to detailed exploration of the positions of the two
sides. No further drafting has been undertaken so far. While the Soviets
have moved closer to the U.S. position on some points, they have
moved away in several areas which we previously believed were close
to being resolved. All in all, only modest progress has been made in this
round in resolving major issues. The tone of the meetings, however,
continues to be workmanlike. End summary.
2. The seventh round of US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations
began 10 January 1978. Eleven plenary and seven drafting group
meetings have been held to date. As of 13 February 1978 the activity
level was reduced so experts could return to capitals for consultations.
Meetings of both the plenary and drafting groups will continue in the
interim. (The period of reduced activity was requested by the Soviets,
who indicated that they had “run out of material.” Judging from the
comments of the Soviet experts, the Soviet Delegation had not expected
the round to run past the end of January.) The seventh round is ex-
pected to resume on 29 March.
3. So far the round has been devoted to exploration of the positions
of the two sides. No drafting has yet been undertaken.
A. At the beginning of the round the Soviets presented a “supple-
mented” draft convention containing twenty-four articles and two an-
nexes. In effect, this represents an expansion of their previous articles
on key issues into a fully elaborated draft convention.
B. At the outset the U.S. Del put forth detailed proposals for
dealing with “important” precursors, “important” lethal and other
highly toxic chemicals, and riot control chemicals. In addition, it pre-
sented the revised U.S. position on challenge inspection (i.e., to be re-
quested by a state party rather than by the consultative committee).
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, USNATO, London, Paris, and
Bonn.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
C. The drafting group sessions have been devoted to extensive
question-and-answer exchanges, as each side attempted to clarify the
details of the others position. (In several cases, the Soviets have not yet
been able to respond to questions about their own proposals or the ac-
ceptability of U.S. suggestions.)
4. Generally speaking, during this round there has been relatively
little movement toward resolving key issues.
A. On the positive side, the Soviets:
(1) Have dropped some terms the U.S. had objected to (e.g., single-
purpose, dual-purpose, teratogen, carcinogen), but have retained
others (e.g., chemical agent);
(2) Have agreed to put precursors under the general purpose crite-
rion and have accepted, in principle, the U.S. proposal for a list of “im-
portant” precursors to serve as a focus for verification efforts;
(3) May be close to agreeing to accommodate the U.S. interest in
protecting the uses of riot control chemicals specified in Executive
Order 11850;2
(4) Are apparently willing to specify in the convention the rights
and functions of verification personnel carrying out a challenge on-site
inspection;
(5) Have agreed to several other points proposed by the U.S. (e.g.,
declarations in connection with destruction activities; inclusion of toxic
chemicals of biological origin; prohibition of new production facilities;
declaration of types and quantities of highly toxic commercial chem-
icals produced but they also take the position that each party will deter-
mine the form and content of its own declarations.)
B. On the negative side, the Soviets:
(1) Have dropped the toxicity threshold separating super-toxic le-
thal chemicals from other chemicals. This greatly complicates our effort
to apply more stringent verification arrangements to super-toxic chem-
icals (e.g., nerve gas) than to less toxic commercial chemicals (e.g., hy-
drogen cyanide, phosgene);
(2) Have put forward positions which are not acceptable to the U.S.
in several areas where we previously believed the two sides were fairly
close:
—Quantities of otherwise prohibited chemicals to be produced or
diverted for nonhostile military purposes. We had believed that both
sides agreed that a limit should be specified. Now the Soviets would
allow each state party to produce whatever it determines it needs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Retention of chemical munitions. We had believed that both
sides agreed that equipment to be used for protective training should
not be suitable for offensive purposes. The Soviets now would allow
the retention, in quantities to be determined by each state itself, of
chemical munitions for protective training.
—Declaration of facilities for production of the means of chemical
warfare. We had believed that both sides shared the view that present
and former facilities would be declared. The Soviets now would de-
clare only existing “capabilities,” (i.e., ability to produce), and reject
declaration of individual facilities.
5. The tone of both the plenary and drafting group meetings has
continued to be friendly and workmanlike.
Vanden Heuvel
83.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
77166. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Sev-
enth Round: Supplementary Guidance. Ref: (A) State 43532 (B) Geneva
State CW message—
1. This message provides general guidance for continuance of
round seven discussions following return of experts to Geneva. This
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, London, Bonn, and Paris. Drafted
by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA); cleared by Les Denend (NSC), Robert Weekley (DOD),
John Kokolas (CIA), and Margot Mazeau (ACDA); and approved by Thomas Davies
2 See Document 79.
3 This February 16 telegram from the Mission in Geneva summarized the major
issues the United States and Soviets would discuss during the seventh round of chemical
weapons negotiations. These included: whether or not to exclude irritants or riot control
agents from an agreement, verification provisions for “super-toxic” chemicals, which
types of chemical weapons could be retained by the two nations, whether or not either
nation could conduct “challenge inspections” should one believe the other had not com-
plied with an agreement, a declaration by both sides of their current stocks of weapons
and their production facilities, and international on-site verification, which the U.S. con-
sidered “the key unresolved issue.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780071–0902)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
guidance supplements that provided earlier (Ref A). Detailed re-
sponses to questions posed Ref A are being provided separately.
2. Del should seek to isolate those issues which resist resolution at
Delegation level and thus may need to be addressed by senior officials
on both sides. To permit such a judgment to be made, the Delegation
should seek to focus bilateral efforts on resolving issues in the areas
listed below, giving particular attention to verification. Specific issues
and detailed U.S. views are presented in the approved guidance
papers.
A. Irritants and riot control chemicals;
B. Provisions for super-toxic chemicals;
C. Type and quantity of chemicals and delivery devices which can
be retained;
D. Challenge inspection-related questions:
(1) Rights and functions of personnel carrying out challenge on-
site inspection,
(2) Obligation to provide a full explanation if a request for chal-
lenge inspection is refused,
E. Declaration of stocks and facilities,
(1) General declaration of stocks prior to entry-into-force of the
convention,
(2) Declaration of facilities,
F. Required international on-site verification;
G. Extent of use of toxic chemicals in field training exercises.
3. In context of discussion of negotiation and implementation of
any multilateral chemical weapons convention, the Delegation should
assure Soviets that U.S. considers it important for the U.S. and USSR to
work in close cooperation on a bilateral basis both before and after the
convention comes into force. The Delegation should indicate that U.S.
will present some ideas at a later stage—but would also welcome So-
viets suggestions on the best mechanism for such bilateral cooperation
and consultation.
4. Delegation should continue to brief allied reps in Geneva during
course of negotiations. In addition, consultations with the UK, FRG and
France should be offered in London, Bonn and/or Paris as appropriate.
5. We believe that period between round seven and round eight
should be long enough for thorough review in capitals of status of ne-
gotiations. Due to participation of some US Del members in SSOD, it
would not be practical to resume during SSOD. Del may tentatively
agree on late July date for beginning round eight. Date should be sub-
ject to confirmation through diplomatic channels in mid-June.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(not repeat not 36).4
Vance
Geneva to agree to reactivate the chemical warfare talks on March 25. (National Archives,
84.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
6458. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
Ref: Geneva 24112 (CW Message No. 31).
CW Message No. 49
1. The final meeting of the seventh round of the US–USSR Chem-
ical Weapons negotiations was held April 26, 1978. For tactical reasons,
the official concluding date will be set to coincide with the end in early
May of the spring session of the conference of the committee on disar-
mament. The negotiations, which began January 10, were relatively in-
active between February 13 and March 31 while experts on both sides
were in capitals for consultations. (Developments between January 10
(beginning of round) and February 13, 1978, are summarized Reftel.)
After the experts’ return, the meetings were devoted to further presen-
tation and exploration of positions. No drafting was undertaken.
2. The US Delegation put forward detailed views on treatment of
irritants, procedures for challenge inspection, rights and functions of
inspectors and the host party in connection with challenge inspections,
quantities of toxic chemicals permitted for protective purposes, and the
preparatory commission.
3. The Soviet Delegation responded to US presentations made
during the first half of the round, but did not engage in extensive
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.
2 See Document 82.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
question-and-answer exchanges about recent US presentations. Gener-
ally speaking, they also did not commit themselves on details in areas
where agreement in principle has been reached.
4. While there was progress on some secondary issues, there was
little progress in resolving the central outstanding issues, i.e., those re-
lating to on-site verification.3
A. On the positive side, the Soviets:
(1) Have agreed to accommodate the US interest in protecting the
uses of riot control chemicals in defensive military modes;
(2) Have agreed in principle that provisions for supertoxic chem-
icals should be different from those for less toxic chemicals;
(3) Have agreed in principle to establish a ceiling on the quantities
of super-toxic chemicals allowed for protective purposes;
(4) Have accepted the US proposal on timing of declaration of
stocks (i.e., within 30 days after entry into force);
(5) Are willing to accept a provision that a party which refuses a re-
quest must provide a detailed explanation;
(6) Indicated they are willing to discuss (at a later stage) the US
proposal for a bilateral exchange of general information on stocks; and
(7) Stated they are studying US proposals on destruction of stocks.
B. On the negative side, the Soviets:
(1) Have not responded to US requests for clarification of their po-
sition on declaration of “capabilities” or on retention of munitions;
(2) Continue to reject the US proposals regarding declaration and
destruction of CW production and filling facilities, as well as on-site
verification at such facilities, without presenting any suggestions for a
compromise;
(3) Continue to reject the US proposal that super-toxic chemicals be
prohibited for hostile military purposes not related to chemical war-
fare; and
(4) Insist that the important issues be settled in principle before de-
tails are discussed in areas where agreement in principle has already
been reached.
3 The Mission in Geneva reported on April 19 that Likhatchev said that he had
“always held that a refusal for an on-site inspection would not affect the effectiveness of
the convention if such a refusal were accompanied by a convincing explanation as to why
the request was deemed unfounded.” The Acting Head of the U.S. Delegation, Alexander
Akalovsky, “noted with regret the absence of any Soviet movement on the issue of re-
quired on-site verification, to which the US attaches great importance.” (Telegram 5940
from the Mission in Geneva, April 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780168–0137)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. The tone of both the plenary and drafting group meetings con-
tinued to be friendly and workmanlike.
Vanden Heuvel
85.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, May 1978
Soviet Civil Defense Against Chemical and Biological Warfare (OUO)
Key Judgments
• The USSR has an extensive biological and chemical warfare civil
defense program. The effectiveness of the program, however, is limited
by the present lack of sufficient resources such as shelters and protec-
tive equipment. Preparations for defense against biological and chem-
ical warfare are similar in some respects to those for defense against nu-
clear weapons and Soviet civil defense preparations against chemi-
cal, biological, and nuclear weapons have been and continue to be
integrated.
• Most of the Soviet civil defense shelters appear to provide ade-
quate protection against the effects of biological and chemical weapons.
The standard-type shelters are equipped with ventilation-filtration sys-
tems that include filters specifically designed to remove chemical and
biological contaminants. Currently about 10 to 20 percent of the urban
population can be accommodated in these shelters and accommoda-
• Compulsory civil defense training in general is not taken seri-
ously by the population. Nevertheless, those portions of the program
dealing with chemical and biological weapons will generate at a min-
imum increased public awareness of the effects of such weapons and
appropriate defensive measures.
• Soviet concern with civil defense against biological and chemical
weapons continues even after a biological warfare treaty has been
signed and talks on limiting chemical weapons are under way.
Chemical and Biological Weapons
[Omitted here is the table of contents and the body of the
assessment.]
86.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–371
Washington, June 16, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons (U)
The President has directed that the Special Coordination Com-
mittee undertake a review of the United States chemical weapons (CW)
posture incorporating information acquired over the past year and cov-
ering the following:
1. An update on the CW threat, U.S. protective posture and U.S. re-
taliatory capability.
2. An assessment of the current bilateral negotiations with the
USSR aimed at the preparation of a joint CW initiative for presentation
to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD) including:
—Key elements on which some degree of agreement has been
reached with the USSR.
—Key elements on which agreement has not been reached, and
possible approaches for resolution.
—Prospects for agreement on a joint initiative consistent with the
current U.S. negotiating instructions.
—Consideration of extent of implementation of past decrease re-
garding U.S. CW stocks.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
decision2 “that U.S. chemical warfare forces be maintained without
force improvement” including a discussion of possible steps to mod-
ernize or restructure the U.S. CW posture.
The review should be completed by July 14, 1978.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 See Document 70.
87.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
204929. Subject: Chemical Weapons Consultations With Allies:
1. This telegram provides guidance for the US Delegation during
the bilateral Chemical Weapons consultations with the UK to be held in
London on August 15 and quadrilateral CW consultations with the UK,
FRG and France to be held in London on August 16.
2. In the August 15 bilateral consultations with the UK, the US Del-
egation should:
(A) Attempt to clarify the British position on declaration and dis-
position of UK Chemical Weapons production and filling facilities;
Confidential. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva, Bonn, Paris, and USNATO.
Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); cleared by Roger Booth (ACDA/MA/
AT), Robert Strand (ACDA/MA/IR), David Carlson (PM/DCA), Dufour Woolfley
(EUR/NE), Susan Klingaman (EUR/CE), Edgar Beigel (EUR/WE), Sheila Buckley
(DOD), [name not declassified], and [name not declassified]; and approved by Thomas Davies
of State that the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office had agreed to host a meeting on
chemical weapons negotiations between U.S., UK, French, and West German experts on
Embassy that “it would be desirable for US and UK experts to consult briefly, prior to the
quadrilateral meeting,” on “questions of particular US–UK interest.” (National Archives,

Chemical and Biological Weapons
(B) Discuss the desirability and feasibility of further quadrilateral
consultations later this year for the purpose of discussing the declara-
tion of stocks under the CW convention and estimates of the Soviet/
Warsaw pact Chemical Weapons stockpile. In our view such consulta-
tions would involve political, military and intelligence representatives.
No more than two days would be necessary. US preferences regarding
exact timing of these quadrilateral consultations cannot be expressed at
this time, but will be made known in near future.
3. In the quadrilateral consultations on August 16, the Delegation
should:
(A) Explore possible approaches to the question of the cut-off date
for declaration of Chemical Weapons production and filling facilities;
(B) Discuss various options for disposition of such facilities, in-
cluding the option currently being considered in Washington to permit
conversion of such facilities to peaceful purposes under appropriate
safeguards;
(C) Seek views on the US proposal that, as a confidence-building
measure, information be exchanged on activities related to protection
against Chemical Weapons;
(D) Ascertain how the FRG plans to follow up on Chancellor
Schmidt’s proposal at the UN special session on disarmament that
other countries send representatives to Germany to see that it is pos-
sible to verify adequately a ban on production of Chemical Weapons;
(E) Propose that further quadrilateral consultations on stockpile
declaration and estimates be held later in the year, as discussed above
in para 2 (B). (This should only be raised if the UK has posed no objec-
tions in the earlier bilateral session.)
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
88.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
205530. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
1. This message provides general guidance for round eight. De-
tailed responses to the questions posed Ref A are being provided sepa-
below.
2. During round eight the Delegation should: a) Actively seek So-
viet views in areas where the Soviets have not yet responded to US
questions and proposals, particularly Ref C, b) Seek to clarify and re-
solve as many of the remaining issues as possible and c) Seek to clarify
and consolidate areas of agreement through drafting agreed language
for a joint initiative.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, London, Bonn, Paris, and US-
NATO. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); cleared by Les Denend (NSC),
Gelb (PM), Sheila Buckley (DOD), Flowerree (ACDA/MA/IR), Roger Booth (ACDA/
MA/AT), Margot Mazeau (ACDA/GC), and [name not declassified]; and approved by
Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA).
that the Department of State consider a number of questions for discussion during future
chemical weapons negotiations, including how the United States would verify Soviet
compliance with a treaty and how international would inspectors be chosen. (National
issues between the U.S. and the Soviet Union at the end of round seven of chemical
weapons negotiations. These included: the rights and functions of inspection personnel
and host state during challenge on-site inspection, a declaration of existing stocks and fa-
cilities, the destruction of facilities, and international on-site inspection of destruction of
stocks and facilities. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780182–
0779)
ACDA Assistant Director Thomas Davies had given to Soviet Embassy Minister-
Counselor Bessmertnykh earlier that day in Washington. The Non-Paper explained that
the U.S. considered the “group of issues related to chemical weapons production and
filling facilities poses one of the most important obstacles to a joint initiative. Unfortu-
nately the two Delegations have made little progress on these issues.” The U.S. suggested
that both nations declare all facilities for the production of chemicals “that are primarily
useful for chemical weapons purposes” and “the filling of chemical weapons” and as
soon as a state became party to a chemical weapons convention, “such facilities should be
place in an inactive (‘mothballed’) status.” These facilities would then be destroyed “by
an agreed deadline” and the “mothballing and destruction” of these facilities “would be
verified by international on-site inspection.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780320–0046)
5 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
3. In addressing remaining issues the Delegation should devote
particular attention to trying to resolve the issues cited Ref B, which are
listed below:
(A) Required international on-site inspection of destruction of
stocks and disposition of facilities.
(B) Declaration of stocks and facilities.
—General declaration of stocks prior to entry into force of the
convention
—Declaration of facilities
(C) Destruction of facilities.
(D) Rights and functions of inspection personnel and host state
personnel during challenge on-site inspection.
4. We believe it is important to resume drafting of agreed language
in order to nail down general points on which the two sides appear to
agree and to specify the more detailed points which are essential to
make agreement on the general points meaningful and effective. For
these purposes we believe that language which is more detailed than
that discussed in round six is necessary. In drafting, the Delegation
should be guided by the format and formulations contained in the set
of “expanded key elements”, which is being provided separately.
5. Key points in the guidance package:
(A) Detailed guidance has been provided for the first time con-
cerning the exchange, for confidence-building purposes, of information
on activities related to protection against Chemical Weapons.
(B) A background paper is provided on the methods the US would
employ for destruction of agent and weapon stocks. (This is for use by
the Delegation in trying to elicit analogous information from the
Soviets.)
(C) The US considers it important for the US and USSR to work in
close cooperation on a bilateral basis both before and after the conven-
tion comes into force. It would be best to continue to use the existing bi-
lateral Chemical Weapons working group as the forum for bilateral
consultations unless it becomes clear that other arrangements are
needed.
(D) An alternative approach is outlined for prohibition of super-
toxic chemicals for military purposes not related to chemical warfare.
6. The US position on the deadline for destruction of stocks has
been further elaborated. Previously the US proposed that at least eight
years be allowed. We now believe it desirable to be more specific and
are prepared to accept ten years as the deadline. The deadlines for be-
ginning and completing the destruction of facilities would continue to
be eight years and ten years after entry into force, respectively.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
7. The following points are still under review:
(A) Conditions under which the US may be prepared to permit con-
version of facilities (rather than requiring their complete destruction).
(B) Whether to adopt a bilateral approach to mandatory on-site in-
spection of facilities.
(C) Whether to change proposed cut-off date for declaration of fa-
8. The Delegation should continue to brief allied representatives in
Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition, an offer
should be made to hold consultations with the UK, FRG and France at
the end of the round in London, Bonn and/or Paris as appropriate.
9. We currently expect round eight to end in late September or
early October and believe that it would be desirable to hold another
round before the end of the year if possible. Most feasible period would
be from late November to late December.
Christopher
89.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
12636. Subject: Chemical Weapons Negotiations: Consultations
With Allies. Ref: State 204929.2
1. Summary: US reps held bilateral consultations on Chemical
Weapons limitations with the UK in London on August 15 and quadri-
lateral consultations (US, UK, FRG, France) on August 16. Allies gener-
ally supported US position on exchange of information on chemical
protective measures, on conversion of chemical agent production facil-
ities, and on value of consultations later in the year on certain questions
related to declaration of Chemical Weapons stockpiles. British also
raised matter of resolution on CW at coming UNGA. In bilateral ses-
sion, they discussed preparations for Biological Weapons Convention
Review Conference including need for UNGA resolution which they
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Bonn, London, USNATO, and Paris.
2 See Document 87.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
are drafting for possible sponsorship by depository powers. End
summary.
2. US and UK representatives held bilateral consultations on
Chemical Weapons limitations in London on Tuesday, August 15, 1978.
Salient points are summarized below:
A. In response to questions from UK Del about outlook for round
eight of the US-Soviet Chemical Weapons negotiations, US reps re-
ported that Russians do not expect to have much new material to
present. However, there has been no evidence of a deliberate Soviet
slowdown. The US Del will put emphasis on resolving outstanding
issues and on drafting common language in areas of agreement.
B. British Del head (Burns) inquired whether US had considered
submitting partial initiative to the CCD which left verification section
blank. He said that pressure from other CCD members might force
Russians to make concessions on verification. US Del head (Flowerree)
responded that US had no plans for such a partial initiative and consid-
ered it important to resolve verification issues before submitting an ini-
tiative to the CCD.
C. US reps outlined proposal to be made to Soviets for confidence-
building measure involving exchange of information on chemical pro-
tective activities. They also indicated that Washington agencies were
considering possibility of allowing conversion of chemical agent pro-
duction and filling facilities to peaceful purposes, under appropriate
safeguards.
D. After Burns raised question of an agreed estimate of Soviet CW
stocks, US reps conveyed suggestion for quadrilateral consultations
late in year as instructed Reftel. US reps said that US envisioned partici-
pation of political, military, and intelligence representatives. Burns
stressed importance of US–UK intelligence conference scheduled to
begin in late October, but agreed that quadrilateral consultations
would also be useful and said he could support US proposal for such
consultations.
E. Burns said that UK had no plans to make statement at the CCD
during informal CCD meetings on Chemical Weapons week of August
21–25. Looking ahead to UNGA, UK had prepared draft CW resolution
along lines of last year’s resolution (text septel).3 He thought that as in
past it might be appropriate to ask Canada and Poland to act as
sponsors of resolution.
F. British presented further information on former UK chemical
agent production facilities. There would be no objection to having in-
spectors walk through former production buildings owned by Imperial
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Chemical Industries (ICI). These buildings are now used only for
storage. ICI would also be willing to have inspectors walk through sur-
rounding chemical complex and look into “from the doorway.” At the
site (Springfields) used by British Nuclear Fuels (BNF), there are two
former production buildings which are not in use. While destruction
would not appear to be a problem at the BNF site or another site
(Valley) used by the Department of the Environment, razing the ICI
buildings would be more difficult but not out of the question. It was
mainly a question of deciding who would pay for the work of disman-
tling. (Comment: It appears that British can now accept US position
that CW agent production and filling facilities should be destroyed.
End comment)
G. Burns also pointed out need for UNGA to pass a resolution es-
tablishing a preparatory committee for the Biological Weapons Con-
vention Review Conference to be held in 1980. The UK is preparing a
draft resolution and will provide it to us in the near future. Burns said
Dutch believed that whether convention covers military applications of
genetic engineering would be a controversial issue at the Review Con-
ference. He asked for US comments on Dutch suggestion that CCD ex-
perts group be set up to review this issue in an attempt to defuse it. US
reps responded that such a group could be counterproductive since
issue, which arose several years ago, now appeared quiescent. UK reps
agreed that establishing such a group of experts in the CD appeared
undesirable.
2. Quadrilateral consultations (US, UK, FRG, France) on chemical
weapons limitations were held in London on Wednesday, August 16,
1978. Salient points are presented below:
A. As at bilateral session, US reps outlined prospects for round
eight, reviewed the US proposal for exchange of information on chem-
ical protective activities, and discussed a possible change in the US po-
sition in order to permit conversion of chemical agent production facil-
ities to peaceful purposes under appropriate safeguards. There was
general acceptance that the negotiations will be slow and general sup-
port for the US proposals on exchange of protective information and on
conversion of facilities.
B. The British expressed a strong preference for using 1940 as the
cutoff date for facilities to be declared. FRG Del head (Von Arz) said
that 1940 was certainly acceptable to the FRG, although the 1947 date
would be “optically nicer”. French representative (De Bellescize) said
he had no specific instructions, but that the more comprehensive the
agreement, the better. He [said] France would therefore prefer the 1940
date.
C. Von Arz discussed FRG invitation at the UN special session on
disarmament to government experts to visit the FRG to see that verifi-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
cation of non-production of chemical weapons was possible. He said
the details of the visit are being worked out by the German federation
of chemical industry and that an announcement would be made at the
coming UNGA session. The visit will be modeled on a 1977 Pugwash
visit to a German chemical plant and will probably take place in the
spring or summer of 1979. Von Arz promised to stay in close contact
with the US Embassy in Bonn as plans are developed.
D. US reps outlined suggestion for quadrilateral consultations
later in the year on stockpile declarations and estimates with participa-
tion of political, military, and intelligence reps. Burns stated that it
would be best to discuss this matter among the four before raising it in
NATO. (Germans had suggested at an earlier meeting that stockpile es-
timates be discussed in NATO.) There was no immediate German com-
ment on the US suggestion, but during the luncheon that followed,
German reps eagerly sought further details on proposed consultations.
3. As in previous quadrilateral sessions, French sent Embassy rep-
resentative but did not participate actively. French representative said,
however, that in Paris interest in the CW negotiations is increasing. He
indicated informally that the French might send a technical expert to
the next session.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]
90.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
13849. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations. Prepa-
rations for Round Nine.
CW Message No. 18
We recommend that preparations for round nine focus on the
items listed below:
1. How should the U.S. react to the Soviet proposals regarding
non-transfer and declaration of previous transfers?
2. How should the U.S. react to the Soviet proposals regarding
non-circumvention?
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. What super-toxic chemicals should be placed on the “impor-
tant” chemicals list.
4. How should the U.S. respond to Soviet suggestions concerning
the list of “important” precursors?
5. What are U.S. views on whether and how to seek a U.S.-Soviet
understanding on the purposes for which safe riot control chemicals
may be developed, produced and stockpiled?
6. What capability does the PRC have to conduct chemical
warfare?
7. Are there any steps which might be taken to make it easier for
the Soviets to accept entry into force without the participation of the
PRC?
8. Can the U.S. position on declaration and verification related to
facilities be adjusted to improve negotiability while still giving the U.S.
adequate information and access to the facilities?
9. Preparation of an informal paper summarizing the US position
for exchange with the Soviets.
Vanden Heuvel
91.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
13860. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
Eight: Summary of Developments. CW Message No. 17. Ref: Geneva
1. Round eight of the US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations,
that period six plenary and five drafting group meetings were held.
2. Discussions during the round focused on the scope of prohibi-
tion and on declaration and verification provisions relating to Chem-
ical Weapons production and filling facilities. There was no progress in
resolving the central outstanding issues, e.g., those relating to declara-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information; Priority to Bonn. Sent for information to
London, Moscow, Paris, and USUN.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
tions and verification. The major issues remain as discussed Reftel. On
secondary issues results were mixed; some progress was made on a few
points, on a number of issues the U.S. was unable even to obtain a clear
statement of Soviet views.
A. On the positive side, the Soviets:
(1) Finally responded to U.S. requests for clarification of their posi-
tion regarding production “capabilities” (albeit in an unsatisfactory
fashion as noted subpara 2B(2) below).
(2) Responded favorably to some aspects of the U.S. proposal to
prohibit transfer of certain super-toxic chemicals to non-parties.
(3) Responded favorably to the U.S. proposal that the ceiling on
possession of super-toxic chemicals for protective purposes be one ton
although differing with other aspects of the U.S. proposal.
(4) Accepted part of the U.S. list of “important” precursors.
B. On the negative side, the Soviets:
(1) Have provided only vague confirmation of what in U.S. view
are areas of agreement already reached regarding scope.
(2) Continued to reject the U.S. proposals regarding declaration of
CW production and filling facilities, proposing instead to declare only
aggregate production capacities.
(3) Continued to reject any pre-agreed OSI without offering any
suggestion for compromise.
(4) Have reiterated their initial position that only those precursors
which are used in the final production stage should be covered.
(5) Specifically mentioned PRC’s adherence in context of entry
into force implying this may be requirement for entry into force of
convention.
(6) Maintained their position that use of chemical munitions
should be allowed for protective training purposes and that super-toxic
chemicals for military purposes not related to chemical warfare should
not be prohibited.
(7) Rejected U.S. proposal for centralization of production of super-
toxic chemicals for protective purposes.
3. While the tone of both the plenary and drafting group meetings
continued to be friendly, the Soviets resisted U.S. efforts to engage
them in give-and-take discussions. In comparison to past rounds the
Soviet representatives were much more restrained in drafting group
sessions. It is not possible to assess to what degree this Soviet behavior
in the negotiations was governed by overall bilateral relations and to
what degree by the issues in the Chemical Weapons negotiations. As
regards such issues, however, it is increasingly apparent that declara-
tions and pre-agreed verification are the critical issues and until these

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
matters are resolved, it will be difficult to make progress on other
issues, even if there is no direct connection.
4. We recommend that consideration be given to raising these
issues at senior political level in the near future.
5. List of detailed backstopping tasks is being provided septel.3
Vanden Heuvel
3 Not found.
92.
Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs (Slocombe) to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons
The Department of Defense has reviewed the working group draft
of the response to PRM–372 and offers the following comments and rec-
ommendations. We are providing separately to your staff a marked up
copy which offers improvement to a number of apparent editorial
problems.
The PRM–37 draft response addresses all of the points in PRM–37
and provides negotiating alternatives and chemical weapons posture
modernization alternatives which will require timely decisions. How-
ever, the document is too long and some key points are obscured.
In the sections which describe the current status of the negotiations
tion and the terminology tend to obscure where we stand on individual
issues with the Soviets and the relative importance of those issues. For
2 Attached but not printed is an October 20 draft prepared in response to PRM/
NSC–37.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
example, the draft response discusses the status of each of the PD/
NSC–15 key elements but it is not clear on precisely what material the
Soviets have apparently agreed or disagreed, nor is the depth of dis-
agreement clear. For example, the draft response states that “most of
the issues” on scope have been resolved, that the Soviets have accepted
many of the “general points” within the U.S. key elements, and that
various “aspects” of the U.S. position have been resolved, although
most “details” which are “essential to give meaning to the ‘general
of “issues,” “general points,” “aspects,” and “details” is obscure. It is
misleading to infer that we are making good progress when most “de-
tails” have not been agreed to. In fact, serious disagreements exist on
key elements having to do with declarations of chemical weapons and
facilities, and verification. The reference on page 11–20 to the U.S. pro-
posal concerning challenge on-site inspections in the comprehensive
test ban negotiations is misleading because technical data provided by
on-site access would be indispensible to verifying an agreement.
The General Assessment of the negotiations (page 11–23) provides
an inadequate wrap-up of the status of negotiations. It should point
out, for example, that no agreement is possible unless one of the parties
changes its basic position on such central issues as declaration, destruc-
tion and verification of stocks and facilities. The Soviets have given no
indication that they are prepared to compromise on key issues.
The section “Rationale For Relying on Non-Chemical Means for
and argumentation which does not adequately address the military
merous assertions for which support is not provided.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
An issues/discussion paper should be prepared for SCC review to
resolve the question of whether to take measures now to improve the
U.S. chemical retaliatory capability and, if so, which alternatives
should be pursued. The SCC should also address the three suggested
alternatives in the U.S. negotiating position addressed in the PRM–37
response.
An Executive Summary of the PRM–37 response should be pre-
pared for common use by each agency. This summary should contain
appropriate excerpts from the annexes such as the views regarding So-
viet intentions (Annex B) and the Soviet assessment of U.S. capabilities
The main body of the PRM response should contain frequent refer-
ences to particularly relevant material found in the annexes.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
cient analysis to support the data and the data are unnecessary for this
PRM response.
The OJCS concurs.
Walter Slocombe
Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense
International Security Affairs
93.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany
[Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
94.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
21058. Subject: Consultations With Allies on Chemical Weapons
1. Summary. Principal topics in quadrilateral (US, UK, FRG,
France) consultations on November 13 were size of Soviet chemical
weapons stockpile and plans of FRG and UK to invite government ex-
perts for confidence-building visits to organophosphorus chemical
plants. FRG and UK agreed with US [3 lines not declassified] End
summary.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to USUN, London, Paris, and USNATO.
2 See Document 93.
quadrilateral discussions and discusses logistical associated with the discussions. (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])

Chemical and Biological Weapons
2. Quadrilateral consultations (US, UK, FRG, France) on chemical
weapons negotiations were held Monday, November 13, 1978 in Bonn.
Salient points in discussion are summarized paras 3–12. Delegation
lists given para 13.
3. US presentation. US reps began consultations by presenting
views contained Ref. A on estimating Soviet chemical weapons stock-
pile and on judging eventual Soviet stockpile declaration. Principal
conclusion was that we may have difficulty in judging the accuracy of
the overall quantity declared by the Soviets, but that it may be possible
to make a rough judgment about whether the quantity appears “unrea-
sonable” or not.
4. Allied reactions. Burns (UK Del. Head) responded that a rough
judgment was really the objective. [8 lines not declassified] He pointed
out that this should be seen in a proper perspective. Similar problems
would be encountered in trying to estimate Soviet stocks of other types
of munitions. Col. Christen (FRG) responded that the FRG had come to
the same conclusion as the US and UK. There was no detailed discus-
sion of information presented by US reps.
5. Continuation of intelligence efforts. Burns (UK) suggested that,
rather than launch a special NATO study (an idea advocated earlier
this year by the FRG), the four countries should continue their own sep-
arate efforts or divide up the task (another FRG suggestion) and peri-
odically exchange views. Christen (FRG) promised that the FRG would
provide any new information to the others and asked that they do the
same.
6. Soviet CW program. Burns (UK) asked if the Soviets had shown
the same restraint as the US in pursuing a chemical weapons program
during the bilateral negotiations. [3 lines not declassified]
7. Convertibility of commercial chemical facilities. Zeil (FRG)
raised question about possibility that Soviets could use insecticide
plants for nerve agent production. Reid (UK) replied that conversion
would be difficult unless the plant had been specifically designed with
that possibility in mind. He said that in addition to plants producing
highly toxic insecticides, chemical plants employing chemical pro-
cesses similar to those used in nerve agent production might also be
convertible. US experts said US was still studying convertibility ques-
tion but that prior planning appeared to be necessary.
8. China. Burns (UK) asked if Soviet relations with the PRC might
be one reason for Soviet reticence in the bilateral negotiations. He asked
if Soviets had made Chinese participation a condition for entry into
force of the convention and if the US had had any discussions with the
PRC. Burns mentioned that before the UK tabled its draft CW conven-
tion in 1976, Chinese comments had been sought, but none had been
forthcoming. Akalovsky (US) responded that although the Soviets had

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not made Chinese ratification an explicit condition for entry into force,
they had strongly implied it. He said he was not aware of any US–PRC
discussions on CW questions.
9. US CW program. In response to questions from UK reps,
Leonard (US) said principal problem with US stocks was not deteriora-
tion, but rather obsolescence of munitions, which cannot be arrested.
He noted that no decision had yet been taken on the DOD L budget re-
quest for funds to construct a binary Chemical Weapons production
facility.
10. Confidence-building visits. Following up on FRG proposal at
the UN special session on disarmament, Von Arz (FRG) provided Dels
with draft letter4 to the UN Secretary General inviting UN members to
send experts to a workshop on verification of ban on manufacture of
Chemical Weapons. He said workshop would involve visits to four
chemical plants and a round-table discussion. Tentative workshop
possible invitation in the committee on disarmament for experts to visit
the former UK nerve agent pilot plant at Nancekuke, Cornwall. (This
facility is now being demolished.) He said trip could include visit to a
commercial organophosphorous chemical plant and a display of mili-
tary chemical defensive equipment. Burns said UK visits might follow
immediately after FRG workshop. In response to FRG and UK requests
for US reaction on timing of visits, Akalovsky said on personal basis
that mid-March, 1979 would not appear to affect the US–USSR negotia-
tions adversely. He said US would provide official reaction as soon as
possible.
11. Committee on Disarmament (CD). Burns (UK) asked what can
be done in the CD on Chemical Weapons. He noted interest of majority
of CD members in having a meaningful role in negotiation of a CW
convention. Burns suggested that CD might first discuss technical
methods for destruction of CW stocks and then take up possibility of
destruction of such stocks at an international facility. Akalovsky (US)
responded that General US view was that for now it would be best to
avoid introducing controversial points into the CD. Effort in the CD to
work out some part of a CW convention in isolation from the rest
would not be productive. He added that the concept of an international
destruction facility was interesting and would be given consideration.
German Government said in the letter that it considered “the conclusion of a convention
concerning an effective and comprehensive ban on chemical weapons as an already ex-
isting means of mass destruction a matter of urgent priority.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780490–0710)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
12. French views. French rep (Masset) asked several questions to
clarify US views but did not participate actively in discussions.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]
95.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Leslie G.
Denend of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, November 30, 1978
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on PRM–37—Chemical Weapons
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. Jerome Kahan, Deputy Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
OSD
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Lt. Colonel Robert K. Weekley, Assistant for Negotiations and Policy Plans,
OSD/ISA
ACDA
Acting Director Spurgeon Keeny
Dr. Robert Mikulak, Staff Officer
JCS
General David C. Jones, Chairman
Lt. General William Y. Smith, Assistant to the Chairman
Situation Room.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
CIA
Dr. Karl Weber, Director, Office of Scientific Intelligence
OMB
Mr. Edward R. Jayne, Associate Director for National Security and International
Affairs
White House
Mr. David Aaron (Chairman)
NSC
Mr. Leslie G. Denend
MINUTES
David Aaron began the meeting at 9:37 by calling for views on how
the chemical weapons stockpile figures in the deterrence of chemical
warfare. Duncan said that the stockpile provides substantial deterrence
if we have a true CW capability. Jones pointed out that CW was not
used in World War II because each side had a capability. He agreed
with Duncan’s view and added that the U.S. stockpile is not very good
and that only a small amount of artillery rounds were deployed in Eu-
rope. He felt the U.S. must have a reasonable war-fighting capability
along with adequate protection. Keeny acknowledged that the exist-
ence of the stockpile has a deterrent role; however, he questioned how
effective it was operationally. He felt sure that if the Soviets used CW
they would also have adequate protection. He asked whether the U.S.
in light of Congressional and NATO political realities could achieve a
credible retaliatory capability. Duncan noted the political problems as-
sociated with deployment but added that a CW capability was still nec-
essary. Jones added that the likelihood of CW in Europe could increase
as our tactical nuclear advantage narrowed, and added that the deploy-
ment of binary munitions would be easier than conventional types.
Keeny pointed out that CW was a potential super neutron bomb in a
political sense and said that the Europeans do not even want to think
about the prospect of CW in Europe. Christopher observed that there
was value in a retaliatory capability, but how it was developed would
be affected by three realities: how the allies view it; Congressional reac-
tion; and the prospects in the CW negotiations. Jayne agreed with
Christopher and stressed the importance of the political dimension of
CW. [7 lines not declassified]
Aaron outlined the three options developed in the PRM: (1) main-
tain the stockpile without improvement; (2) undertake steps short of
new production facilities to modernize the stockpile; or (3) build a bi-
nary facility deferring the production decision. Duncan favored
building the binary facility. Jones strongly supported the binary fa-
cility. He added that roughly two thirds of the cost of the facility could
be recovered in the event of a treaty since it could be used for the de-
struction of U.S. stocks. Christopher disagreed and said that option 2

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
had not been fully developed. He suggested that modest steps (those at
the low end of option 2) might be undertaken to arrest further erosion
of the stockpile. He added that to go binary would send very negative
political signals. Keeny agreed with Christopher, and Jayne did also.
Duncan called into question the notion that in reality option 2 would be
cheaper than option 3 for similar capabilities. Jones agreed. Aaron
questioned whether formulating the question so that only the binary fa-
cility seemed at stake adequately reflected the true scope of the deci-
sion at hand. Duncan added that the U.S. needs a CW capability for de-
terrence and given that, binary was the best way to go. Aaron pointed
out that it was not a question of whether or not to maintain a stockpile
but rather one of which type the U.S. would commit to. He framed the
issue for the President as on the one hand replacing and increasing the
present stockpile with binary munitions versus more modest steps to
improve the effectiveness of the current stockpile with no increase in
deployments to Europe. Christopher added that option 2 needed to be
fleshed out. Jones stated that without a verifiable treaty, we need CW
capability and in the long run, binary is the only way to go. Christopher
noted that before a decision in favor of binaries was made more infor-
mation about Congress and our allies was needed. (S)
Next, Keeny described the proposed changes to the negotiating in-
structions. All agreed that the time period allowed for the destruction
of facilities should be clarified and made independent of the destruc-
tion of stocks. On the conversion of facilities, Keeny said it would only
be offered if the Soviets agreed to the higher on-site verification re-
quirements. Jones commented that because there was so much neces-
sary information about Soviet facilities which we did not have that it
was premature to discuss conversion. Smith asked why the decision
had to be made now. Duncan added that the Soviets are not even pre-
pared to tell us where their facilities are at this point. Christopher asked
if the negotiators would be willing to agree to explore the topic but
agree to nothing. Mikulak responded that up to this point conversion
had been mentioned in the talks only to say that if conversion were al-
lowed more intrusive on-site inspection would be required. Aaron felt
that the Delegation should be limited to exploring the conversion issue
with the Soviet Delegation. All agreed. Jones added that the Soviets
may even prefer destruction because of the on-site inspections associ-
ated with conversion. On the issue of bilateral versus multilateral in-
spection of facilities, Keeny explained that this would be an option
which might be used only if it proved important in reaching agreement
with the Soviets. Jones emphasized that we were seeking a true multi-
lateral convention and that bilateral inspections should not be a part of
such an agreement. Duncan felt that it was important to talk to our
allies about this possibility. Aaron offered a compromise, stating that

Chemical and Biological Weapons
he sensed there was some receptivity to this idea but that the first step
was to talk to our allies. All agreed. The meeting ended at 10:37 a.m. (S)
97.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 14, 1978
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on Chemical Weapons (C)
The SCC recently reviewed the U.S. chemical weapons posture.
The Summary of Conclusions is at Tab A.2 An issue concerning the fu-
ture of the U.S. chemical weapons stockpile requires your decision. (S)
Defense argues that an improved U.S. retaliation capability is es-
sential to the deterrence of chemical warfare and advocates the inclu-
sion of a binary production facility in the FY 1980 Defense budget. (Bi-
nary implies that munitions are filled with two relatively harmless
chemicals which when mixed after firing form the toxic agent. The ad-
vantage is improved safety in handling and storage.) Although an ac-
tual production decision would not be made for several years, the in-
tent is to replace and increase the present U.S. stockpile with modern
binary munitions. The cost in FY 1980 is only $18 million; however, the
ultimate cost of the program including production could approach $2.0
billion. (S)
On the other hand, State, ACDA and OMB acknowledge the deter-
rent role of the U.S. stockpile but maintain that because of the political
sensitivities associated with chemical warfare, it is not possible to
achieve a much improved retaliatory posture. All agree that in order to
improve the U.S. retaliatory capability additional munitions must be
forward deployed to locations in Europe. Our allies remain very nega-
tive on this issue, based not only on safety which binary munitions re-
solve in part, but more importantly on even acknowledging that NATO
is considering the prospect of chemical warfare in Europe. In addition,
Congressional attitudes are quite hostile to the idea of chemical weap-
right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed. See Document 96 for the minutes of the meeting.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ons production. Congress removed the binary facility from the budget
each time it was proposed by the previous Administration. It would re-
quire an enormous Administration effort to defend a binary facility on
the Hill, and even then, the outcome is uncertain. State, ACDA and
OMB recommend that, for now, the binary facility should not be built,
although this decision would be reviewed. As an alternative, they sug-
gest that there might be certain low cost and politically feasible steps
which could be taken to arrest the gradual deterioration of the current
stockpile. On this point, Defense maintains that there is no way to im-
prove the U.S. stockpile significantly without chemical weapons pro-
duction, and if the Administration is considering new production, a bi-
nary facility is the best approach. (S)
I concur with State, ACDA and OMB that a binary facility should
not be included in the FY 1980 budget. It would be a guaranteed no-win
situation on the Hill. If attitudes in Congress and those of our allies
change markedly or the negotiations with the Soviets take an adverse
turn, the issue can be reopened. I agree with the Defense judgment that
if the U.S. undertakes the production of new chemical munitions they
should be binary. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the exclusion of a binary facility from the FY
State, ACDA and OMB concur.3
That you approve the attached Summary of Conclusions.4
3 Carter checked “Approve” and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
4 Carter checked “Approve.”

Chemical and Biological Weapons
98.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
42041. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
State Message No. 2
1. This message provides general guidance for round nine. De-
tailed responses to the questions posed Ref A are being provided sepa-
rately in the guidance package.6 Highlights are outlined in para 5
below.
2. During round nine the Delegation should: (A) actively seek So-
viet views in areas where the Soviets have not yet responded to US
questions and proposals, (B) seek to clarify and resolve as many of the
remaining issues as possible, and (C) seek to clarify and consolidate
areas of agreement through drafting agreed language for a joint
initiative.
3. In addressing remaining issues the Delegation should devote
particular attention to trying to resolve the issues cited Ref B, which are
listed below:
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, London, Bonn, Paris, and US-
NATO. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); Robert Strand (ACDA/MA/IR),
Roger Booth (ACDA/MA/AT), (Merle MacDonald (OSD), Harry Goodall (JCS), [name
not declassified] (CIA/OSR), Les Denend (NSC), David Carlson (PM/DCA), Michael
Matheson (L/PM), and [name not declassified] (CIA); and approved by Lawrence Finch
2 See Document 90.
State that after “canvassing allied and a few key non-aligned delegations” to the UN
Committee on Disarmament, it had concluded that chemical weapons “is the most log-
ical—if not the only—one suitable for active consideration” in the UN since chemical
weapons “affected all countries having a chemical industry.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790070–1085)
tions of the UN’s Committee on Disarmament. Regarding chemical weapons, the Depart-
ment told the Delegation that it expected “the US and USSR to be subjected to consider-
able pressure and criticism on the chemical weapons issue,” in particular a proposal by
“the nonaligned and some US allies to establish a CW negotiating work group.” The Del-
egation, the Department said, “should continue to oppose the creation of such a group as
premature before a US–USSR joint initiative has been formulated and presented.” The
joint initiative, the Delegation should stress, “will ban a complete spectrum of weapons
which have been used in the past.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790038–0326)
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(A) required international on-site inspection of destruction of
stocks and disposition of facilities.
(B) Declaration of stocks and facilities.
—General declaration of stocks prior to entry into force of the
convention.
—Declaration of facilities.
(C) Destruction of facilities.
(D) Rights and functions of inspection personnel and host state
personnel during challenge on-site inspection.
4. We continue to believe it is important to resume drafting of
agreed language in order to nail down general points on which the two
sides appear to agree and to specify the more detailed points which are
essential to make agreement on the general points meaningful and ef-
fective. For these purposes we believe that language which is more de-
tailed than that discussed in round six is necessary. In drafting, the Del-
egation should be guided by the format and formulations contained in
the position summary,7 which is being provided separately, and in the
set of “expanded key elements,” which will be provided when it is
completed.
5. Key points in the guidance package:
(A) A summary of the US position is provided for transmission to
the Soviet Delegation, as agreed at the end of round eight.
(B) With regard to declared facilities, the Delegation is authorized
to explore the concept of conversion under appropriate safeguards.
Modified tactics for presenting the US position regarding mandatory
on-site inspection of facilities are outlined.
(C) Guidance is provided for responding to Soviet proposals re-
garding non-transfer and declaration of previous transfers, non-
circumvention, the list of “important” precursors, and conditions for
entry into force.
6. In our view the convention would completely preclude stock-
piling of Chemical Weapons, regardless of any reservations to the Ge-
neva protocol. The backstopping committee will study whether or not
the US should propose a specific restriction on use in order to make this
point completely clear. Depending on the conclusions of the study, fur-
ther guidance may be provided.
7. Ref C reports Soviet view that question of a role for CD in CW
should be taken up during US–USSR bilateral negotiations. The Dele-
gation should seek to delay this discussion until guidance concerning
CD Delegation suggestion of technical working group on toxicity
7 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
measurement is received. The Delegation should continue to oppose
the creation of CW negotiating working group as premature before a
US–USSR joint initiative has been formulated and presented (Ref D).
Should the Soviets propose a joint initiative to get the CD involved now
in negotiating the text of a CW convention, the Delegation should op-
pose it. (Because a comprehensive CW prohibition is so complex, and
its parts so closely interwoven, it would be extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to negotiate individual key elements separately. The inter-
relationship is apparent in the US position summary. We think it would
facilitate consensus on a multilateral convention if a common approach
were developed by the two states with the largest Chemical Weapons
stocks before the CD takes up its work. The US–USSR joint statements
19788 also refer to the complexity of CW issues.) The Delegation should
not discuss such a Soviet suggestion in detail, but rather report and
seek further guidance.
8. The Delegation should cable verbatim translation of the Soviet
position summary as soon as it is available.
9. The Delegation should continue to brief allied representatives in
Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition an offer
should be made to hold consultations with the UK, FRG and France at
the end of the round.
Vance
8 The first statement is available as “Joint Statement by the United States and the So-
viet Union to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament: Negotiations on a
Chemical Weapons Ban,” May 9, 1978 and the second statement is available as “State-
ment by the U.S. Representative (Fisher) to the Conference of the Committee on Disarma-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
99.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
6663. Subject: (C) US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations,
Round nine: Sixth (Final) Plenary Meeting, April 12, 1979.
CW Message No. 19
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Sixth and final plenary meeting of round nine was
held on April 12. Both sides presented assessments of round nine. In US
view, despite some progress on defining limitations to be placed on
super-toxic chemicals not related to chemical warfare, little or no prog-
ress took place in key areas; at same time, there seems to have been an
unraveling of understanding regarding toxins and safe irritants. The
US remains convinced that it would be a mistake to make entry into
force of the proposed convention contingent upon adherence of any
specific third state and that Soviet attempts to link such adherence to
specific provisions now under negotiations served only to interfere
with the bilateral negotiations. SovDel, for its part, also concluded that
key questions remained unresolved, citing both “objective” and “sub-
jective” difficulties. Among the latter the SovDel had not noticed any
steps by the US in round nine to meet their position. Concerning the
question of riot control agents, SovDel observed that CS had not been
specifically discussed and therefore no agreement could have been
reached between the two Delegations. Moreover, while subdivision of
irritants into “safe” and “not safe” categories had been discussed,
agreement had not been achieved. Soviet position on adherence by all
permanent members of UN security council was restated. Following
plenary, an informal meeting was held to discuss how to deal with CW
issue in the CD (septel)2 end summary.
3. The sixth and final plenary meeting of round nine was held
April 12 at the Soviet mission. Amb Israelyan opened meeting with the
suggestion that after a short exchange of views, the two sides should
hold informal discussions on how to deal with problem of Chemical
Weapons in CD. Amb Fisher agreed to this procedure (see septel) and
then made statement presenting US assessment of round nine. He
began with observation that frank exchange of views in drafting group
had clarified respective positions on number of topics relating to decla-
Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Bonn, London, Moscow, and USNATO.
2 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
ration and destruction of accumulated stocks of Chemical Weapons
and that progress had been made on defining limitations to be placed
on super-toxic chemicals not related to chemical warfare. However,
Amb Fisher stated, not much progress has been made in areas we con-
sider absolutely essential and even on questions of scope, we appear to
have witnessed an unraveling of understandings in area where we
thought there was agreement, i.e. toxins and safe irritants. Morever, the
US remains concerned by continued Soviet rejection of US proposals to
exchange of information on military activities related to protection
against chemical warfare. Similarly the US continues to attach great im-
portance to required international on-site inspection of both the de-
struction of Chemical Weapons stocks and the disposition of Chemical
Weapon facilities. In this context, we view the declaration of individual
facilities and their locations as absolutely essential to providing effec-
tive verification arrangements. No progress has been made on these
crucial issues during this round. Ambassador Fisher ended his state-
ment with a reiteration of US views that it would be a mistake to make
entry into force contingent upon adherence by any specific third coun-
tries and that Soviet attempts to establish a linkage between adherence
by specific states and various individual provisions of a future conven-
tion served only to interfere with the bilateral negotiations.
4. Amb Israelyan responded to Fisher’s assessment by asserting
that while question of subdividing irritants into safe and “not safe” cat-
egories and relevant criteria needed to accomplish this had been dis-
cussed, agreement had not yet been reached in this area. Moreover, CS
was not specifically discussed and therefore no agreement on CS could
have been reached. Israelyan then provided his own general assess-
ment of round nine, beginning with the observation that the key prob-
lems have not disappeared. In explaining the comparatively slow
progress he first referred to “objective” difficulties inherent in negotia-
tions on such a complex subject as Chemical Weapons which, he
added, “is inextricably linked to other activities of state.” Turning to
“substantive” difficulties, he noted that the USSR had taken a number
of steps to bring the sides closer together, although we may differ on
the significance of the steps. He had not noticed any similar steps by the
US and hoped that the process of bringing the sides closer together
would be a bilateral one in the next round. Nonetheless, he saw posi-
tive results in some areas such as composition of lists of super-toxic
chemicals (on an illustrative basis). Finally, and most important, both
sides confirm their intention to continue the negotiations and strive for
further progress. Israelyan then departed from his prepared remarks to
reiterate the Soviet position of participation of all permanent members
of the security council, which he maintained is a question vital to the ef-
fectiveness of the convention and which is in the interests of all con-
cerned, in particular the two negotiating states. He ended his remarks

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with the observation that the position paper presented earlier by the
US3 contained new formulations which would be studied carefully.
Sorenson
3 Not found.
100.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 24, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S.-Soviet Chemical Weapons Negotiations
I enclose for your consideration and for transmittal to the Presi-
dent a copy of a March 14, 1979 memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of
Staff concerning U.S.-Soviet chemical weapons negotiations.
The memorandum underscores the Joint Chiefs of Staff concern
that the U.S. maintain effective means for monitoring compliance with
any agreement which is reached in our negotiations with the Soviets to
ban chemical weapons. The Chiefs also ask for SCC review, prior to this
fall, of the decisions to maintain U.S. chemical warfare forces without
force improvement, and not to seek funds for the binary munitions
facility.
I support these views of the JCS.
Harold Brown
Chemical/Biological Weapons. Secret. Copy sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. In a June 30 memorandum to Brown, Brzezinski wrote that the “views of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff” had “been noted and will be brought to the attention of the President. I
suggest we examine this question in connection with the FY 1981 Budget review
process.” (Ibid.)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
Attachment
Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of
Defense Brown2
JCSM–57–29
Washington, March 14, 1979
SUBJECT
US Chemical Weapons Negotiating Position (U)
1. (S) Review of the US negotiating position summary developed
by the Chemical Weapons Backstopping Committee indicates that an
agreement fully incorporating all elements in this position would meet
the objective of a chemical weapons prohibition set forth in Presidential
Directive/NSC–15.3 However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the
current and projected asymmetries in chemical warfare capability fa-
voring the USSR provide no incentives for the Soviets to agree to any
meaningful prohibitions on chemical weapons.
2. (C) The Joint Chiefs of Staff note that the chemical weapons ne-
gotiations, in seeking to eliminate an entire means of warfare, consti-
tute a disarmament—as opposed to an arms control—undertaking.
Therefore, it is vital to national security that strong, effective provisions
be made for monitoring compliance with any agreement resulting from
such an undertaking.
3. (S) There are serious military risks inherent in this disarmament
effort. [5 lines not declassified] These risks could be offset to some extent
if all provisions of the US position summary were fully implemented.
4. (S) While the position summary includes the essential US ele-
ment requiring onsite international access for adequate verification, the
Soviets have indicated this approach to chemical weapons verification
is unacceptable. In view of this real and critical difference and of the ab-
sence of any compelling reasons for the Soviets to resolve this differ-
ence, it will be important for the US Delegation to remain resolute in its
negotiating effort. Further, it is essential that the Special Coordination
Committee review again, prior to the fall of 1979, the decision to main-
tain US chemical warfare forces without force improvement and the
decision not to seek funds for the binary munitions facility.
2 Secret. A copy was sent to U.S. Commander in Chief, Europe.
3 See Document 70.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. (U) The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you support their views
and that you also convey these views to the President.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
James E. Dalton
Major General, USAF
Vice Director, Joint Staff
101.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Third Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev
Topics: SALT III and other arms control issues
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
General David Jones
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
General G. Seignious
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Joseph Powell
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
President L.I. Brezhnev
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Marshal D.F. Ustinov
Mr. K.U. Chernenko
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
by Krimer on June 20; and approved by Aaron. The meeting took place at the Soviet Em-
bassy. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 203.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
Mr. L.M. Zamyatin
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.M. Vavilov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]
Turning to chemical weapons and the possibility of reaching
agreement to prohibit such weapons, Gromyko noted that the negotia-
tions on this question are proceeding badly and in an unsatisfactory
way. It would evidently be difficult to go into detail at this meeting, but
he wanted to make two points in this connection. First, we had major
differences between our views on questions relating to verification in
this connection and, secondly, for an agreement on chemical weapons
to be effective, it was important that all major powers, and certainly the
permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, join in such an
agreement. What kind of an agreement would that be without the par-
ticipation of China? Could one really agree to a situation in which the
Chinese alone would have a free hand to manufacture chemical
weapons? These were the major points to which he wanted to draw the
President’s attention.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical weapons.]
2 Carter did not address the issue of chemical weapons after Gromyko’s comments
and in his final two meetings with the Soviets. However, in the joint communique´ issued
after the Summit, the “two sides reaffirmed the importance of a general, complete and
verifiable prohibition of chemical weapons and agreed to intensify their efforts to pre-
pare an agreed joint proposal to the Committee on Disarmament.” (Documents on Disar-
102.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
14555. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons (CW) Negotiations,
Round Ten: Ninth (Final) Plenary Meeting, August 31, 1979.
CW Message No. 19
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow. The tenth round of negotiations

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. (Confidential—Entire text)
2. Summary: At ninth (final) plenary meeting, held August 31,
both Delegations gave wrap-up statements. US Del head Fisher out-
lined accomplishments of round, drew attention to issues involved in
drafting work and proposed both sides consider increasing resources
devoted to bilaterals. Soviet Delhead reviewed accomplishments and
made plea for common US–USSR approach to the work of the Com-
mittee on Disarmament in the chemical weapons field. Discussion of
verification issues begun at previous meeting was continued. End
Summary.
Prepared statements were presented by both sides.
4. Statements by US Del head (Amb. A.J. Fisher) contained over-
view of the round.
A. Accomplishments: Fisher said that, overall, the US Delegation
believed that round ten had been successful. He noted that in latter
stages of the round the negotiations had intensified. In Fisher’s view
the most important accomplishments were the initiation of active dis-
cussions of verification issues and initiation of efforts to draft language
for a joint initiative. He noted, on the other hand, that the major unre-
solved issues remained the same.
B. Drafting group issues. Fisher pointed out that, in order to permit
the drafting group to complete its work on the first three elements of a
joint initiative issues in the following areas needed to be resolved:
—Use of munitions for permitted purposes
—Treatment of irritants and herbicides
—Coverage of toxins
—Transfer of super-toxic chemicals to non-states parties
—Scope of the term “precursor”
C. Neglected issues. Fisher expressed disappointment that it had
not been possible to give priority attention to resolving the issues of
declaration of stocks and procedures for challenge inspection. He
pointed out that in the latter case the US had not received a response to
proposals made well over a year ago.
D. Committee on Disarmament. With respect to the Committee on
Disarmament (CD), Fisher said US was studying the Soviet August 15
suggestion that the two sides try to develop a common approach
toward possible CD work on the outline of a CW convention, (as pro-
posed by the Poles). The US hopes to respond well before the next
round begins.
E. Delegation staffing. Fisher pointed out the difficulties experi-
enced in trying to have the same Delegation members cover both the
CD and the CW bilaterals. He proposed that, for next year, both sides

Chemical and Biological Weapons
consider assigning a senior political officer and several advisers solely
to chemical weapons-related work.
5. Soviet Del head (Amb. V.L. Israelyan) also presented a wrap-up
statement.
A. Overall assessment. Israelyan asserted that there had not been a
single major issue where the Soviet Del did not present new views and
proposals which took US views into account. He said that while the
major issues remained there had been an active and useful exchange on
verification.
B. Drafting group. Israelyan noted the promising beginning of ef-
forts to draft language for a joint initiative. He said that in this connec-
tion the exchange of position summaries during the last round had
been most useful.2 Enough time and attention should be devoted to
drafting in the next round. The drafting group should also give atten-
tion to clarifying positions and narrowing areas of disagreement.
C. Committee on Disarmament (CD) both Delegations received
verbal pat on the back from Israelyan for presenting the detailed joint
progress report to the CD in July. Israelyan expressed concern, how-
ever, about US-Soviet difference on how to deal with CW related work
of the CD. In his view, first priority should be given to the success of the
bilateral negotiations. For this reason an effort should be made to coor-
dinate positions concerning possible CD work on the outline of a CW
convention.
6. As at the previous plenary meeting, verification issues were dis-
cussed extemporaneously.
A. Fisher responded to Soviet question from previous meeting
about US suggestions for using verification procedures taken from the
IAEA safeguards system, the Bilateral Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Ex-
plosions (PNET), and the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) negotiations.
He said that each treaty requires specially tailored verification provi-
sions. However, all three cases mentioned by Soviets had a common el-
ement; on-site inspections had been agreed on in advance and pro-
vided for in the convention. While the balance between challenge
inspection and systematic inspection for a CW convention had to be tai-
lored to its special situation, the other three cases could provide a
guide.
B. Israelyan agreed that every treaty required verification provi-
sions suited to the particular nature of the agreement; there can be no
general approach. He said that Soviet side is seeking the most effective
system for verification of chemical weapons prohibition. In the Soviet
2 The U.S. and Soviet position summaries are in Telegram 12183 from the Mission in
Geneva, July 18; ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
view, lack of effectiveness is just as important an objection to the US ap-
proach as the risk the US approach poses to commercial and national
security interests. Israelyan said visits to declared locations, as pro-
posed by the US, might only create an illusion of compliance. USSR be-
lieves that a combination of national declarations and challenge inspec-
tion would provide the most effective verification system
7. Deputies made brief report on progress in the drafting group.
Focus was on substantive issues which need to be resolved in order to
complete the first three elements (basic prohibition, definitions, non-
transfer/non-assistance). More terms may have to be included in “defi-
nitions” element as work on additional elements is undertaken.
Sorenson
103.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 4, 1979
SUBJECT
Binary Chemical Munitions Facility
My memorandum of May 24, 19792 pointed out the concern felt by
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and myself regarding the need
to maintain effective means of monitoring compliance with any agree-
ment which is reached with the Soviets to ban chemical weapons. It
also requested review of the 1978 decision to defer funding for the bi-
nary munitions facility. Your response suggested we examine this deci-
sion in connection with the FY 1981 budget review process.
We have been participating in the bilateral negotiations with the
Soviets since 1976 and see little or no movement on their part to resolve
critical differences. In view of the continuing degradation of our deter-
rent stockpile and the serious asymmetry of capabilities in this area, I
directed that the binary chemical munitions facility be included in the
Department of the Army basic budget submission in the amount of $19
Chemical/Biological Weapons. Secret.
2 See Document 100.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
million. I believe this action will provide the Soviets a clear indication
of our dissatisfaction with the negotiations, and will signal the in-
creasing difficulty of exercising restraint in our own chemical warfare
capabilities while negotiations toward a comprehensive ban continue
without progress.
Please inform the other concerned agencies of this action and so-
licit their views. If any agency forwards a nonconcurrence, then the
SCC should resolve the issue in time to insure a decision prior to for-
warding the FY 1981 budget to the President.
Harold Brown
104.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Committee on Disarmament Involvement in CW Negotiations (C)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Jerome Kahan (Dep. Director—Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs)
Stephen Steiner (Dep. Director—Office of Disarmament & Arms Control)
OSD
Dr. Lynn Davis (Dept. Asst. Sec. for Policy Plans & NSC Affairs)
Ms. Shelia Buckley (Director, Negotiating Policy)
JCS
General John Pustay (Asst. to the Chairman)
Ray McCrory (Chief, SALT Staff)
[name not declassified] (Office of Scientific Intelligence)
took place in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny (Acting Director)
Alan Neidle (Dep. Asst. Director for Multi-Lateral Affairs)
Charles Floweree (Chief, Intelligence Relations Division)
OSTP
John Marcum (Senior Policy Analyst)
White House
David Aaron
NSC
General Jasper Welch
Jerry Oplinger
Marshall Brement
Jim Rentschler
The mini-SCC met to review whether the U.S. should now agree to
the formation of a CD Working Group to begin discussion of CW
Keeny reviewed the current situation. In the bilateral negotiation,
progress has been very slow because of Soviet intransigeance on basic
issues, above all verification questions. Our substantive position is
clearly defined and we want a treaty on our terms, but the prospects are
not now encouraging. Pressures have mounted for multilateral in-
volvement; our allies and others strongly desire it and the Soviets sup-
port it. Our isolation on this question is politically costly and not
helping to achieve our objective. ACDA believes we should agree to the
formation of a CD Working Group with a one-year mandate to compile
a list of topics to be covered by a treaty.2 This will put pressure on the
Soviets on substantive questions. (C)
David Aaron asked what other matters are on the CD agenda this
security assurances, and 4) comprehensive program for disarma-
Kahan reviewed the foreign policy considerations involved. The
Soviets are stonewalling in the bilateral negotiation and exploiting our
isolation on the CD question, making it appear that the U.S. is the in-
transigeant party. The Soviets are vulnerable on their positions, and
also on their reported use of chemical weapons in Southeast Asia and
2 ACDA’s position is laid out in a memorandum from Davies to Brzezinski, January
22; Ibid.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
Afghanistan.3 Thus, CD involvement can help to bring pressure on
them in the bilateral. The allies have consistently indicated their strong
desire for CD involvement, both before and since the Afghanistan inva-
sion.4 They want serious verification provisions and will strongly sup-
port us. France has just entered the CD arena; French views and in-
terests on this subject are similar to our own. By accommodating these
allied pressures, we will gain political credit and improve our position
vis-a-vis the Soviets. The nonaligned do not understand many of the
issues, and this provides an opportunity to educate them and expose
the weakness of the Soviet position; the majority is likely to support us.
The PRC will take its seat for the first time this year, and has expressed
an interest in CW; this provides an opportunity to work with them on
an arms control issue. If we maintain our present position, the PRC will
be frustrated and complain of superpower dominance. (C)
General Pustay said that the JCS views the problem in a military
context; the Soviets are well ahead in CW capabilities and we can nei-
ther deter or respond in kind. Only the bilateral forum can provide a
negotiated solution. If we yield now to pressures for multilateral in-
volvement, we will create expectations for a treaty which may well be
translated into later pressures for relaxation of our substantive posi-
tion. It is better to take minimum losses now than larger losses later.
The Joint Chiefs also believe that the U.S. should review our entire posi-
tion on CW in light of the lack of progress, and reconsider the question
of CW modernization. (C)
Davis said that the Secretary of Defense supports the Joint Chiefs
on modernization and on the need to proceed with a binary facility. But
OSD does not believe that the tactical question of CD involvement is
linked to these issues, and need not prejudice them. (C)
3 Reports that the Soviet Union’s ally Vietnam had employed chemical weapons
against tribes in Laos and Cambodia had been publicized by the ACDA and the CIA on
tion condemning such actions. (“Statement by the ACDA Assistant Director for Multi-
lateral Affairs (Davies) Before a Subcommittee of the House Committee on Foreign Af-
fairs: Use of Chemical Weapons in Indochina, December 12, 1979,” “Central Intelligence
Agency Paper: Chemical Warfare in Laos, December 12, 1979,” and “House Resolution
by Soviet forces, telegram 20775 to Conakry and other posts, January 24, contains the text
of Department of State Press Secretary Hodding Carter III’s statement concerning “un-
confirmed” press reports that the Soviets had used chemical weapons in Afghanistan. He
linked these reports to previous allegations about the use of chemical weapons by Laos
and Vietnam. Carter said that if the reports were true, “such action would be an outra-
geous and inhuman act against defenseless peoples” and made the conclusion of a chem-
ical weapons convention more “urgent.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800042–0556)
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Aaron suggested that we take advantage of the upcoming consul-
tations with allied and other western countries to build a strong con-
sensus as a basis for US agreement to CD involvement. We would make
clear that we have not yet decided, but are considering a shift in our
past position if satisfactory assurances are received that we will have
strong support to avoid expansion of the CD’s role or erosion of our po-
sition on verification. To reduce the problem of raising false expecta-
tions, we will emphasize that we would take this step because of the
lack of progress in the bilateral, and need to be sure that it will
strengthen, not weaken, prospects for a satisfactory bilateral outcome.
We would then take a final decision before the opening of the CD ses-
sion on February 6, in the light of responses to this approach. (C)
There was general consensus with this approach, except for the
JCS representative who said that he was unable to concur. (C)
105.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons (U)
A Mini-SCC chaired by David Aaron2 has discussed whether the
US should change its negotiating tactics to allow the Committee on Dis-
armament (CD) to begin limited multilateral discussion of a CW treaty.
State, ACDA, and OSD favor such a shift on the grounds that it will end
our present and costly isolation on the question and will be helpful to
our position in the US-Soviet bilateral negotiation. The JCS strongly op-
poses the shift; they believe it will increase expectations for a treaty and
eventually create pressures for relaxation of our substantive positions.
It was decided that in upcoming consultations with key allies and other
western nations, we will indicate that we are considering a shift if we
can be assured of strong support to keep the CD’s mandate narrowly
limited, and in protecting our substantive position. A final decision will
initialed the top of the memorandum.
2 See Document 104.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
be made in light of responses received. The JCS representative noted
that he could not concur in this approach. (S)
106.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
21764. Subject: Allied Consultations on Chemical Weapons (CW)
1. (C—Entire text).
2. This message provides guidance for the US Delegation partici-
pating in bilateral (US-France) and quadrilateral (US-UK-FRG-France)
CW consultations in Paris on January 28 and consultations with the
Japanese CD Delegation in Geneva. Guidance on the subject of a CD
working group on CW will be provided septel.4
3. US-French consultations.
A. The purpose of the bilateral consultations is to discuss the re-
ported use of Chemical Weapons in Laos, and Kampuchea and to con-
sider possibilities for diplomatic action (see Ref A). We would also at
that time discuss our concerns relating to Afghanistan.
B. The Delegation should brief the French on the reported use of
Chemical Weapons in Laos, Kampuchea, and Afghanistan, drawing on
intelligence data provided separately, USG statements issued on the
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); and approved
by Flowerree (ACDA/MA), Oplinger (NSC), Ronald Lorton (NEA/PAB), (Merle Mac-
Donald (OSD), Steven Steiner (PM/DCA), Edmund McWilliams (EA/VLC), M. Christine
Vick (EUR/RPM), and Manuel Sanches (JCS). Sent for information to London, Bonn,
USUN, USNATO, the Mission in Geneva, Moscow, and Vientiane.
sion that had occurred in December in Washington between PM Deputy Director Kahan
and the French Ambassador to the CD, De la Gorce, about the reported use of chemical
weapons in Southeast Asia. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
subject and the background package on Southeast Asia (contained
C. The overall message of the briefing with regard to Southeast
Asia should be that:
(1) While we do not have absolute proof, the results of USG inves-
tigations support the conclusion that some chemical agent or combina-
tion of agents has been used in Laos as part of the Lao Government’s
effort to bring the H’mong Hill tribes under its control;
(2) There is also limited evidence that it has been used in Kampu-
chea; and
(3) The US is very concerned by the reports and believes concerted
international diplomatic action could contribute to a resolution of the
problem.
D. The Delegation should also seek to draw the French out on rele-
vant intelligence and other information available to them on use of CW
in Southeast Asia.
E. Possibilities for further diplomatic action which should be dis-
cussed include:
—De´marches by France, UK, FRG, and possibly other interested
countries, similar to those already made by the US to the governments
of Laos, Vietnam, and the Soviet Union regarding use of CW in South-
east Asia;
—Efforts to have an investigation by an impartial international
body (e.g., the International Committee of the Red Cross);
—Expressions of concern and any appropriate action in interna-
tional political bodies (e.g., the UNGA, Security Council, Committee on
Disarmament); and
—In conjunction with requests from concerned states, possible ac-
tion by French as 1925 Geneva protocol depositary to convene a meet-
ing of protocol parties to consider the issue.
F. For briefing on Afghanistan, Delegation should draw on Ref B.
4. Quadrilateral consultations.
The Delegation should consult with the allies on:
A. The US–USSR bilateral negotiations on a CW ban (guidance
para 5);
B. The role of the Committee on Disarmament (CD) on the CW
issue; and
5 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
C. The reported use of Chemical Weapons in Laos, Kampuchea
and Afghanistan, including possibilities for further diplomatic action
(guidance para 7).
5. Bilateral Negotiations.
A. The Delegation should begin by giving our reasons for having
rescheduled the start of CW round eleven.6
B. The Delegation should review at an appropriate level of detail
the state-of play in the bilateral negotiations, drawing on the wrap-up
C. During round eleven the US will:
(1) Continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues,
particularly verification; and
(2) Continue drafting in order to nail down points thought to be
agreed.
D. In view of past allied interest in these topics, the Delegation
should indicate to the allies that the round eleven guidance authorizes
the Delegation:
—To discuss possible mutually agreed procedures for mothballing
declared facilities. Our objective is to facilitate verification by eventu-
ally specifying which actions can and cannot be taken.
—To be prepared to agree to a scaled-down version of the Soviet
proposal on declaration of past transfers. We will attempt to trade US
agreement on this proposal for Soviet willingness to accommodate the
US proposal for exchange of information on CW protective activities.
—To explore, in the event the current US effort to keep safe riot
control agents and herbicides out of the convention entirely is rejected,
the possibility of adopting legally binding constraints consistent with
our policy on permitted uses in return for more explicit recognition of
those permitted uses.
E. The US Delegation will continue to brief allied representatives
in Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition, we would
be willing to hold consultations with the UK, FRG and France at the
end of the round.
6. The role of the CD on the CW issue. Guidance on the question of
a working group will be provided septel. In connection with the discus-
sion of the working group proposal, Delegation might also explore
briefly allied views on the Australian proposal to hold small informal
technical seminars on CW to acquaint working level members of inter-
6 Telegram 4614 from the Department of State, undated, asked for the postpone-
7 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ested Delegation with some of the technical complexities of the issue.
Delegation may tell the allies that, as we understand the proposal, such
seminars would serve as a technical foundation for any future CD ef-
forts on CW. (One possibility for a US presentation might be a briefing
on destruction of stocks). Del may indicate US willingness to partici-
pate in such seminars and encourage our allies to do so as well.
7. Laos, Kampuchea and Afghanistan.
The Delegation should briefly review the situation for the allies
and seek their views on further diplomatic action. In this discussion US
reps may draw on the guidance (para 3 above) for the US-French con-
sultations and on the results of those consultations.
8. US-Japanese consultations.
In line with past practice, US reps should seek an early opportu-
nity to meet in Geneva with Japanese CD Delegation. At the meeting
US reps may draw upon guidance for Paris consultations (paras 3–6
above).
Christopher
107.
Telegram From Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
3210. Subj: (C) Allied Consultations on Chemical Weapons (CW)
Issues: US-Soviet Negotiations. Ref: A) State 217642 B) 79 Geneva
1. C—Entire text.
2. Summary: In quadrilateral CW consultations, US reps briefed
allies on bilateral US-Soviet CW negotiations. Allies raised a number of
detailed questions. Discussion centered around verification of a CW
prohibition. End summary.
3. Quadrilateral (US-UK-FRG-France) consultations on Chemical
Weapons (CW) issues were held in Paris on January 28, 1980. This tele-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Bonn, London, the Mission in Geneva, US-
NATO, USUN, and Moscow.
2 See Document 106.
3 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
gram contains report of US reps on discussion of the US–USSR CW ne-
gotiations. Septels report discussions of a CW working group in the
committee on disarmament (CD) and of the reported use of CW in
Laos,4 Kampuchea and Afghanistan.
4. US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations.
A. Akalovsky (US Del head) began by stating US desire to continue
CW arms control negotiations and explaining reason for postponement
of consultations. He said that in the course of reviewing the US rela-
tionship with the Soviets and deciding on appropriate actions to take in
response to their invasion of Afghanistan, USG concluded that CW
arms control should continue to be pursued. This decision was taken
both because of the important international dimension associated with
CW and because it is clearly in US security interests to pursue a com-
prehensive CW prohibition. We were sensitive, nonetheless, to the im-
pression which could be created by resuming a security-related bilat-
eral negotiation within days of announcing a series of retaliatory steps
against the Soviets.5 Therefore, we proposed to the Soviets that the start
of the next round of the bilaterals be rescheduled to correspond with
the opening of the CD. The Soviets agreed to resume the talks February
11. US view, in light of the as yet unconfirmed reports that CW is being
used in Afghanistan and the evidence that it has been used recently in
Southeast Asia, is that it is now all the more urgent and important to
continue to press on CW arms control and conclude agreement on a
comprehensive and verifiable CW prohibition. In any event, US needed
this extra time in order to prepare better for these consultations as there
are other important CW-related matters which we felt should be dis-
cussed, including Southeast Asia-Afghanistan and the question of how
to handle CW in the CD.
B. Drawing fully on wrap-up telegram from round ten (Ref B) Aka-
lovsky outlined noteworthy aspects of most recent round of bilateral
negotiations and summarized positive and negative aspects of the
round. As instructed Ref A, he informed allies that in next round US
Del will continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues,
particularly verification. Del will also seek to continue drafting to nail
down points thought to be agreed. Akalovsky informed allies of key
points in Del’s guidance, as given Ref A, para 5C.
the use of chemical weapons. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800073–1105) The telegram discussing a chemical weapons working group in the CD
was not found.
whether or not to retaliate against the Soviet Union after it invaded Afghanistan. For
more on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
C. Kunz (FRG Del head) recalled strong German support for man-
datory on-site inspection of civil as well as military chemical industries
and asked for clarification of US views. He noted that effort to press So-
viets on this issue could have tactical value but stressed that the FRG
did not want to embarrass the US by having a stronger position on this
particular question. The FRG would be prepared to drop its insistence
on such inspection if the US wished. Akalovsky responded that while
the US did not favor this form of inspection in a CW convention, it
would be useful for the FRG to maintain its position for the time being
to put as much pressure as possible on the Soviet verification position.
Reeve, UK Del head, added that it was difficult to see how the treaty
could operate without mandatory inspection of civil industry.
D. Kunz asked whether US expected momentum from end of
round ten to be maintained in next round. Citing press reports to this
effect, he asked whether the US planned to enhance its CW capabilities
in order to put more negotiating pressure on the Soviets. Akalovsky
said that while the end of round ten was active in comparison with the
almost total inaction at the beginning of the round, this development
should not be overemphasized. He noted that no funds for binary
Chemical Weapons have been included in the new defense budget. The
issue will be reviewed late this year. Progress in the bilateral negotia-
tions will be one of the factors considered. Akalovsky added that there
is growing concern in the USG that Soviets are stonewalling on verifica-
tion in the knowledge that the US offensive CW capability continues to
deteriorate.
E. Reeve (UK) asked a series of questions on relatively technical as-
pects of the US negotiating position in the bilaterals. In response to UK
inquiry as to whether special verification provisions were necessary for
binary Chemical Weapons, Akalovsky said that US believed that bi-
naries were adequately dealt with by generally applicable verification
provisions. He answered UK question on possibility of a separate veri-
fication agreement with limited participation (as in CTB) saying US did
not envision such an arrangement.
F. Responding to UK question about need to allow ten years for de-
struction of stocks, Akalovsky said this period had already been
agreed. Sanches (US) said US analyses showed ten years to be neces-
sary. When Reeve inquired how many third world countries possessed
CW stocks, Akalovsky responded saying he did not have this informa-
tion immediately available, but that it might be possible to exchange
such data through other channels.
G. Reeve asked whether US believed CW treaty could be ade-
quately verified by combination of national technical means and on-site
inspection. Akalovsky noted that no agreement can be foolproof, but

Chemical and Biological Weapons
that if all elements of the US verification position were accepted, ade-
quate confidence would exist.
H. French also raised a series of detailed questions d’Aboville
(French Del head) asked rhetorically if it might not be possible to have
separate verification agreements for those parties which possessed CW
stocks and those which did not. He also noted that Soviet position on
verification contains internal contradictions which could be exploited
by allies. In response to question about verification provisions for non-
transfer, Akalovsky (US) said that no specific provisions had been pro-
posed and that suspected transfers could be investigated using the
challenge inspection provisions.
5. Akalovsky (US) said US would continue to brief allies in Geneva
and offered to have quadrilateral consultations at the end of next round
of US-Soviet negotiations, if that were generally desired.
6. Following completion of quadrilateral consultations, Mikulak
and Sanches met with French experts, at their request, to clarify points
of uncertainty identified in French comparison of US and Soviet
positions.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]
108.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
39607. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations, Round
1. (C—Entire text)
2. This message provides general guidance for round eleven. De-
tailed responses to the questions posed Reftel are being provided sepa-
rately in the guidance package.3 Highlights are outlined below.
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); cleared by
Flowerree (ACDA/MA), David Carlson (PM/DCA), Oplinger (NSC), Merle MacDonald
(OSD), Harry Wilson (JCS), and [name not declassified]; and approved by Thomas Davies
(ACDA/MA). Sent for information to Moscow, USNATO, London, Bonn, and Paris.
2 Not found.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. At the opening of the round the Delegation should say that the
US is deeply disturbed by reports that Chemical Weapons have been
used in Laos, Kampuchea, and Afghanistan. These reports make it all
the more important to negotiate a complete, effective and verifiable
prohibition of chemical weapons. The bilateral negotiations can be in-
strumental in achievement of that goal. Delegation should state (A) US
expects all states to observe the principles and objectives of the Geneva
protocol and (B) US hopes that USSR will join with US in reaffirming
publicly support for the protocol.
4. During round eleven the Delegation’s strategy should be to:
A. Emphasize the US expectation that the pace undertaken in the
latter half of round ten will be continued and perhaps accelerated;
B. Continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues,
particularly verification-related issues (including declarations); and
C. Continue drafting in order to reaffirm and define precisely
points thought to be agreed. (The Delegation should continue to be
guided by the format and substance contained in the position summary
provided to the Soviets during round nine.)
5. Key points in the guidance package:
A. Discussion points have been provided on the possibility of at-
taining mutually agreed procedures for mothballing declared facilities.
Our objective is to facilitate verification by eventually specifying which
actions can and cannot be taken.
B. Guidance is provided for responding to Soviet round ten state-
ments on verification and on declarations.
C. The Delegation is authorized to agree to a scaled-down version
of the Soviet proposal on declaration of past transfers. If possible US
agreement on this proposal should be traded for Soviet willingness to
accommodate the US proposal for exchange of information on CW pro-
tective activities (round 5 guidance).
D. Further guidance on safe riot control chemicals and herbicides
is included in the package.
6. The Delegation should continue to brief allied representatives in
Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition an offer
should be made to hold quadrilateral consultations with the US, FRG
and France at the end of the round.
Vance

Chemical and Biological Weapons
109.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Earle) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 5, 1980
SUBJECT
Possible Soviet Biological Weapons Activities
There is a growing body of evidence—[less than 1 line not declassi-
fied]—pointing toward the occurrence of a serious accident in April
1979 at a facility in Sverdlovsk which has long been suspected of being
involved in biological warfare (BW) activities.
One interpretation of the accident is that a large amount of dry BW
agent was released into the air as a result of an explosion at the facility.
The presence of a large amount of BW agent would raise a question re-
garding Soviet compliance with the BW Convention’s prohibition on
production and stockpiling of BW agent.
Given the potential seriousness of this situation, and the fact that
the BW Convention Review Conference is underway in Geneva,2 I be-
lieve we should review this matter on an urgent basis. The first step
would be the preparation as quickly as possible of a thorough all-
source intelligence assessment of the incident. We have asked CIA to
expedite publication of such an assessment, and I understand that a
coordinated report should be available in the next few days.
Depending on the intelligence assessment, we should consider
whether it would be appropriate to bring this matter up with the So-
viets—and whether to do so before the Review Conference concludes
around March 21st. In this connection, I note that Article V of the Treaty
provides for direct consultations between Parties, while Article VI pro-
vides for a formal process for complaints being lodged with the UN
after a Party “finds” that any other Party is in violation. We may also
have to decide what position to take on past compliance in the final
document of the Review Conference.
Ralph Earle II3
3 Earle signed the memorandum “Ralph.” Under his signature, he wrote “I have
discussed the substance of this memo with Cy, who agrees and suggests that we have an
SCC meeting as soon as possible after receipt of the intelligence assessment. RWE.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
110.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Reported Use of Chemical Weapons
As you know, we are continuing to receive and analyze reports of
the use of lethal chemical weapons (CW) by the Soviets and some of
their friends in Afghanistan, Laos, and Kampuchea. Press and Congres-
sional attention is intensifying.
Efforts to Date
We have taken a substantial number of steps to assemble pertinent
data and make our concerns known. Our country officers conducted
the first systematic interviews of Hmong refugees and took the initial
steps on the diplomatic front to raise the level of consciousness re-
garding reported use of gas in Laos and Kampuchea. Working with De-
fense, we organized a very professional investigation by a medical
team sent to refugee camps in Thailand. We have made de´marches to
the parties concerned with regard to use in Indochina and have had our
Delegations express concern over the reports in general in the Human
Rights Commission (HRC), the Committee on Disarmament (CD), and
the US/Soviet negotiations on CW.
Strategy for the Future
We have thought through a broad internationally-oriented strat-
egy that builds on the actions already taken—a strategy intended to
mobilize our allies and other concerned states behind the effort to re-
solve the CW use issue. We particularly need an investigation into the
reports by some impartial third party or international group. However,
for this approach to succeed we must be careful so that we can avoid
being perceived as attempting to engage others in the growing East/
West rivalry.
The strategy consists of seven interrelated parts, setting out a
number of actions to involve other states and appropriate international
fora more actively in the issue. Specifically:
and the CIA.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
—Intensified collection efforts to further substantiate the reports, par-
ticularly but not exclusively focused on Afghanistan—[less than 1 line
not declassified] Working with [less than 1 line not declassified] other coun-
tries, we will press for acquisition of physical data (e.g., gas residue,
empty canisters or dud rounds, blood samples from victims). We are
examining the feasibility of sending a US medical team to Pakistan to
interview Afghan refugees who may have first-hand knowledge of CW
use.
—Consulting with Allies and other interested countries, stressing US
concern over the reports; providing briefings; and seeking support for
our strategy.
—Stimulating multilateral action, most importantly an investigation
into this matter by a disinterested third party or an apolitical interna-
tional organization. In the HRC and appropriate committees of the
UNGA we will request that an observer team investigate the reports
and/or that the SYG appoint an ad hoc Experts Group to study the
issue. As this is unlikely to work, we are also considering other interna-
tional bodies and approaches.
—Consulting further with the French on their idea of convening a
meeting of the States Parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol to look into
the reports.
—Making appropriate de´marches to the countries involved whenever
the intelligence justifies an approach.
—Public expressions of concern, continuing to say that if the appar-
ently credible reports are true, we would regard such use as outrageous
and inhumane.
—Keeping Congress well informed. And thorough documentation of
our actions, as a report on this issue is owed the House Foreign Affairs
Committee in four months.
We will continue to pursue this strategy vigorously, working with
your staff and appropriate agencies in its implementation.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
111.
Intelligence Assessment1
Washington, March 10, 1980
Intelligence Community Assessment of Disease Outbreak in
Sverdlovsk (C)
The Weapon and Space Systems Intelligence Committee has re-
viewed all available intelligence to determine if a reported disease out-
break in the Soviet Union in April 1979 was associated with a biological
warfare program and has determined the following: (C)
• An extraordinary outbreak of a disease, probably pulmonary an-
thrax, occurred at Sverdlovsk in April 1979. (S)
• The number of deaths and the virulence of the disease were sig-
nificant enough to force the Soviets to impose a quarantine in the area.
The situation was not brought under control until late May 1979. (S)
• The outbreak in the city was a result of an accident in southwest
Sverdlovsk at the military facility that has long been suspected of being
engaged in research and development on biological warfare agents. (S)
• The nature of the accident and the resultant number of disease
victims strongly indicate that the quantity of infectious agent exceeds
that reasonably expected to be required for prophylactic, protection, or
other peaceful purposes. (S)
• The official silence on this incident is in sharp contrast to usual
public announcements of naturally occurring disease epidemics in the
[less than 1 line not declassified] has provided consistent information
regarding time, location, and a disease outbreak associated with a mili-
tary biological warfare facility and has been supported by [less than 1
line not declassified] Specific details provided by these sources are tech-
nically accurate and does provide a plausible explanation for what
happened. (S)
We have considered explanations of this incident other than the re-
lease of a large quantity of disease-producing agent from a biological
warfare facility. None of these alternatives, including an improperly
conducted vaccine testing or production program, adequately explains
what occurred. Therefore, the Weapon and Space Systems Intelligence
Committee, with the exception of State Department, concludes that
there is a high probability that the Soviets still have an active biological
warfare agent program at this Sverdlovsk facility. (S)
sessment to Moscow and the Mission in Geneva in telegram 68653, March 15. (National

Chemical and Biological Weapons
State Department believes that the April 1979 accident provides evidence
that biological warfare stocks were involved; but that there is not adequate evi-
dence to conclude that the facility is involved in current biological warfare
production. (S)
112.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Soviet Compliance with Biological Warfare Convention
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher
David Aaron
Jerome Kahan Dep. Dir., Pol-Mil
NSC
Affairs
Maj. Gen. Jasper Welch
Defense
Marshall Brement
Harold Brown
OSTP
Walter Slocombe Dep. Under
Frank Press
Secretary for Policy
Ben Huberman
ACDA
CIA
Ralph Earle
Stanfield Turner
Spurgeon Keeny Deputy Director
[name not declassified] Office of
JCS
Strategic Weapons Research
Gen. David Jones
OMB
Lt. Gen. John Pustay
Randy Jayne Assoc. Dir., NSIA
DOE
John Deutsch Under Secretary
It was agreed that the [less than 1 line not declassified] data in hand
([less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet official silence) supports that
there was a major accident in Sverdlovsk in April 1979 in which a cloud
of agent escaped from a military facility long suspected to be a biolog-
ical warfare facility and subsequently infected people in the local vi-
cinity of the facility, causing between [numbers not declassified] deaths
[less than 1 line not declassified] due to anthrax, a known biological war-
Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
fare agent. The number and distribution of victims, the military juris-
diction over the subsequent quarantine, the inspection of materials
leaving the city during the quarantine, and the visit of a high-level com-
mission from Moscow early in the quarantine [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] that the quantity of agent involved exceeds that permissible
under the Biological Warfare Convention2 for public health purposes.
No other hypothesis has been advanced which could reasonably ex-
plain the [less than 1 line not declassified] reports. (FYI: These reports
have been trickling in since the summer of 1979, but only on 10 March
did the Intelligence Community come to a formal determination of the
conclusions outlined above. End FYI) (S)
It was noted that the BW Convention negotiating record on what
quantity is allowed for these purposes is somewhat ambiguous: the
U.S. used the phrase “laboratory quantities,” whereas the Soviets stuck
to “certain quantities.” Therefore, there is no numerically defined
quantity for the permissible amount. (S)
Nonetheless, it was agreed that the incident raises serious issues of
compliance by the Soviet Union of the Biological Warfare Convention.
Further, although the evidence contains some ambiguity, it is suffi-
ciently persuasive that it cannot be ignored and is sufficient to merit
raising with the Soviet Union under Article V of the Biological Warfare
Convention, which provides for direct consultation in such circum-
stances. It was further agreed that the evidence in this case is about as
good as we can expect to have for monitoring compliance with this BW
Convention, and testimony at the time of ratification so indicated. (S)
It was agreed that the appropriate channel for approaching the So-
viets was from Ambassador Watson to the Soviet Deputy Foreign Min-
ister in Moscow. State will prepare an appropriate cable whose purpose
will be to get a serious and businesslike response, to indicate the seri-
ousness with which the U.S. Government takes the matter, and to indi-
cate we believe a satisfactory resolution has bearing on the success of
other arms control negotiations. (S)
It was noted that there is currently on-going in Geneva a Review
Conference on the Biological Warfare Convention which is scheduled
to finish on 21 March. Accordingly, the approach to the Soviets should
be made as soon as possible. (S)
With regard to instructions to our Delegation at the Review Con-
ference, it was agreed that: (1) we should inform the Soviet Delegation
of our approach in Moscow; (2) we should seek to avoid any language
in the Review Conference report which might indicate that there had
been full compliance with the Convention; (3) we should brief appro-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
priate allied Delegations on the reasons for our reservation on compli-
ance; (4) we would not seek to accuse the Soviets directly or to overly
dramatize the situation pending any Soviet response; and (5) we
should not support a recent Swedish initiative to amend the BW Con-
vention to provide for a Consultative Commission but consider sup-
port for a UK response to the Swedes which suggests some consultative
arrangements within the UN. (FYI: The Convention now provides for
private consultation and cooperation under Article V and provides for
raising unresolved issues in the UN Security Council under Article VI.
The thrust of the Swedish proposal is to provide an international body
of inquiry which would not be subject to major power veto; this non-
veto aspect has made the Swedish proposal attractive to many non-
aligned members of the Convention. End FYI) (S)
It was noted that the extant intelligence information was briefed to
the intelligence communities yesterday. It was agreed that our ap-
proach to the Soviets should be communicated to the Foreign Relations
Committees forthwith. (S)
It was noted that the Sverdlovsk incident was alleged in the
German press and brought forth a strong denial by Tass. It was agreed
that there is a high probability that the matter will shortly come out in
the U.S. press. It was also agreed that a working group will prepare ma-
terial suitable for briefing the U.S. press on background if that is later de-
cided to be useful. (S)
It was agreed that a number of technical and intelligence points
should be followed up with some urgency. (C)
113.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
68654. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree only. Subject: Sverd-
lovsk BW Incident.
1. (Secret—Entire text).
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent immediate to the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by Mark
Palmer (PM/DCA) and Martin Mclean (EUR/SOV); cleared by Aaron (NSC), Robert
Martin (INR/PMT), Marshall Brement (NSC), Shulman (S/MS), Earle (ACDA), Peter
Wilson (S/P), Slocombe (DUSD/PP), John Taylor (S/S–O), J.S. (Pustay), McCrory (CIA),
Jerome Kahan (PM), and Robert Barry (EUR); and approved by Christopher (D).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. Summary and action requested. There is disturbing evidence
pointing to the release of lethal biological agent as the cause of nu-
merous deaths in Sverdlovsk, USSR, in April–May 1979. The intelli-
gence community’s present conclusions and report have been sent to
you septel.2 Ambassador Watson is instructed to raise this matter with
deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko as soon as possible. Ambassador
Flowerree should inform Ambassador Israelyan of the de´marche
promptly after it is made in Moscow.3 End summary.
3. We are deeply concerned about the the incident in Sverdlovsk in
April 1979 and its implications. We wish to make a serious effort to
discuss this issue bilaterally in accordance with Article V of the Biolog-
ical Weapons (BW) Convention. Speed is essential in view of the end of
the BW Convention Review Conference on March 21, and our desire to
give the Soviets as much time as possible to give USA considered re-
sponse. It is in both our interests to have at least a preliminary response
before the end of the Review Conference, since we will have to state at
the conference that we have raised a compliance issue.
4. Ambassador Watson should personally make the following
points as soon as possible to Korniyenko or, should he be unavailable,
to another official on the First Deputy Minister or Deputy Minister
level. Points should be provided in the form of a Non-Paper as well.
A.—The United States and the Soviet Union have a continuing in-
terest in sustaining our mutual efforts to control the arms race.
B.—I have been instructed to raise a matter which potentially has
extremely serious implications for the future of arms control negotia-
tions between our countries and more specific bearing on the Biological
Weapons Convention.
C.—Although no public announcement was made by Soviet au-
thorities, for some time we have been aware of reports of an extraordi-
nary outbreak of disease which was apparently pulmonary anthrax,
which caused numerous deaths in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, and which
resulted in the establishment of a quarantine.
D.—We have now received further information which indicates
that this extraordinary outbreak appears to have been caused by the re-
lease of a quantity of anthrax agent exceeding that justified for prophy-
3 On March 17, the Mission in Geneva reported that when informed of the
de´marche, “Israelyan’s only reaction was to bemoan the fact that this development
would further complicate the already difficult task of agreeing to a final declaration for
the BW Review Conference. He also said that he had not been informed by Moscow of the
US de´marche.” (Telegram 4292 from the Mission in Geneva, March 17; National Ar-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
lactic, protective, or other peaceful purposes and that it originated at a
military facility in Sverdlovsk.
E.—Article V of the Biological Weapons Convention provides that
the parties shall consult and cooperate with one another in solving any
problems which may arise. In accordance with that article, the US gov-
ernment is asking that the Soviet government consult and cooperate
with it and provide information to explain this outbreak of disease in
Sverdlovsk in April 1979.
F.—We want to deal with this matter in the same serious way in
which we have consulted on a number of questions involving compli-
ance with arms control agreements in recent years. Because of the im-
plications regarding compliance with the Convention itself and for
other arms control negotiations, we are raising this matter directly with
you and asking for prompt and full consultations. A simple denial in
response to this present US approach will not advance the situation and
will not serve our mutual interests.
G.—Since we are now in the process of consulting with you on a
compliance related question, we will make a statement before the Re-
view Conference concludes indicating that we are pursuing consulta-
tions in accordance with Article V. Any response you can make to our
request for consultation and cooperation under Article V before the end
of the Review Conference will be taken into account in determining the
character of the statement we will make.
H.—Obviously, under these circumstances we would not be pre-
pared to approve language in the final document of the Review Confer-
ence which states that no questions have arisen relating to compliance.
5. Embassy Moscow should inform Ambassador Flowerree imme-
diately after Ambassador Watson sees Korniyenko. Ambassador Flow-
erree should then inform Ambassador Israelyan of the de´marche, and
repeat points made in para 4 above.
6. For Geneva: We will provide additional guidance on Revcon
and consultations with Allies.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
114.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
4225. Department repeat Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subj:
De´marche on Sverdlovsk BW Issue. Refs: (A) Moscow 4211,2 (B) State
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. I made the de´marche on the Sverdlovsk incident this morning to
First Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko, reading and leaving with
him as a Non-Paper the talking points from Ref C as amended by Ref B.
In supplemental remarks I made the additional point that a simple de-
nial would not advance the situation or serve our mutual interests.
3. Korniyenko responded to my presentation by stating that the
Soviets would of course study the statement I had made, but that he
would like to make a few immediate points. First of all, he said, in the
case of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) as with all interna-
tional agreements to which the Soviet Union is a party, the Soviet
Union strictly complies with all requirements of the agreement. Sec-
ondly, in a number of instances US government agencies have been
compelled to admit publicly and officially that charges which have ap-
peared from time to time in the US press about the alleged non-
observance by the Soviet Union of this or that agreement were
unjustified.
4. In the present case, Korniyenko continued, he could not but
wonder why we were raising the matter and what the purpose of our
statement was. He noted that Soviet, US, and British specialists, as rep-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Later that day, Watson sent an Eyes Only telegram to Vance and
said “I thought I ought to tell you personally that if we cannot back up the Sverdlovsk
questions with substance, or if the Soviets are able to prove their denial or shake our posi-
tion in any way, we will further reduce our precarious relationship with this country.”
Policy File, P900077–1675)
eign Minister Georgi Korniyenko “questioned the motives” behind the raising of the
Sverdlovsk incident “at this stage, given the fact that it did not arise during the several
months that our experts worked together in preparing a draft report for the Review Con-
Watson to delete the final sentence of paragraph 4 (F) of the Non-Paper Sverdlovsk inci-
dent contained in Telegram 68654 (See Document 113) and instead convey the sentence
orally to Korniyenko. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–
0585)
4 See Document 113.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
resentatives of the BWC depository, had jointly worked on a report for
submission to the BWC Review Conference and that no such questions
had arisen during the preparation of the report. Now, all of a sudden,
the US side was raising expressions of concern, asking for urgent con-
sultations, and stating that it would inform the Review Conference that
it had done so.
5. Korniyenko then characterized the information I had provided
about the incident itself as vague. He did not know, he said, on what it
was based and added that it was not unheard of for there to be no basis
for such allegations. Even assuming, Korniyenko went on, that some
kind of illness did occur in the Sverdlovsk area, what relationship did
this have to the BWC? He asked me to imagine how we would react if
the Soviets today or tomorrow were to make such a representation to
US, expressing concern about the “Legionnaires’ Disease,” obliging US
to enter into consultations under the BWC, and trying to bring that
matter into the work of the BWC Review Conference.
6. In commenting on Korniyenko’s remarks, I stated that the US
representation was occasioned by an interagency study of all available
evidence of the unexplained incident in Sverdlovsk, some of it received
fairly recently, and that what we were seeking was an explanation of
the incident. As for his reference to the vagueness of the information, I
told him that I thought it was spelled out rather clearly in the non-
paper I had left with him but that if he could characterize what was not
clear to him I would try to elaborate. Noting that the parties to the BWC
are not permitted to have biological warfare stocks, I told him that if
there was a sensible explanation for what had occurred in Sverdlovsk I
hoped it could be provided to US quickly so it could be taken into con-
sideration in the report we were required to make [garble].
7. Answering his question on how we would react if challenged
about the Legionnaires’ disease, I said I thought I had a pretty good
idea of what our procedure would be. We would in all likelihood invite
the Soviets to send scientists to discuss the matter with our scientists
and to visit the communicable disease center in Atlanta to go over the
records of what our investigation had shown thus far.
8. Korniyenko said he had nothing to add and would merely re-
peat that the Soviets would study our statement and provide a re-
sponse. He stressed that he did not know whether anything had hap-
pened in Sverdlovsk or not and that it would require looking into and
checking. But he was still struck by the fact that our experts had
worked together for several months and that no such matter had been
raised. Our raising of the question at this point could only give rise to
feelings of apprehension on the Soviet side as to our good faith in doing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
so—particularly in view of the fact that the Soviets would do nothing
which would violate the Convention.
Watson
115.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Earle) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Congressional Consultations on BW Convention Compliance Question
I have now consulted with Senators Church, Javits and Baker and
Congressmen O’Neill, Rhodes, Wright, Zablocki and Bloomfield2 on
the subject of the question we have raised with the Soviets relative to
compliance with the BW Convention. An appointment with Senator
Byrd3 could not be arranged.
All the Members that I briefed were calm in their reactions and
considered this to be a serious matter that should be pursued with the
Soviets. Chairman Zablocki urged that our Allies get out in front on
this issue, as it is just as much a concern of theirs and in Soviet eyes
these days anything we do of this nature is suspect. Chairman Zablocki
asked if the Review Conference couldn’t be extended until we had an
answer. I undertook to consider these suggestions.
Chairman Church expressed concern over what we would do next,
if we got a negative answer from the Soviets. He observed that in view
of the U.S. press reports, the Soviets would probably believe that this
was a deliberate plot by the United States. I replied that at this time we
were awaiting the Soviet reply, considering what we should say in our
plenary statement at the Review Conference and giving general consid-
eration to any further steps.
Jones, Turner, and Brzezinski.
2 Senators Frank Church (D-Idaho), Jacob Javits (R-New York), Howard Baker
(R-Tennessee), and Congressmen and Speaker of the House of Representatives Thomas
P. “Tip” O’Neill (D-Massachusetts), House Minority Leader John Rhodes (R-Arizona),
House Majority Leader James “Jim” Wright, (D-Texas), Clement Zablocki, Chair of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee (D-Wisconsin), and William Broomfield (R-Michigan).
3 Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia).

Chemical and Biological Weapons
Senator Baker asked if there was any connection between this issue
and the allegations of gas warfare in Afghanistan. I replied that the two
were completely separate questions and involved different interna-
tional agreements. Senator Baker asked whether there was anything he
could do to help. I expressed the hope that the Congress would be re-
strained in its reaction and permit us time to review and assess the So-
viet response and consider next steps. Senator Javits said that we
should insist on a Soviet response prior to the close of the Review Con-
ference and I said that we had indicated to them that the nature of their
response would determine the character of our plenary statement at the
Conference.
Congressman Rhodes said that we had enough difficulties of this
type at this time and it was too bad we had another problem. Speaker
O’Neill and Congressmen Wright and Broomfield listened closely and
expressed appreciation for the briefing.
116.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
4496. Department repeat Geneva. Subj: Soviet Reply to De´marche
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. In replying to our de´march on the Sverdlovsk incident, the For-
eign Ministry confirmed that an outbreak of anthrax occurred in Sverd-
lovsk in March/April 1979 but said this was due to natural causes, de-
nied that it had anything to do with the Biological Weapons
Convention and charged that the raising of the issue by the United
States creates the impression that someone is trying to cast a shadow on
the efficacy of the Biological Weapons Convention. The reply was
given to the acting DCM in the form of an oral statement this morning
(March 20) by Viktor Komplektov, Chief of the Foreign Ministry USA
Department, because Komplektov insisted that the appointment take
indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 114.
3 See Document 113.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
place before 12 noon, we imagine the Soviets may be planning shortly
to release the text of the statement to the press.
3. Following is the embassy’s informal translation of the oral state-
ment, a copy of which was given us as a Non-Paper.
Begin text:
In connection with the representation of the embassy of the USA in
Moscow of 17 March 1980, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the USSR
is instructed to state the following:
The Soviet side firmly rejects the efforts of the government of the
USA to place in doubt the conscientious fulfillment by the Soviet Union
of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriolog-
ical Weapons; with regard to this Convention, just as with other inter-
national agreements in which the Soviet Union participates, the Soviet
side strictly fulfills all provisions of the documents under which it has
accepted the relevant obligations.
In accordance with the legislation and practice of the Soviet Union,
the observance of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Bi-
ological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction, ratified by
order of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR on 11 Feb-
ruary 1975, is guaranteed by the appropriate State Institutes of the
USSR. In a statement made by the representative of the USSR in the
Committee on Disarmament on 24 June 1975, it was pointed out that
the Soviet Union does not have any of the bacteriological (biological)
agents and toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery indi-
cated in Article 1 of the Convention.4
As for the incident referred to by the American side which oc-
curred in April 1979 in the area of Sverdlovsk, there did in fact occur in
this area in March–April 1979 an ordinary outbreak, arising from nat-
ural causes, of anthrax among animals and cases of illness of people
from the intestinal form of this infection, connected with the use as food
of the meat of cattle which was sold without observance of the rules es-
tablished for veterinary supervision. Appropriate warnings in connec-
tion with this were given in the press. No quarantine of any kind was
established.
That it occurred, however, has no relationship to the question of
observance by the Soviet Union of the Convention on the Prohibition of
Bacteriological Weapons. And therefore there is absolutely no basis for
4 Article 1 of the Biological Weapons Convention outlines the prohibitions detailed
in the BWC. While specific substances are not banned, their purposes can be if they
would prove to be harmful. Biological weapons that are prophylactic, protective or
peaceful are permitted by the BWC. (Draft text of the Biological Weapons Convention,

Chemical and Biological Weapons
putting forward the question which has been raised by the American
side.
The impression is automatically created that someone would like
under a clearly invented pretext to cast a shadow on the efficacy of the
Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriological Weapons—one of the
most important agreements in the arms control area—and to do this at
the very moment when the Review Conference on the operation of this
Convention is taking place in Geneva,5 such actions by the government
of the US are clearly not dictated by concern for the strengthening of
valid international agreements on disarmament. On the contrary, they
are only capable of weakening these agreements, of complicating the
situation, of hampering the efforts of States in the matter of limiting the
arms race. The Soviet side condemns such actions as directly contradic-
ting the interests of preserving and strengthening peace. End text.
4. A/DCM stated that the embassy would transmit the Soviet
Union’s response immediately to Washington. He took note of the fact
that the response contained some information on the incident in Sverd-
lovsk, but added that it was not possible to accept the allegations as to
the motives of the US in raising this matter. Given the growing evi-
dence on the incident, it clearly had to be raised in order to be dealt
with before the BWC Review Conference meeting in Geneva ended. He
emphasized that it was not the intent of the USA to “cast a shadow”
over the BW Convention or any other disarmament treaty.
5. In seeing A/DCM to the door, Komplektov commented that,
only 24 hours after the Ambassador had met with first Deputy Foreign
Minister Korniyenko on March 17,6 everything he had said at that
meeting had appeared in the press and that this happens “every time”.
That circumstance, he said, only served to bear out the validity of the
views expressed in the final paragraph of his statement.
Watson
5 The First Review Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention met March
6 See Document 114.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
117.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Conversation with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin
PARTICIPANTS
US
Soviet Union
The Secretary
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
Assistant Secretary George Vest,
EUR
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical or biological
weapons.]
Dobrynin:—The mood of the country is reinforced by the pro-
nouncements of the Administration, so much so that there seemed to be
practically nothing left to maintain in our bilateral relations.
Dobrynin illustrated his point with the report of Soviet gassing of
Afghanistan villages, complaining that our official press briefing ac-
cused the Soviets without evidence to back it up. The Secretary replied
that for weeks we have gotten extensive and numerous reports which
give detailed accounts describing two kinds of gas, smoke and another
which causes bleeding and death. We have report after report from
many different sources. Therefore, our Spokesman was correct when
he said that, although we have no photographs, we have so many re-
ports from refugees that we have to take account of them. Dobrynin’s
reply was that these are only stories and we have no proof. Do you be-
lieve, he asked, that we have no sense of civilization? It seems that you
will accept any accusation against the Soviets.
He then turned to the bacteriological warfare episode. Anthrax, he
said, is a disease which from time to time occurs in the Asian world.2
The Soviets have experienced it before in Siberia and warned people to
avoid infected meat. In this case it was not a secret episode, it happened
a year ago. Yet when people came to the West and told stories, we lis-
tened to their stories, reacted in public and to the UN agency without
waiting for or giving credence to what the Soviet Union said. The Secre-
tary pointed out that the essential fact was that there appeared to be ev-
idence that some material had not been destroyed which should have
by Vest; and approved by Vance. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations,

Chemical and Biological Weapons
been. Dobrynin replied that the Soviet authorities would not take such
chances with their own citizens. The episode took place a year ago and
now was being used as propaganda against the Soviets. The State De-
partment Spokesman had no answer as to why this subject came up a
year late or why we made accusations without proof. He was forced to
conclude that a US TV commentator was right when he described it as
an instance of the Administration’s “aggressive psychological war-
fare.” Certainly that is the atmosphere, an atmosphere which is alto-
gether negative, a search warrant atmosphere, and as a result the struc-
ture of the past ten years is left standing like a building exposed to an
atomic bomb. The Secretary commented that it was not our intent to de-
stroy the structure. He had said that before and stood by it, but he did
not minimize the problems. Dobrynin repeated gloomily that the only
thing left was the bare framework of the structure and nothing else. The
Secretary asked if Dobrynin thought the people in Moscow understood
the intensity of the US public reaction to the invasion in Afghanistan.
Dobrynin replied yes, they did understand it and, if not, the US re-
minded them of it daily.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical or biological
weapons.]
118.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
4735. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons (CW) Negotiations,
Round Eleven: Summary of Developments.
CW message number 16
1. (Confidential—Entire text).
2. Summary. Round eleven represented continuation of pattern es-
tablished in second half of round ten. Delegations met frequently. De-
spite active discussion of verification, Dels did not narrow differences
on key issues in this area. Some progress was made on secondary issues
and in drafting language for a joint initiative. End summary.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Round eleven of the US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations,
that period eight plenary meetings and fourteen drafting group meet-
ings were held.
4. Plenary discussions during the round dealt primarily with is-
sues relating to on-site inspection, with problems of irritants and pre-
cursors, and with various declarations concerning chemicals used for
permitted purposes. Work in the drafting group was devoted to discus-
sion of provisions on definition of terms, non-transfer/non-assistance,
permitted activities, declarations to be made within thirty days after a
state becomes a party, and destruction of stocks.
5. The most noteworthy features of the round were: continuing ac-
tive pace of meetings, better-focussed discussion of verification-related
issues, slow progress in resolving substantive questions, drafting of ad-
ditional elements for a joint initiative, and Soviet nervousness about
CW discussions in the Committee on Disarmament (CD).
A) Continued active pace. Meetings were held frequently (4 days
out of 5), continuing the pattern begun in the second half of the pre-
vious round. Atmosphere was business-like with no apparent indica-
tion that US-Soviet tensions were spilling into the bilateral CW negotia-
tions. Both Delegations experienced considerable difficulty in working
around schedule of other meetings (CD and the Biological Weapons
Convention Review Conference).
B) Better-focussed discussion of verification-related issues. So-
viets appeared more willing this round to enter into discussion of
verification-related issues. This reflects pattern first observed toward
end of previous round. Agreement between Dels to respond at the next
plenary meeting, if possible, facilitated exchange of views. Verification-
related discussions dwelt on agreed procedures for facilitating verifica-
tion at declared production and filling facilities, as well as on nature of
international participation in on-site inspections; procedures for chal-
lenge inspection were discussed briefly. As discussed below, while
some progress was achieved on secondary issues, principal issues
remain.
C) Slow progress in resolving substantive questions. Despite some
progress on secondary issues, U.S. Del is disappointed that more
progress was not achieved given the time and effort expended. In terms
of resolving issues, this round was not much more productive than pre-
vious rounds. (Specific issues resolved are noted below). Soviets, how-
ever, appear not only comfortable with current pace but have also re-
sisted our attempts at accelerating it.
(1) On the positive side, the Soviets:
—Agreed
that
herbicides
should
be
excluded
from
the
Convention;

Chemical and Biological Weapons
—Accepted U.S. proposal that production of small quantities of
super-toxic lethal chemicals for protective purposes be limited to a
single small-scale facility, the location of which would be declared;
—Suggested that representatives of the consultative committee be
permitted to participate as observers during on-site inspections;
—Suggested a broad interpretation of the term “law-enforcement
purposes” so as to cover those military uses of irritants the U.S. wishes
to protect;
—Finally began to respond to April 1978 U.S. proposals on proce-
dures for challenge inspections.
(2) On the negative side, the Soviets:
—Continued to oppose pre-agreed (i.e., mandatory) international
on-site inspection;
—Continued to insist that coverage of precursors be limited to the
final stage of agent production;
—Continued to oppose declaration of facilities at an early stage of
the treaty regime;
—Took the position that teams carrying out challenge inspection
could not bring own equipment, and that no data acquired by such
teams without participation of host country personnel could be consid-
ered reliable.
(3) Entry into force. Final plenary statement contained the only So-
viet reference during this round to Soviet proposal that ratification by
all permanent members of the UN Security Council should be a re-
quirement for entry into force. Reference was indirect; Soviets asked if
U.S. had changed its position on entry-into-force question.
D) Drafting of further provisions for a joint initiative. Virtually all
the effort in the drafting group was devoted to discussing and formu-
lating provisions for a joint initiative. Work begun in previous round
on definitions and non-transfer/non-assistance provision was con-
tinued. Ad referendum agreement was reached on several additional
definitions and on the non-transfer/non-assistance element (texts
being transmitted septels).2 As a result first three elements are virtually
complete (element covering the basic prohibition was agreed in pre-
vious round). Work was started on elements dealing with permitted ac-
tivities, with declarations to be made thirty days after a state becomes
a party, and with destruction of stocks. Some progress was made
in drafting language on these elements, but a number of substantive
issues remain to be resolved.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
E) Soviet nervousness about CW discussions in the CD. Soviets,
having cynically supported establishment of a CW working group in
the CD, are obviously nervous about how it will actually function. They
raised topic of CW working group in virtually every plenary meeting
and sought to establish coordinated US-Soviet approach to nature of
the group’s work, scheduling and chairmanship. U.S. Del assured So-
viets that U.S. would avoid actions in the CD which would harm the bi-
lateral negotiations, but avoided more specific commitments.
Helman
119.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
4939. Department please repeat to other interested posts. Subject:
BWRC: Biological Weapons Convention Review Conference—Wrap
up.
1. (Confidential—Entire text).
2. Summary. This message provides a summary and analysis of the
treatment of issues such as verification, complaint procedures, chem-
ical weapons, and peaceful biological research contained in paras 9–12.
The impact of the revelations regarding the Sverdlovsk incident on the
Revcon is also considered. End summary.
3. The Biological Weapons (BW) Convention Review Conference,
declaration2 reaffirming the “strong support (of the 53 states parties in
attendance) for the Convention, their continued dedication to its prin-
ciples and objectives and their commitment to implement effectively its
provisions.” This successful conclusion was not achieved without con-
siderable effort by a small group of delegations, especially the UK with
low-key U.S. support, to bridge gaps between the various positions on
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to London, Moscow, USNATO, and USUN.
2 See “Final Declaration of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Bi-
ological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction,” Documents on Disarmament,

Chemical and Biological Weapons
issues such as adequacy of verification and complaint procedures and
the flow of information and assistance in the area of peaceful research
in biological agents and toxins. These issues as well as treatment of Ar-
ticle IX of the Convention calling for efforts toward a chemical weapons
ban are treated in more detail below.
4. The impact of the Sverdlovsk incident on the outcome of the
Revcon seemed to be relatively slight with most delegations (including
some allies) bemused by the curious timing of our approach to the So-
viets and the subsequent press play. However, these same participants
also recognized the seriousness of the inquiry and the importance of
our obtaining a satisfactory response from the Soviets. In general they
appreciated our low-key handling of the issue within the Revcon.
Sverdlovsk did have the effect of making it more difficult for U.S. Del to
take a direct role in negotiating the final declaration, which involved
finding a median position between the Soviet line that all was well with
the Treaty and Swedish pressure to amend the Convention to provide
for a permanent consultative committee which the U.S. and most West-
ern delegations opposed as being unworkable in view of Soviet opposi-
tion and as setting a bad precedent for the NPT.
5. Sverdlovsk, coupled with recent events in Southwest Asia, of
course minimized substantially co-depositary cooperation which had
characterized earlier Treaty Review Conferences. Until the Soviet Del
was informed of the incident they were expressing dismay over our
conspicuous failure to support them on such issues as compliance and
on the adequacy of verification and complaint procedures. Our bilat-
eral difficulties with the Soviets provided an opportunity for the UK
Del, as representatives of the third depositary power, to play an ex-
tremely active role in developing a final declaration through their pro-
posal, with our encouragement, to establish an informal “non-group”
with representatives from various political and geographic groups.
Their role in negotiating language in Article V was particularly note-
worthy and is detailed in para 9 below.
6. Cooperation within the Western group, whose informal meet-
ings were chaired by the U.S., was generally close and harmonious. A
number of our allies, most notably Canada, Australia, and New Zea-
land, were vocal in their early support of the Swedish proposal to
amend Article V (see para 9); however, they soon became skeptical of
chances for its success and began working closely with UK on compro-
mise formulations. It should be noted that these delegations were quite
supportive of U.S. positions on issues such as CW and increasing coop-
eration to developing countries in the area of peaceful biological
research.
7. Oscar Vaerno, the Revcon’s President, put in a solid, if not spec-
tacular, performance, and was largely responsible for the generally

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
businesslike pace of the deliberations. Amb. Voutov of Bulgaria, the
chairman of the committee of the whole, more than once seemed un-
comfortable under the watchful eyes of the Soviets as he attempted to
reconcile differing points of view during the article by article debate.
Amb. Maina of Kenya, the drafting committee chairman, was effective
in his role, and clearly appreciative of the spade work done by the
“non-group” in developing draft elements of a final declaration.
8. Detailed discussion of major issues follows.
9. Complaint mechanism. Clearly the most controversial and con-
tentious debate during the conference centered on Sweden’s proposed
amendment to Article V to provide for a permanent consultative mech-
anism to investigate complaints of possible violations of the Conven-
tion. The Swedish objective was to ensure that this “fact finding” stage
was clearly distinguished (and thus immune from a possible veto for a
permanent UN security council member) from the subsequent “Polit-
ical Decision” phase, i.e., whether to take a complaint to the security
council for appropriate action. Predictably, the GOS proposal caught
on with the Non-Aligned and the objective, if not the means, attracted
some sympathy from Western Dels who shared Swedish concerns over
the adequacy of existing verification measures in the Convention.
However, increasingly strident Eastern opposition and latent Western
skepticism about the wisdom of formally amending a convention
which had been so carefully negotiated and whose amendment could
create two sets of parties each adhering to a different text enabled the
UK Del to step in as honest broker with a proposal, based on earlier
US–UK discussions, to attempt to meet Swedish concerns through
some other means, such as an interpretative statement in the final dec-
laration. The UK’s efforts were aided to a considerable degree by: a) our
own low-key but strong expressions of support; and b) more impor-
tantly, by the realization that many Non-Aligned Dels were more inter-
ested in removing alleged “discriminatory” language in the Conven-
tion than with the real substance of the GOS amendment. It then
became a matter of getting the Soviets, who were obviously aware of
their isolated stance, to agree to some compromise formulation which
would be at least minimally acceptable to the Swedes, but would reflect
the view that no amendment was necessary. The Soviets undoubtedly
also feared that, if a consultative committee were established, interest
of others in the Sverdlovsk incident could create a test case. These “ne-
gotiations” to a certain extent were prolonged needlessly by Swedish
(read Amb. Lidgard’s) insistence that any interpretative language in-
clude a commitment to revise Article V formally at some future date.
Swedes finally settled on a formulation calling for “further consider-
ation” of this issue at “an appropriate time.”
10. While, as noted in U.S. Rep’s closing statement, the agreed lan-
guage on the right of any party to call for the convening of a consulta-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
tive committee of experts lacks precision in some areas (e.g., it does not
designate the authority who would convene the consultative com-
mittee), we believe the Convention is now an improved instrument. We
must continue to bear in mind, however, that the Swedes and others
will continue to press their case for formal revision of Article V at the
second BW Revcon, whether or not this agreed interpretation of the
current consultative provisions is ever invoked.
11. Chemical Weapons. Suprisingly little controversy was engen-
dered by the review of Article IX, dealing with negotiations on a chem-
ical weapons convention, a subject that had been the focus of non-
aligned concerns at the PrepCom last July. The imminent establishment
by the Committee on Disarmament (CD) of a working group on CW
undoubtedly helped defuse the situation. Therefore, most delegations,
particularly the Non-Aligned, seemed content to make the customary
criticism of the alleged lack of progress in our bilateral talks with the
USSR and to call on the CD to begin immediate multilateral negotia-
tions. However, they stopped short of seeking any far-ranging discus-
sion on a CW prohibition. A number of delegations did take the oppor-
tunity of citing the indispensability of effective verification measures to
any CW convention—a point we trust was not lost on our bilateral CW
negotiating partner.
12. Peaceful biological research. On the other hand, Article X on co-
operation in peaceful biological research was singled out for substan-
tial comment by the Non-Aligned, evoking memories of recent lengthy
debates in the UN and elsewhere on the peaceful uses of nuclear en-
ergy. Taking their cue from the background paper on scientific/techno-
logical developments in the field of biology (Bacteriology) as well as
the UN SSOD’s endorsement of the “close relationship” between disar-
mament and development, several delegations, led by Romania, Yugo-
slavia, and Brazil, pressed for commitments from developed countries
to make info on such scientific/technological developments available
on a more regular and systematic basis to all parties. They also sought
(and obtained) a call in the final declaration for developed states to pro-
vide increased technical assistance, such as the training of personnel
and transfer of equipment and technology in relevant areas of biolog-
ical research. The reaction from eastern and western delegations was
extremely cautious, with the USSR citing the extensive amount of
assistance already taking place and the western Europeans expressed
privately their concerns over the potential effect on commercial propri-
etary interests of any subsequent efforts to “institutionalize” transfers
of technology in this field.
13. The negotiations with the Soviets on compromise language for
the section on the final declaration on Article V ultimately led to agree-
ment on the question of future Review Conferences. While the BW con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
vention does not provide for subsequent Review Conferences, it was
the clear desire of an overwhelming majority of the participants that a
second Review Conference should be held. Soviet reluctance to fix a
date for this future meeting forced the Swedes to accept language
which made the holding of the conference contingent upon the request
of the majority of the parties, and no earlier than 1985, in exchange for
Soviet acquiescence on the Article V issue. In practice, however, we be-
lieve there will be no difficulty in mustering the majority required to
convene the next Revcon in 1985.
Helman
120.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
81691. Subject: Sverdlovsk Incident (U). Geneva for Amb. Flow-
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. Embassy should seek an early opportunity to convey the fol-
lowing points to Komplektov or another MFA official at a comparable
level. Points should also be provided in the form of a Non-Paper.
A. We have studied the response of March 20 by the ministry of
foreign affairs to the United States’ request for information regarding
the outbreak of anthrax in the area of Sverdlovsk in March–April 1979.4
B. We welcome the information you provided regarding the inci-
dent. However, you will appreciate that on matters of such complexity,
it is difficult for us to acquire a sufficiently full and confident under-
standing of the situation without a substantially greater exchange of in-
formation. For example, reports available to us indicate a prolonged
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to the Mission in Geneva.
Drafted by Robert Einhorn (ACDA); cleared by Aaron, Jerome Kahan (PM), Keeny, Slo-
combe (OSD), Michael Finnarelli (OSTP), James Granger (JCS), Shulman, Peter Wilson
(S/P), Robert Barry (EUR), McCrory, and Robert Steven (S/S–O); and approved by
Vance.
2 See Document 113.
3 See Document 116.
4 Ibid.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
outbreak of pulmonary anthrax in Sverdlovsk, involving large num-
bers of fatalities. Based on our experience, we would expect an out-
break of anthrax resulting from contaminated meat to have been of rel-
atively short duration and to have resulted in only a small number of
fatalities.
C. We believe it is essential for our two governments to make
prompt and determined efforts to arrive at a mutual understanding of
this matter. Article V of the Biological Weapons Convention, the impor-
tance of which was recently reaffirmed at the Convention’s Review
Conference, requires consultation and cooperation between parties in
order to reduce uncertainties and allay concerns that might arise. As
depositary governments, the Soviet Union and the United States bear a
special responsibility for ensuring the effective operation of the Con-
vention’s consultative procedures. As the two leading participants in
international arms control efforts, we have an additional and important
responsibility to demonstrate our readiness to work together construc-
tively to promote the viability of existing agreements.
D. We believe the most effective means of clarifying the situation—
and thereby meeting our mutual obligations under Article V of the
BWC—would be to hold confidential discussions involving Soviet and
American medical, public health and veterinary specialists. We believe
the specialists should meet as soon as possible, preferably within the
next few weeks. We would be prepared to hold the discussions in the
Soviet Union or some other mutually acceptable location.
E. In proposing that specialists from both sides meet confidentially
to discuss the Sverdlovsk situation, we are mindful that, in the context
of SALT, U.S. and Soviet experts have been able to resolve treaty imple-
mentation questions of great complexity and sensitivity in a mutually
satisfactory manner. While no formal consultative mechanism exists
for the BW Convention, we hope that the ad hoc discussions we are
proposing would enable us to deal with the present situation in an
equally satisfactory fashion.
F. In reference to the last paragraph of the foreign ministry’s
response, we cannot accept the implication that U.S. efforts are di-
rected toward complicating the situation and weakening international
agreements on disarmament. Our motivation is precisely the op-
posite—to resolve the current situation as quickly as possible and to
strengthen those agreements by restoring confidence in their effective
implementation.
3. FYI. Site of initial discussion, referred to in para 2D above,
should not prejudge possibility of U.S. seeking to visit Sverdlovsk as
part of investigative process if necessary. End FYI.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
121.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
6630. Military addressees handle as Specat exclusive for Service
Chiefs. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subj: Soviet Response to
De´marche on Sverdlovsk Incident. Ref: (A) Moscow 4974,2 (B) State
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. The Soviets have rejected our request for consultations under the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) in connection with the out-
break of anthrax in Sverdlovsk, relying on their earlier explanation that
the outbreak was due to natural causes. The reply to our March 28
De´marche (Ref A) was given to the DCM on April 24 in the form of an
oral statement by Viktor Komplektov, chief of the MFA USA
Department.
3. An informal translation of the Soviet statement, which Kom-
plektov also gave to DCM as a Non-Paper, follows:
Begin text. In connection with the renewed De´marche of the em-
bassy of the USA in Moscow on March 28, 1980, concerning the cases of
anthrax disease in March–April 1979 in the region of the city of Sverd-
lovsk, the Soviet side reaffirms its response to this question which was
The Soviet side resolutely rejects as fully unsubstantiated the at-
tempts by the American side to place under doubt the reliability of the
information presented to it to the effect that the mentioned cases of an-
thrax disease appeared as a result of epizootics which periodically
break out in these areas. The information given to the American side
clearly indicates that what occurred is in no way connected with a
question concerning the implementation of the Convention on the Pro-
hibition of Bacteriological Weapons. Accordingly, there are no bases for
raising the question of conducting consultations as foreseen by the
mentioned Convention.
Brown Files—General #1, Biological Weapons. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for infor-
mation to the Mission in Geneva and USNATO.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been unable to locate newspapers that covered the Sverd-
lovsk incident because “they were after all local papers and that the incident occurred a
3 See Document 120.
4 See Document 116.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
The fact that, despite the official clarifications given to it, the
American side continues to return to this question only confirms the
earlier conclusion we have drawn concerning the real motives of such
type of actions of the government of the USA which have nothing in
common with the goals of strengthening the Convention on the Prohi-
bition of Bacteriological Weapons. End text.
4. DCM responded that he would of course report the Soviet state-
ment to Washington. As a preliminary reaction, however, he said that
he must express regret that the Soviets had seen fit to answer our ap-
proach in this manner and to reject the possibility of consultations,
which would have been a constructive way of dealing with the ques-
tions that had arisen. DCM added that he once again rejected the alle-
gation that the motives of the US in raising the question were other
than to strengthen the BWC.
5. Komplektov responded that he could only say that he regretted
DCM’s expression of regret. The Soviets, he said, had given a very con-
structive, exhaustive and official response to the first US De´marche. Re-
peating that the Soviet Delegate to the Conference on Disarmament
had stated as early as 1975 that the Soviet Union did not possess any of
the bacteriological agents or instruments prohibited by Article 1 of the
BWC, Komplektov said that this meant that there was no justification
for questioning of Soviet compliance with the BWC. The Soviets had
earlier explained, Komplektov continued, that the 1979 outbreak of an-
thrax was due to natural causes despite this, the US was still endea-
voring to cast doubt on the well-grounded official Soviet position and
on the good will which the Soviet side had shown in answering the US
question in a constructive manner.
6. DCM stated that he would not comment further on Kom-
plektov’s repetition of their position, but would report the conversation
for Washington’s official reaction.
Watson

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
122.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
109665. Subject: Consultations on Reported use of Chemical
Weapons (CW).
1. (Secret—Entire text)
2. Summary: We believe the reports of Chemical Weapons (CW)
use in Indochina and Afghanistan require greater international atten-
tion and that they should be investigated further by an impartial inter-
national team. We are planning to send out an interagency team to se-
lected capitals to discuss the issue further. This message instructs
action addressees to approach host governments to set up meetings for
the team with appropriate host government officials. The request for
administrative assistance in arranging the team’s trip will follow
Septel. End summary.
3. The USG continues to be deeply concerned over continuing re-
ports that Chemical Weapons (CW) are being used in Laos, Kampuchea
and Afghanistan. These reports are sufficiently credible to warrant
greater international attention to discourage such use and help ensure
that Chemical Weapons are not used in any conflict, current or future,
in any region of the world. We believe the most effective means of ob-
taining the necessary attention and action would be through an impar-
tial international investigation.
4. Reports of the use of Chemical Weapons are not and should not
be a matter of concern to the United States alone. To stress the seri-
ousness with which the USG views this issue, to stimulate support for
such an investigation, and to encourage other actions which could con-
tribute to the resolution of the problem, we plan to send out a special
interagency team of policy officials [less than 1 line not declassified] to se-
cret; Priority. Sent Priority to Paris, Bern, Bonn, Rome, Brussels, The Hague, USNATO,
Copenhagen, Stockholm. Sent for information Priority to the Mission in Geneva, USUN,
Islamabad, Vientiane, Moscow, Bangkok, Ottawa, Canberra, Tokyo, the U.S National
Military Representative to the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Powers in Belgium,
and Wellington. Drafted by Murray and David Carlson (PM/CA); cleared by Oplinger
and Brement, Jack Smith and Manuel Sanches (JCS), Alan Overmeyer (T), Peter Wilson
(S/P), Robert Peck and Richard Norton (NEA/PAB), Avis Bohlen (EUR/RPM), Edgar
Beigel (EUR/WE), Charles Hoettle (EUR/CE), Cameron Sanders and William Menold
(IO), Mark Palmer (PM/DCA), [name not declassified] (CIA), George Gasberri (DIA), Merle
MacDonald (OSD), Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT), Richard Combs (S/MS), Edmund
McWilliams and Michael Gelner (EA/VLC), Martin Mclean (EUR/SOV), Neil Michaud,
Richard Thompson, and Dennis Goodman (EUR/NE), Michael Matheson (L/PM), and
Robert Martin and Gary Crocker (INR/PMA); and approved by Mark Palmer (PM).

Chemical and Biological Weapons
lected capitals. Other key nations will be contacted either in Wash-
ington or through our embassies (we will be sending Septels on this
later.)
5. Mr. Mark Palmer (Director, State, PM/DCA) will head the team
and will be accompanied by officials from the Department of Defense,
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and the State Depart-
ment’s Legal Advisor’s Office. The trip and our separate consultations
will have three specific purposes:
—A. To share the evidence we have collected to date, and to en-
courage others to join in pooling with us any evidence they may have
or obtain.
—B. To describe the diplomatic steps we have taken to date, and to
learn what actions other governments have taken.
—C. To present US ideas for further steps, to consider any ideas
others may have, to obtain support in the evidence collection effort and
to seek agreement on a common strategy which would include having
an objective international investigation of the reports conducted.
6. Action addressees are requested to set up meetings for the team
with appropriate host government officials concerned with arms con-
trol, security and foreign policy issues, and the regions involved. In ap-
proaching host governments and initiating these consultations, em-
bassies may draw on points contained paras 3–5 above.
7. For Geneva: We will be in touch with mission by phone to
discuss arrangements for team’s meetings in Geneva.
[Omitted here is the travel schedule for the Palmer team.]
123.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, April 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Weteye Bombs
On February 25, 1980, the Department of Defense announced that
our inventory of 888 Weteye bombs, containing the nerve agent GB,
would be retained in indefinite storage at Rocky Mountain Arsenal
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(RMA), Colorado. This decision reversed an announcement by the
Army in May 1978 that the bombs would be moved to Tooele Army
Depot in Utah.2
The decision to retain the bombs at either location was based on
the significant and apparently growing Soviet capabilities in chemical
warfare and the need to retain a credible deterrent to the use of chem-
ical weapons against U.S. forces or those of our allies. The JCS have
recently reaffirmed the military need for Weteye, the most modern
aerial-delivered weapon in our chemical inventory, and one which is
compatible with modern delivery systems. An additional and impor-
tant reason for retention is that, in the complete absence of any NATO
offensive chemical capability, tactical nuclear weapons might be the
only available response to a Soviet/Pact first use of chemical weapons.
These are the reasons not to detoxify (destroy) the bombs in place.
The decision to retain the Weteye bombs at Rocky Mountain Ar-
senal was based largely on the desire to avoid any hazard that would
be associated with their movement. Although the Army, in coordina-
tion with the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, concluded
that the bombs were safe to move, we decided that such a move was too
risky to undertake, given the high public visibility and concern, be-
cause there would always be the possibility of accident or sabotage. Of
course, such a possibility would be remote, but the consequences of an
accident or sabotage could be extremely serious; if we decided to move
them, those consequences would certainly be highly advertised. With
planned improvements to the present storage site, retention at RMA
represented the least risky alternative that would still allow for reten-
tion of the stockpile. (Other reasons for deciding to keep the bombs at
RMA included RMA’s capability to tap and drain leaking bombs, and
the significant delays caused by litigation and preparation of environ-
mental impact statements that a move to Utah would entail.)
Under Secretary Bill Perry has assumed personal responsibility to
see that the Army takes every reasonable action to insure that the con-
tinued storage at Rocky Mountain Arsenal poses no problems to the
health and safety of the people of Denver. There are no known leaking
bombs at Rocky Mountain Arsenal at this time; all are stored in sealed,
air-tight containers. The Army has already been authorized additional
civilian spaces to increase the security guard force, and is undertaking
all necessary measures to improve fencing, lighting, and other aspects
of security at the facility. In the longer term, the site upgrade will in-
clude the construction of a new underground storage facility that will
provide maximum safety and that would prevent danger to the adja-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
cent vicinity even in the event of an aircraft crash directly into the
storage site. Senator Hart, Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Sub-
committee on Military Construction, although he personally supports
immediate detoxification, has pledged to work with DoD to provide
the funds necessary to ensure that storage at RMA meets the highest
possible standards of safety and security.
Other than urging immediate detoxification, Mrs. Schroeder has
made other complaints and recommendations. She has proposed that
the bombs be drained and subsequently refilled elsewhere. Unfortu-
nately, it does not appear either timely or cost effective to pursue this
quired to implement this proposal.
The storage facility at RMA will be needed until modern binary
weapon systems are available to replace the Weteyes in our deterrent,
retaliatory stockpile. Until a facility is built for the production of these
weapons, I see no prudent option but to retain the Weteyes in the safest
environment possible.
Harold Brown
124.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, May 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Weteye Nerve Agent Bombs
This memorandum updates my 1 May memorandum to you2 and
summarizes recent discussions on the Weteye issue. These discussions
have followed our notification to interested Committees of the
Congress of the DoD decision to retain the Weteye nerve agent bombs
at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal (RMA) in Denver, Colorado, rather
than to move them to another location.
As you remember, the DoD decision was based on strong reaffir-
mation by the Services and the Joint Staff of the military need for the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
bombs and the perceived small, but finite, risk to the public associated
with the movement considering the high media attention that would be
given to air movement and the possibility of a terrorist attack on an air-
plane as it was loaded at Stapleton Airport or as it took off. Retention at
Rocky Mountain Arsenal is intended for a period of approximately
four to six years, depending on the construction plan for the new bi-
nary facility. To ensure secure and safe storage of Weteye at RMA, we
will invest approximately $7 million to bring the storage sites up to the
level of protection afforded nuclear weapons.
After the Congressional notification of the decision to retain the
agent at RMA, Under Secretary Bill Perry discussed the issue with Con-
gresswoman Schroeder, Senator Hart, Governor Matheson and others.
With the exception of Congresswoman Schroeder, there has been to my
knowledge no request for reexamination of alternative actions. Con-
gresswoman Schroeder asked for discussion of the following four alter-
natives, which in one variant or another we had previously considered:
(1) Arrange to fly the Weteye bombs covertly from Stapleton Air-
port (to avoid alerting potential terrorists) to Dugway Army Depot,
Utah and then transport them by ground to Tooele Army Depot, Utah.
(2) Transport the Weteye bombs from RMA to Buckley Airfield (an
Air National Guard airfield near Denver) by truck; then in the more
controlled environment associated with a military airfield, take off and
fly to Dugway with ground transport to Tooele.
(3) Move Weteye by ground transport from RMA to Pueblo Army
Depot, Colorado for permanent storage.
(4) Empty the Weteye bombs at RMA, detoxify the agent, retain
bomb cases and reload and store at Tooele.
Let me briefly summarize my position on these four alternatives:
Alternative (1). In my opinion, the likelihood of covert movement of
14 aircraft loads of very conspicuous cargo from an area as populous as
that surrounding RMA is very slight. Further, trying to convert into a
covert action what has heretofore been an open, widely-debated issue
is unlikely to succeed and more likely to simply exacerbate public
opinion.
Alternative (2). This requires truck transport through populous
areas, and appears to be even more susceptible to sabotage than the air
transport from RMA.
Alternative (3). This requires road transport, again through popu-
lated areas, but over a considerably longer road distance than alterna-
tive (2). This appears to involve greater risk of sabotage, and when the
move is complete, permanent storage will be at a place less acceptable
than Tooele.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
Alternative (4). This requires extensive investment, both in detoxifi-
cation equipment not now at RMA, and in nerve agent loading equip-
ment not now at Tooele. It would take almost as long to detoxify and
rebuild the old bombs as it would to build new binary bombs to replace
them.
In summary, let me emphasize that DoD is sensitive to the difficult
military, environmental and political issues involved in retention of
Weteye at RMA. Having spent considerable time and effort again re-
viewing the subject, I still believe that the most responsible position is
to retain Weteye at RMA until the binary facility is in operation or con-
ditions are more favorable for movement. There is no decision we
can take without drawing significant opposition from some source.
Changing our decision will please some, anger others, and make us
susceptible to a charge of vacillation. Our best course of action is to
stick with the decision we have made, which is most defensible from an
objective viewpoint (because it minimizes the risk) and is no worse
than other alternatives from a political viewpoint.
Harold Brown
125.
Editorial Note
Per the instructions contained in telegram 109665 to London and
Briefing Team briefed their North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies,
as well as the Swiss and the Norwegians, in May 1980 about the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Afghanistan and Indochina. The team sub-
sequently informed the Department of State that the Europeans be-
lieved that the United States had not provided sufficient proof that the
Soviet Union and/or it allies had used chemical weapons against
civilians. Any investigation, the Europeans argued, should be under-
taken either by the United Nations or by a group of Non-Aligned na-
tions whose impartiality could be guaranteed. For more on the Euro-
peans’ misgivings, see telegram 9401 from Bonn, May 19, and telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
126.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
136331. Subject: US–USSR Chemical
Weapons
Negotiations,
State CW Message No. 2
(C—Entire text)
2. This message provides general guidance for round twelve. De-
tailed responses to the questions posed Ref A are being provided sepa-
rately in the guidance package,4 which will be forwarded in the near fu-
ture. Highlights are outlined below.
3. During round twelve the Delegation should continue the
strategy contained in the guidance telegram for round eleven (Ref B).
This strategy is to:
A. Continue to express US concern over reports of use of chemical
weapons in Laos, Kampuchea and Afghanistan.
B. Emphasize the US hope that the pace of resolution of issues will
be accelerated;
C. Continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues;
particularly verification-related issues (including declarations); and
D. Continue drafting in order to reaffirm and define precisely
points thought to be agreed. (The Delegation should continue to be
guided by the format and substance contained in the position summary
provided to the Soviets during round nine.)
4. Key points in the guidance package:
A. A US proposal for possible agreed measures for moth-balling
production and filling facilities is included;
B. A US proposal for a possible schedule for destruction of stocks
has been developed;
C. Ideas for reaching a mutually agreed definition of the term “pre-
cursor” are provided;
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT); and approved by
Keeny (ACDA), Oplinger, Manuel Sanches (JCS), Merle MacDonald (OSD), David
Carlson (PM/CA), and Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA). Sent for information to Moscow,
USNATO, London, Bonn, and Paris.
2 In preparation for round twelve of the chemical weapons negotiations, the Em-
bassy requested guidance from the Department of State regarding how chemical stocks
would be verified and then destroyed. (Telegram 4710 from Geneva, March 24; National
3 See Document 108.
4 Not found.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
D. Previous guidance on challenge inspection procedures has been
reviewed and reaffirmed.
5. The Delegation should endeavor to develop with the Soviets a
progress report on the bilateral negotiations for presentation to the CD
early this summer. The draft report should be transmitted for Wash-
ington review before presentation to the CD.
6. The Delegation should continue to brief allied representatives in
Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition an offer
should be made to hold quadrilateral consultations (US, UK, FRG,
France) at a mutually acceptable time before the beginning of the next
round.
Muskie
127.
Editorial Note
In the wake of the Soviet response about the alleged outbreak of
pulmonary anthrax at Sverdlovsk (See Document 121), both the United
States Senate and the House of Representatives called for further inves-
tigation into the incident in accordance with the 1972 Convention on
Biological Weapons. (“Senate Resolution 405: Sverdlovsk Incident Re-
garding Biological Weapons, May 14, 1980, and “Report of a Subcom-
mittee of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence: So-
viet Biological Warfare Activities, June 1980,” in Documents on
On May 28, 1980, Hodding Carter III, the Press Secretary of the De-
partment of State, said in an official statement that “information at our
disposal has raised serious questions and concerns regarding the na-
ture of the outbreak of disease which occurred in Sverdlovsk in 1979.
We have pursued this matter actively and seriously with the Soviet
government through private diplomatic channels. As of this time, our
concerns regarding that incident have not been alleviated, and we will
continue to pursue this matter vigorously in accordance with the con-
sultative procedures provided for in the Biological Weapons Conven-
tion.” The text of Carter’s remarks, as well as his replies to press ques-
tions, are in telegram 141594 to Moscow, May 30; National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
128.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
8006. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons (CW) Negotiations,
Round Twelve: Conversation With Soviet Amb. Israelyan. Ref: A) Ge-
CW message no. 8
1. (C—Entire text).
2. Summary. Soviet CD Rep Israelyan, who is heading the Soviet
Delegation in the CW bilateral negotiations, sees no prospect of a
breakthrough in the talks this year. He attributes the rigid Soviet stance
to the general political atmosphere, exacerbated by the issue of the
Sverdlovsk BW incident. He says the Soviets will want to study the im-
plications of the results of the U.S. elections in establishing their future
arms control policies. In the meantime, Israelyan hopes we can keep the
CW talks alive by achieving agreement on several secondary issues
where the positions of the two seem to be drawing together. End
summary.
3. U.S. CW Delegation head Flowerree spoke privately with Soviet
Del head Israelyan on June 4, continuing discussion of matters of mu-
tual interest reported Reftel (A). On this occasion Israelyan’s more in-
teresting comments focused on CW issues and to some extent on BW
(see Reftel B).
4. Flowerree began by asking Israelyan how he saw the current
round of CW bilaterals developing and whether he saw any value in
scheduling an additional round before the traditional January/Feb-
ruary resumption date. Israelyan responded without hesitation saying
there was “no possibility” of a breakthrough in CW this year. He said
that during his recent discussions in Moscow he had talked about CW
negotiations both in the Foreign Ministry (including a discussion with
Gromyko) and in the Ministry of Defense. The attitudes he encountered
were much harder than they had been in January (before the eleventh
Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Moscow.
wanted to establish a CTB working group in the Conference on Disarmament. (National
lyan referred Flowerree to the May 1980 issue of the Soviet journal Microbiology, Immu-
nology and Epidemiology that contained a “straight-forward discussion of the medical as-
pects of the outbreak of anthrax in Sverdlovsk.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800275–0129)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
round), particularly in the MOD. As reported Reftel B, he had been
struck by the anger of the military over the U.S. action in making public
its version of the BW incident at Sverdlovsk. This reaction, Israelyan
thought, was a factor in the hardening of the Soviet position on CW
verification. Flowerree said this hardening had not escaped the notice
of the U.S. Delegation. Israelyan went on to say that he had not been
asked to give his views on whether the talks should be continued, but
said that if he had, he certainly would have strongly urged that the
USSR not move to break them off. He had the strong impression that
Moscow was still firmly committed to the CW negotiations. He noted
wryly that in comparison with MBFR we were making great progress;
nothing had been put on paper in Vienna while there was ad refer-
endum agreement on a number of draft elements for the CW initiative.
5. Israelyan continued by saying that the attitude in Moscow was
such that no one believed there could be a CW agreement with the U.S.
in the present climate, even if the Soviets were able to accept the U.S.
position on verification 100 per cent. In his view there could be no
change whatsoever in the Soviet position before the U.S. elections, the
implications of which the Soviets will want to assess in establishing
their future arms control policies. In these circumstances he thought the
two Delegations should do what they could to continue movement in
the negotiations on secondary issues where there was a possibility of
agreement. Several such issues had already been raised in the bilaterals
and he had been encouraged by the apparent drawing together of the
positions of the two sides on these points. Israelyan concluded by
saying that he hoped Flowerree would not recommend an interruption
of the talks to his authorities in Washington.
6. Flowerree replied that he was going on the assumption that the
bilaterals would continue but the failure to achieve any significant
progress toward solving the major verification issues would inevitably
make it more difficult for the U.S. to maintain unilateral restraint in its
overall CW posture.
7. Israelyan also alluded to Soviet concern over how the U.S.
would handle CW in the CD context. Flowerree said that the USDEL
would not directly refer to the differences between U.S. and Soviet po-
sitions in the bilaterals, but as the Soviets knew from last year’s experi-
ence with the Dutch questionnaire, the U.S. was prepared to make
straightforward statements about its position on the issues. Israelyan
did not comment on the question of CW use in Afghanistan and South-
east Asia which had been raised most recently by the U.S. in the CW
plenary of May 27.
Helman

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
129.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Soviet Compliance with Biological Warfare Convention
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Reginald Bartholomew Dir.,
David Aaron
Pol-Mil Affairs Bureau
NSC
Jerome Kahan Dep. Dir., Pol-Mil
Major General Jasper Welch
Affairs Bureau
Marshall Brement
Stephan Ledogar Dir., Regional
OSTP
Pol-Mil Affairs European
Ben Huberman
Bureau
Peggy Finarelli
James Michel Dep. Legal Advisor
Defense
Ray McCrory Dir. Arms Control
Walter Slocombe Dep. Under Sec.
Intel. Staff
for Policy
Sheila Buckley Dir. Negotiations
JCS
Policy Office of Dep. Under
Lt. General John Pustay Asst. to
Sec. for Policy
the Chairman
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny, Jr. Dep. Director
Admiral Thomas Davies Assistant
Director
Robert Mikulak Physical Science
Officer Multilateral Affairs
Bureau
It was noted that since the SCC meeting of March 14, 1980,2 we
have made two requests to the Soviet Union for information that might
alleviate our concerns as to whether the incidents of anthrax in Sverd-
lovsk in April 1979 pointed to Soviet non-compliance with the Biolog-
ical Warfare Convention. The Soviet replies were brusque,3 asserting
that though there were deaths due to anthrax, they arose through the
consumption of diseased meat, and denied categorically that the Soviet
Union was engaged in any activity which was not in compliance with
the Biological Warfare Convention. (S)
Brown Files—General #1, Biological Weapons. Secret. The meeting took place in the
White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 112.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
The Soviet characterization of the event is not consistent with intel-
ligence information which points to infection by the inhalation of an-
thrax spores (a well-known biological warfare agent) and to a quantity
of agent that exceeds that permissible to be held for public health pur-
poses under the Biological Warfare Convention. Moreover, the com-
portment of the Soviet Union has not been in accord with their respon-
sibilities under Article V of the Biological Warfare Convention which
provides for consultation and cooperation between parties to the
Convention. (S)
The United States Government’s disappointment with the sub-
stance and form of the Soviet replies has become public knowledge.
Both the Congress, through resolutions by both houses, and the press
have called for a more vigorous prosecution of our concerns to the So-
viets. In recent weeks we have completed a thorough review of the in-
telligence data, consulted with the top experts in biological warfare and
medical aspects of anthrax, and delivered to the Soviets the Congres-
sional Resolutions.4 (C)
It was agreed that the task at hand is to convince the Soviet Union
that our concerns are real, that the issue will not go away, that our
purpose is not to take advantage of them through propaganda as
they claim, but to establish a constructive consultation to resolve the
The Director of Central Intelligence’s representative pointed out
that the Soviets have reason to suspect our motives: Our original
de´marche was almost a year after the incident, during a time of deterio-
rating US-Soviet relations over Afghanistan, and during the Biological
Warfare Convention Review Conference, but within a week after the
intelligence community came to a formal determination based on evi-
dence that dribbled in over the year. Our de´marche was leaked before
the Soviet response could be formulated. (U)
There is some evidence from US-Soviet conversations that they re-
alize it is to their advantage to resolve the issue. But they are now stuck
with their infected meat story which is also the story they used at the
time with their own people. It is entirely possible that the infected meat
story is true but that something else happened as well. (S)
Most of our information is derived [2 lines not declassified] is rea-
sonably self-consistent, logical, and in accord with known medical fea-
tures of anthrax. However, [less than 1 line not declassified] is in all cases
at least second-hand, in some cases clearly fed by a commonly held
body of rumor in Sverdlovsk; [2 lines not declassified]
4 See Document 127. Christopher discussed the Sverdlovsk incident with Dobrynin
on July 10 (see Document 130) but did not mention the two congressional resolutions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
It was agreed that the Soviets have probably not yet told us the
whole truth, but that we will have some difficulty in establishing a vio-
lation of the terms of the Biological Warfare Convention related to
holding those stocks of biological warfare agents for two reasons. First,
the Convention provides a loophole by allowing stocks for public
health purposes. The amounts allowed under this provision were not
nailed down during the Convention negotiations, and the amounts
needed to produce the deaths in Sverdlovsk are uncertain because of
our uncertainty as to number and geographical distribution of the
victims, meterological conditions and the details of the release of an-
thrax spores. Second, we will be inhibited in the way in which we can
use our intelligence information, some of which is sensitive. (S)
It was agreed that our appropriate next step is to approach the So-
viets at a high level and tell them that their current stance is unsatis-
factory, that the problem will not go away unless they change, but it
is our desire to resolve this in consultation with them, and that we are
obliged to pursue the matter outside bilateral channels unless they are
forthcoming. (S)
It was agreed, ad referendum to Secretary Christopher, for Chris-
topher to give Dobrynin the political message tomorrow, July 10,
1980, with the detailed de´marche by Ralph Earle to Dobrynin as a
follow-up. (S)
It was agreed that: (1) we would not commit ourselves at this time
to approach the UN Security Council as provided by the Biological
Warfare Convention as a fall-back to bilateral consultation; (2) we
would focus our de´marche on the lack of consultation and coopera-
tion rather than any accusation of non-compliance; (3) we would pre-
pare a white paper for possible public use and circulation to other
parties to the Biological Warfare Convention if the Soviet response is
unsatisfactory. (S)
It was agreed that our objectives are to demonstrate our support
for arms control and to deter violations of even weakly verifiable arms
control agreements by demonstrating our willingness to raise ques-
tions of non-compliance when we have them. (U)
It was noted that our current efforts to publicize our concerns
about the possible use of chemical warfare agents by the Soviet Union
in Afghanistan and by their allies in Southeast Asia will inevitably be
coupled, by timing if nothing else, with our handling of this biological
warfare issue. It was nonetheless agreed that we should pursue the
course outlined above. (C)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
130.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 10, 1980
SUBJECT
BW: The Sverdlovsk Incident
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
The Acting Secretary
Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin
PM—Reginald Bartholomew
S/MS—Marshall Shulman
Toward the end of a discussion on TNF, the Acting Secretary men-
tioned that he had one other matter to raise. This concerned the out-
break of anthrax in Sverdlovsk last spring.2 The Acting Secretary said
that we felt that we hadn’t been able to engage the Soviet Government
on this matter to the extent its seriousness warranted. He noted that
Ambassador Earle would meet with Dobrynin to discuss this issue in
some detail.3
Dobrynin responded by questioning what it was the US wanted,
since this was not clear. He noted that the Soviets have already given us
an explanation of this incident.4
The Acting Secretary again stressed the seriousness we attach to
engaging in bilateral consultations so we could satisfy ourselves on this
issue, and not permit this question to undermine the BW Convention or
damage prospects for arms control generally.
Dobrynin reiterated that they have given us what they have on this
matter, and that the Soviets have not seen anything from us that would
contradict their explanation. He said that our goal should be preserving
the Convention and prospects for arms control. Dobrynin again
stressed that what they have heard was based on hearsay, and that if
we have anything else more to say in terms of evidence or proof would
we please tell them.
The Acting Secretary replied by stressing that Ambassador Earle
will provide information that will underline the seriousness of our
concerns.
In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote, “M[arshall]
B[rement], Next step? ZB.”
2 See Document 114.
3 See Document 131.
4 See Document 116.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Due to the press of vacation plans, Dobrynin suggested that Am-
bassador Earle see Vasev instead and give him a paper, which Do-
brynin would then make certain is dealt with in Moscow. Dobrynin
stressed that he needed to take something back with him.
The Acting Secretary repeated that this was a serious political
matter, that Ambassador Earle had important things to say about this
question, and that Dobrynin should definitely try to see Earle before re-
turning to Moscow.
Dobrynin said that he understood the seriousness of this issue, but
suggested that it reflected domestic American election-year politics.
But he asked whether we really had something to say. If so, this would
be good. But he did not want to discuss just anything on this issue in a
general fashion. People in Moscow are critical of the way in which this
issue has been the subject of rumor, hearsay, and press reports.
The Acting Secretary said that this issue would be every bit as se-
rious to the USG if we were now in the first year of this Administration
instead of the fourth year. He suggested the possibility that the issue
might be addressed by distinguished scientists from each country.
Dobrynin repeated again that up to now there has been no proof,
and there have been indirect discussions in the scientific community
which have caused a chain reaction. There has not been a single addi-
tional fact but only hearsay.
The Acting Secretary concluded this portion of the conversation by
urging Dobrynin to see Ambassador Earle on the BW question.
131.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
182944.
Geneva
for
Ambassador
Flowerree.
Subject:
Earle-
Dobrynin Meeting on BW, July 11.
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. Summary: ACDA Director Earle called in Dobrynin to present
him with a paper expressing our dissatisfaction with Soviet responses
the Mission in Geneva, USNATO, London, Bonn, Paris, and the White House. Printed
from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
to our previous de´marches on BW and urging consultations of Soviet
and US experts. He stressed that we were open to Soviet suggestions as
to how serious and meaningful consultations could be carried out. Do-
brynin recalled that the Soviet Government had given a formal reply2
to our earlier de´marches and reviewed the previously stated Soviet ar-
guments. However, he promised to forward our de´marche to Moscow
and said that either he or the Soviet Charge´ would get back to Ambas-
sador Earle with a reply. End summary.
3. In a meeting on July 103 Acting Secretary Christopher empha-
sized to Dobrynin the seriousness with which the US Government ap-
proaches the Sverdlovsk incident and our dissatisfaction with the
failure of the Soviet Government to cooperate. He stressed that failure
to resolve the issue could not only propagandize the Biological
Weapons Convention itself, but also the prospects for making progress
in other arms control areas. The Acting Secretary told Dobrynin that
Ambassador Earle would contact him to pursue the matter in more de-
tail, and he urged Dobrynin to see Earle despite Dobrynin’s crowded
schedule prior to departure for Moscow.
4. Ambassador Earle, referring to Dobrynin’s meeting the previous
day with Acting Secretary Christopher, said he had a statement to
convey to Dobrynin on the BW question. He stressed that this was an
unwanted problem for us and that our purpose was to clear up
ambiguities in a responsible fashion, not to make propaganda. Ambas-
sador Earle then read the following statement: Begin text:
—On several recent occasions, the United States Government has
raised with the Soviet Government the matter of an extensive outbreak
of anthrax in Sverdlovsk in the spring of 1979 pursuant to Article V of
the Biological Weapons Convention.
—The United States Government has studied carefully explana-
tions which were provided to US earlier by the Soviet Government. As
well as information contained in a May 1980 article in a Soviet scientific
journal.4 The explanation that the reported cases of anthrax were of the
gastrointestinal form and were caused by consumption of meat from
anthrax-infected cattle has left the questions of the United States Gov-
ernment unanswered and consequently our earlier concerns remain.
2 See Document 116.
3 See Document 130.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—In this situation, it is clear that our two governments continue to
face a significant unresolved problem having important future ramifi-
cations for both of our countries.
—The United States ascribes great importance to this issue and to
achieving a mutually satisfactory resolution of the problem. I wish to
state categorically that the United States seeks a serious and respon-
sible resolution which will enhance confidence in the Biological Weap-
ons Convention by ensuring the full realization of its undertakings,
since failure to achieve such a result would both undermine the Con-
vention and unavoidably result in complications for future US–Soviet
cooperation in the vital sphere of arms control. The United States be-
lieves this should be a common objective for both the Soviet Union and
the United States.
—To achieve a satisfactory outcome, it is essential that the key
parties concerned, the United States and the Soviet Union undertake
cooperative steps which assist each other in solving this problem. Such
consultation and cooperation must involve serious and meaningful di-
alogue so that concerns can be examined carefully. That is clearly what
is called for in the provisions for consultation contained in Article V of
the Biological Weapons Convention. The circumstances surrounding
the outbreak of the disease at Sverdlovsk raise questions within the
context of the Biological Weapons Convention. The United States gov-
ernment is aware that outbreaks of anthrax occur naturally in the So-
viet Union. However, there is information available to us which causes
concern regarding the outbreak at Sverdlovsk. This information indi-
cates that:
During the first weeks of April 1979, a number of people died in
Sverdlovsk from a disease with symptoms characteristic of inhalation,
as distinct from intestinal or cutaneous, anthrax. The inhalation form of
anthrax is extremely rare and reported incidents involve only a few
cases. (In the past, the anthrax organism has been widely considered a
potential biological warfare agent in part because of its potential for
causing casualties among those who inhale airborne spores.)
The number of deaths appears to have been large and far greater
than would be expected for a natural outbreak of any form of anthrax;
The initial victims resided or worked in the immediate vicinity and
downwind from a heavily secured military facility in Southwest Sverd-
lovsk, known as Cantonment 19;
The facility includes animal pens, suggesting it is engaged in activ-
ities involving effects on living organisms;
Revetted structures which appear to be suitable for the storage of
explosives are also present within the facility;
The section within the Soviet military which is responsible for
chemical and biological programs is associated with a facility in
Sverdlovsk;

Chemical and Biological Weapons
At a certain stage in the outbreak, civilian medical personnel were
excluded from the hospital where victims were being treated and the
military assumed exclusive control.
—The United States Government believes that the concerns based
on this information make it necessary for the US and USSR to consult in
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Biological Weapons
Convention.
—In an effort to clarify the circumstances surrounding the spring
1979 anthrax outbreak, and in accordance with Article V of the Biolog-
ical Weapons Convention, the United States Government proposed on
March 23 that confidential bilateral discussions be held in which Soviet
and American scientific and medical specialists would participate. This
proposal was based on the proven value of discussions among experts
in resolving questions of great complexity and sensitivity in the SALT
Standing Consultative Commission. The United States Government
continues to believe that confidential consultations on this problem,
similar in nature to those conducted in the Standing Consultative Com-
mission, would provide the best approach for resolving this matter in a
mutually satisfactory manner.
—The United States Government envisages that such consulta-
tions would include consideration of the following subjects, together
with appropriate documentation:
The nature of the disease involved;
The cause of the outbreak;
The number of people affected, the geographical extent and the
duration of the outbreak;
Background information, particularly with respect to normal inci-
dence of anthrax in Sverdlovsk.
—The United States Government recognizes that arrangements for
consultations must be worked out in a mutually agreeable fashion. For
this reason, we would be open to your suggestions as to how these se-
rious and meaningful consultations could be carried out.
—The United States Government is mindful of the fact that our
two countries were leaders in negotiating the Biological Weapons Con-
vention and encouraging worldwide adherence. The Convention now
has more than 80 parties who share a stake in the successful realization
of its objectives, including the implementation of its provisions for co-
operation and consultation.
—It is therefore now incumbent upon the United States and the So-
viet Union to demonstrate that our two countries are able cooperatively
to resolve a serious problem, as they have undertaken to do in the Bio-
logical Weapons Convention. In view of the importance the United
States Government attaches to this matter, the Soviet Government

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
should understand that the United States will pursue this issue until a
satisfactory resolution can be achieved, either through bilateral consul-
tations or any other means which may be necessary to meet our respon-
sibilities, including those to the other parties to the Convention. The
United States Government prefers to pursue this matter through bilat-
eral consultations and cooperation. To this end, it has approached the
Soviet Government on this matter a number of times. If the possibility
of resolving this bilaterally is to be preserved, the United States and So-
viet Governments must begin consultations without further delay.
—A cooperative resolution of this problem would not only
strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention itself, but would be a
positive development for arms control and disarmament. The United
States Government looks forward to hearing the views of the Soviet
Government on how their two countries may best go about seeking a
mutually satisfactory resolution of this important matter. End text.
5. After he had read the statement (a copy of which we handed Do-
brynin), Ambassador Earle said he wished to stress several points: first,
this was not an issue which would go away. He noted that resolutions
had been passed in both houses of Congress which, while not legally
binding on the President, constituted a serious expression of congres-
sional concern. Ambassador Earle noted that the uncertainty regarding
what had really happened in Sverdlovsk would be a festering sore on
all arms control accords and negotiations until this problem was re-
solved. The situation was bad enough without having the additional
burden of the suspected BW violation.
6. Ambassador Earle stressed that we were open minded on the
form which discussions might take. We preferred that they be private
and on a bilateral basis. In any event, we were open to Soviet sugges-
tions. He noted the similarity between our proposal for consultations
on BW and the SCC established in the ABM Treaty and read the text of
Article 5 of the BW Convention as well as the article on the SCC in the
ABM Treaty to prove his point that they envisaged essentially the same
kind of arrangement. He noted that the work of the SCC had been effec-
tive and helpful. What we wanted was a dialogue along these lines. In
effect it would be an ad hoc consultative group. We were prepared to
begin meeting as early as the first week of August. The longer the pres-
ent ambiguous situation continued the greater would be the damage to
arms control and to our relations. Ambassador Earle concluded his
presentation by noting that if we were able to resolve the BW problem,
we could come out of the entire situation with a net plus for arms con-
trol in general. In any case our intention was positive. We certainly had
no desire to undermine arms control.
7. Dobrynin replied that the Soviets had explained their position
many times both here and in Moscow. He thought it was not necessary

Chemical and Biological Weapons
to quote all the arguments. The Soviets felt that our raising of the issue
was artificial and did not have anything to do with the aim of the BW
Convention. Dobrynin claimed that during the congressional hearings
one of the witnesses called as an expert could not even explain the
symptoms of anthrax.
8. Ambassador Earle noted that the witness in question was not
one that we were responsible for and that nothing in our statement
today had as its basis the report of the Aspin committee.5
9. Continuing, Dobrynin claimed there was no hard evidence of
any violation. All was hearsay. The Soviets could manufacture such
hearsay themselves if they wanted to. He asked what a commission to
investigate the problem could usefully do. When Ambassador Earle
suggested that, for instance, it could establish how many casualties
there had been, Dobrynin argued that they had already given these
facts to US. They said there were very few but we claimed there were
more, several hundred in fact. With SALT, verification could be carried
out with satellites. This was not possible with BW. Agreeing that there
were indeed different kinds of anthrax, Dobrynin nevertheless argued
that the head of the America desk at the Foreign Ministry in Moscow,
Viktor Komplektov, who was a very responsible official, on the pre-
sidium of the MFA in fact, had given US a complete official explana-
tion. Our persistence was undermining confidence in the adherence to
treaties. Dobrynin challenged US to document that the Soviets had vio-
lated any treaties in the past. He further argued that the leaks which
followed the raising of the issue by the administration showed our pro-
paganda purpose.
10. When Ambassador Earle continued to stress the utility of re-
solving our concerns through consultation, Dobrynin recalled that the
Soviets had invited American scientists to Moscow to examine the radi-
ation problem at the US Embassy.6 Our scientists had gone to Moscow
but they had refused to join in a statement with the Soviets on their
common conclusions. Dobrynin asked what could be usefully dis-
cussed in the present case. The Soviets had given their explanation
already.
11. Ambassador Earle noted that this was not the case. The Soviets
had given US conclusions, not facts. When Dobrynin pressed him to
give an example, Ambassador Earle suggested that evidence and docu-
ments might be examined to resolve the disparity over how many
people had contracted anthrax. Again stressing that the problem was a
Subcommittee of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence: Soviet Biolog-
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
genuine one which would not go away by itself, Ambassador Earle
pressed the argument that the Treaty itself provided for a cooperative
resolution to problems such as the one we were faced with.
12. Dobrynin repeated that the Soviets had already replied. He
claimed we were pressing the issue for propaganda purposes. Ambas-
sador Earle denied that this was true and said that he was quite pleased
that news accounts of his meeting with Dobrynin had speculated that
they were talking about TNF, not BW. He said he hoped that this meant
that the real purpose of their meeting would remain confidential. He
again emphasized the considerable care we had taken in drawing up
the points in our statement. We had reviewed the Soviet statements but
were left with concerns which we wanted to resolve, if possible, by a
low-key, confidential discussion of the matter among experts.
13. Dobrynin, noting for one last time that the Soviets had already
given US their official views on the matter said he would nevertheless
report our statement to Moscow and promised that either he or, in his
absence, Charge´ Vasev, would get back to Ambassador Earle with a
reply.
14. Septel will provide instructions for briefing allied governments.7
Christopher
7 The Department of State informed the Allies of the de´marche in telegram 187763
1535)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
132.
Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of
Defense Brown1
Washington, July 15, 1980
Subject
US Chemical Warfare Policy and Retaliatory Capability (U)
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned that the Soviet Union
has not matched the restraint shown by the United States in modern-
izing CW capabilities nor the efforts of the United States to negotiate a
meaningful CW treaty. To the contrary, the Soviets not only have de-
veloped an extensive CW capability, but continuing reports indicate
that they also have employed riot control and incapacitating agents
(and possibly lethal agents) in Afghanistan. Their apparent willingness
to employ chemical weapons is in complete disregard of internation-
ally recognized principles to which the Soviets publicly subscribe. The
Joint Chiefs of Staff view the Soviet actions in Afghanistan, following
the apparent and unchallenged use of chemical weapons by the Viet-
namese in Laos, as part of a developing pattern by the Soviet Union and
its surrogates to employ these weapons at low levels of conflict.2
2. (S) These factors present a serious threat to US security interests,
given the marginal capability of the United States to conduct CW oper-
ations and the reluctance of the Soviets to negotiate an equitable, verifi-
able ban on the development, production, and stockpiling of chemical
weapons. The Soviets respect strength and exploit weakness. They
know that the United States and NATO are comparatively weak in the
area of CW. Gradually improving US chemical defense posture pro-
vides little, if any, deterrence to Soviet use of chemical weapons. Even a
near-perfect defense probably would not3 deter Soviet use of chemical
agents because of the significant military advantage of placing an op-
ponent in a CW environment. Until the United States demonstrates that
it has an effective CW retaliatory capability, combined with a viable de-
fense, the Soviets are not likely to be restrained from using chemicals in
any future conflict. The almost nonexistent US offensive capability,
Biological/Chemical Warfare. Secret. In the upper right margin, Brown wrote “7/15—
Good argument. Perhaps best handled by supporting [illegible] add-on, without at this
time changing policy. (since the 3.1M merely puts US in position more to construction of
binary production facility. [illegible] HB.”
2 At the end of this paragraph, Brown wrote “Our degree of certainty is not very
great (about Sov use in Afghanistan—somewhat greater re SEA).”
3 In between “not” and “deter,” Brown wrote “alone.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
coupled with a severely limited defensive capability, is, in fact, seri-
ously destabilizing.
3. (S) Considering the asymmetry between the US and Soviet
chemical warfare posture, as well as the current tactical nuclear bal-
ance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the President should have a
credible chemical response option to Soviet use of offensive chemical
weapons—especially if the
Soviets selectively
employ
chemical
weapons against a few critical targets. Nuclear retaliation, in itself, is a
questionable and possibly an undesirable CW deterrent due to the un-
known level of the Soviet nuclear and chemical response to US use of
theater nuclear weapons. For this reason, it is necessary to pursue a vig-
orous program that provides measurable and visible evidence of the
US resolve to field a CW retaliatory capability. The development of a
safe—and a politically more acceptable—binary weapons stockpile
should be the first major step in this direction.
4. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that positive steps be
taken now to develop a credible US CW retaliatory capability. They
further recommend that a memorandum, substantially like that in the
Appendix,4 be forwarded to the President requesting that US policy be
changed to permit immediate modernization of the US CW retaliatory
capability. Binary munitions represent the most reasonable option for
insuring a credible retaliatory capability in support of the national
policy of deterrence. In this regard, you may wish to recommend to the
President that he support the action by the House of Representatives of
munitions binary facility.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David C. Jones
General, USAF
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
4 The appendix was not attached.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
133.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Sverdlovsk: Next Step (U)
Regarding your question (Tab A),2 the next step is to await the So-
viet response, which will presumably be negative. The story in today’s
New York Times (Tab B)3 will confirm their judgment that this is a prop-
aganda ploy and they will almost certainly continue to stonewall. (U)
Meanwhile, ACDA is working on a White Paper which we would
issue if the Soviet response is unsatisfactory. The problem with this is
that the White Paper will not be an entirely convincing document, at
least in a court of law, particularly after sensitive information has been
scrubbed from it by the intelligence community. In any case, other gov-
ernments will probably not be convinced enough by it to take action
condemning the USSR. We then will have to decide whether we want
to go to the Security Council with our case or take it to some other mul-
tilateral forum. (C)
At that point we will also have to decide whether we can continue
to adhere to a treaty which is being violated flagrantly by the USSR.
(Although there remains at least a modicum of doubt about whether
the Soviets are stockpiling BW materials, they clearly have failed to
comply with Article 5 of the BW Convention, which calls for consulta-
tions.) To renounce the Convention would be a difficult step for us to
take, but to adhere to it in the face of a flagrant violation would not do
the cause of arms control any good either and would be difficult politi-
cally as well. Before we make up our minds as to our ultimate strategy,
we should probably first examine the White Paper, which ACDA
promises will be ready by the end of next week. (S)
Oplinger concurs, but believes we can produce a White Paper
which, without needlessly spilling intelligence sources, can make a
compelling case that the Soviets are in violation of Article 5, perhaps
sufficient to get other governments to condemn them on those
2 Tab A was not attached.
3 Tab B is not attached. Reference is to “Toll is Put at 1,000 in Soviet Accident,” New
York Times, July 16, 1980, which described the Sverdlovsk incident.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
grounds. If we cannot do that much, clearly we cannot sustain a charge
of a substantive violation in the Security Council or elsewhere. (C)
134.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
189291. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subject: Soviet Re-
sponse to U.S. De´marche on Sverdlovsk Incident.
1. S—Entire text.
2. Summary: Soviet Charge´ Vasev came in with a reply to Ambas-
sador Earle’s de´marche of July 11,2 to Dobrynin requesting consulta-
tions under the BW Convention on the reported incidence of anthrax at
Sverdlovsk. Vasev said he had been instructed to confirm that the So-
viet side considered the allegations completely unfounded, that there
had been no violation of the BW Convention and that there was conse-
quently no basis for consultation. Ambassador Earle regretted that the
Soviet reply had not addressed the factual information we had con-
veyed and cautioned that, since the problem would not go away, we
would have to continue pursuing the matter by other means which
would probably include the participation of other parties. End
summary.
3. Saying that he was speaking on instructions, Vasev delivered the
following “oral reply” on July 17:
“In view of repeated requests of the American side the Embassy
has been instructed to confirm once again that the Soviet side considers
as completely unfounded allegations which try to establish some sort
of connection between an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverd-
lovsk in April 1979 and the compliance by the Soviet Union with the
Convention Prohibiting Bacteriological Weapons.
“The Soviet Union, as one of the initiators of and participants in
the Convention, has always attached the utmost importance to the un-
deviating fulfillment of all its provisions which represent a major meas-
sion in Geneva, USNATO, London, Bonn, Paris, and the White House. Printed from a
copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 131

Chemical and Biological Weapons
ure in the field of real disarmament and the effective prevention against
making and storing types of weapons of mass destruction lethal for
mankind. We have already emphasized that the fulfillment by the So-
viet side of obligations established by the Convention is guaranteed by
the appropriate state institutions of the USSR and that the Soviet Union
does not possess bacteriological (biological) agents, toxins, weapons or
equipment and means of delivery as mentioned in Article I of the
Convention.
“Besides, in view of the request made by the American side con-
cerning information on the causes of an outbreak of anthrax in the re-
gion of Sverdlovsk in April of last year the Soviet side has communi-
cated the fact that the outbreak was a result of periodic livestock
epidemics in those regions and that the cases of human illness were due
to the consumption of cattle meat sold in violation of established veteri-
nary rules. This communication was based on data from the epidemio-
logical service furnished in particular by the magazine “Microbiology,
Epidemiology, and Immunology” (May 1980 issue).
“The stated facts show that the incident concerning anthrax in the
region of Sverdlovsk is completely within the realm of veterinary and
public health and does not touch upon any matter relating to the aims
or observance of the Convention banning bacteriological weapons as
mentioned in Article V.
“It is noted with bewilderment and regret how irresponsibly some
American officials make public statements obviously trying to cast a
shadow over the faithful fulfillment by the Soviet Union of its treaty
obligations. The obviously inspired clamor in the American mass
media around this contrived problem is also noted.
“The Soviet side reaffirms that there is no basis for consultations
within the context of Article V of the Convention on the banning of bac-
teriological weapons”. End text.
4. In the discussion which ensued, Ambassador Earle regretted the
Soviet disregard of our de´marche which had furnished detailed infor-
mation underlying our concern over compliance. He noted the Soviets
had not addressed themselves to the information in our paper. Refer-
ring to his conversation with Ambassador Dobrynin last Friday, Am-
bassador Earle reiterated his concern that the Soviet unresponsiveness
would cast a shadow over both our bilateral relations and the multi-
lateral arrangement created by the Convention. Noting that we had not
accused the Soviets of a direct violation, he stated our purpose as
seeking to raise in a diplomatic and noncontentious way a mutual
problem which called for consultation under Article V of the Conven-
tion. He added that we were open to Soviet suggestions on the form
such consultations might take. This was our preferred course. How-
ever, Ambassador Earle cautioned, the problem would not go away

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
and if necessary we would be obliged to deal with it by other means
which would include the involvement of other parties.
5. Vasev denied that the substance of the US de´marche had been
ignored. He said the Soviet side had studied our paper carefully and re-
viewed the situation. The Soviets did not possess any biological agents,
weapons, or means of delivery. Their explanation of what happened in
Sverdlovsk had been based on data furnished by medical experts.
Nothing more was required since Article V did not cover matters of
public health and sanitation. Vasev charged that we were pursuing
psychological warfare against the Soviets and referred to recent news-
paper articles based on e´migre´ sources.
6. Ambassador Earle pointed out that we could not let the issue be
resolved by a flat Soviet statement. He referred to the information
we had supplied in our paper, noting that many of the points had not
been based upon e´migre´ sources. Vasev responded that the heart
of the matter was simply that the Soviets had given us a complete
explanation.
He claimed we were indulging in rumors and psychological war-
fare. Ambassador Earle again stressed the applicability of Article V,
quoting from it directly to make his point. He noted that as a co-
depositary of the Convention we had responsibilities to insure its
observance. Vasev again stressed that the Soviets found no basis for
consultation under Article V. After Ambassador Earle had denied a
final time Vasev’s charge that our purpose was one of propaganda,
Vasev said he had nothing to add and the meeting ended.
7. Septel will contain instructions for briefing allies.3
Christopher
3 The Department of State informed the Allies of the Soviet response to the
Foreign Policy File)

Chemical and Biological Weapons
135.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, July 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Mini-SCC Meeting—Sverdlovsk (C)
A Mini-SCC on the possible BW incident at Sverdlovsk, USSR, was
sible options open to the U.S. in view of the recent Soviet rejection of
the third U.S. request for information on this matter.
D. Aaron (Chairman) opened by asking for a review of the ade-
quacy of the U.S. case, not from the perspective of what we believe hap-
pened but how well we could defend ourselves publicly on that case,
especially if we decided to react by taking public steps such as submit-
ting our case to the UN, withdrawing from participation in treaty, etc.
S. Keeny (ACDA) led response, pointing out that we do have some
problems with the case, especially regarding releasability of informa-
tion [less than 1 line not declassified]. A classified white paper is being
prepared in ACDA which will primarily consist of assertions without
evidence. Keeny pointed out that soft spots in our case include
[5 lines not declassified]
Aaron summed up this phase of the discussion by noting that we
do not have as much assurance as we would need that there was a BW
violation; the most we can say with assurance is that the Soviets have
failed to be forthcoming on a serious matter. Bartholomew (State)
added that we can at least say we have enough evidence for legitimate
concern; there was general agreement on this. W. Slocombe (OSD) ar-
gued that the focus of our case should be Soviet refusal to cooperate in
resolving the problem.
The discussion shifted to what actions the U.S. should take. Slo-
combe argued that we should continue to press the Soviets along the
line we have already, at least in the short term until the UNGA in Sep-
tember. The Soviets are resourceful enough to creatively change their
line if we put them on notice that this is a very serious matter to us, that
their stone-walling behavior jeopardizes further arms control agree-
Brown Files—General #1, Biological Weapons. Secret. Copies were sent to Komer, McGif-
fert, Slocombe, Davis, and Buckley. Prepared by Weakley; and approved by Slocombe. A
hand-written note under the date reads “Walt—This is a good outcome. Well done—
Lynn.”
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions of this meeting were found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ments, and that we take cooperation in verifying arms control agree-
ments very seriously. Bob Barry (State EUR) said Soviets would never
go beyond their current position. A discussion ensued about what we
could realistically expect if we did cause the Soviet side to be more
forthcoming, how much leverage we can hope to exert, and the options
available for exerting such leverage. Consensus was that we want to
deter Soviet pursuit of BW, avoid damage to arms control generally—
and that a fuller explanation and corrective action would help on both
scores, but that a good deal of damage had already been done.
Aaron summarized and cited tasks ahead.
—First, proceed with preparation of the White Paper (ACDA). We
can then estimate its usefulness and decide what to do with it.
—Go to the British; get them to weigh in. (Also use presentation to
them as a test case of the persuasiveness of our evidence to a sympa-
thetic audience.) (State put together a proposal; will pass staff analysis
to them as soon as possible [less than 1 line not declassified]).
—Pursue another de´marche, either in Washington or Moscow, as
described above. Emphasize we want an answer at the senior political
level. (State to circulate proposal).
—[2 lines not declassified]
—Explore possibility of using the incident as a vehicle for pro-
posing to amend and clarify the verification and permitted quantity
clauses if we have to go multilateral. (ACDA).
Robert M. Weekley
Colonel, USA
Assistant for Negotiations ODUSD (Policy Planning)
136.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
11024. Subject: US–USSR Negotiations on Chemical Weapons
(CW): Summary of Developments.
CW message no. 17
1. (C—Entire text).
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, and
USNATO.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
2. Summary. Round twelve of the US–USSR negotiations on
Chemical Weapons (CW) began on May 22 and ended July 7. In a sense,
they also extended beyond the formal closing date almost until the end
of the 1980 session of the Committee on Disarmament (CD) on August
9, since the two Delegations had a number of private exchanges in con-
nection with the work of the CD’s working group on CW. The pace of
round twelve was fairly intensive, especially prior to the opening of the
CD session June 12. The substantive results, however, were quite
meager. In the crucial area of verification, the Soviets—while pro-
fessing willingness to continue the search for mutually acceptable solu-
tions—made it even clearer that they were not prepared to move from
their present basic position. Some progress was achieved on a few sec-
ondary issues, but it was not sufficient for a full resolution of those
issues. Considerable time and effort were expended on the preparation
of the joint report to the CD. In general, it was evident that the Soviets
did not expect any major advance in the negotiations during this
round. End summary.
3. During round twelve of the US–USSR negotiations on CW, eight
plenaries and nine drafting group meetings were held, most of them
prior to the opening of the CD session. Coordination of the joint report
to the CD required a number of additional meetings, outside the reg-
ular plenary or drafting group framework.2 The two Delegations also
had several private discussions after the formal closing of round
twelve, in connection with the work of the CD’s working group on CW.
4. Despite the tensions in U.S.-Soviet relations, the atmosphere in
the bilaterals was business-like. Soviet responses to USDel comments
regarding reported use of CW were also couched in non-polemical
terms. Throughout the round, and especially during the work of the
CD’s working group on CW, the Soviets displayed visible concern
about preventing discussions in that group from exposing the
weakness of their position, in particular on verification. Although they
were clearly unhappy that we remained unresponsive to their attempts
to engage US in joint efforts to circumscribe those discussions, this did
not affect their working relationship with U.S.
5. The substantive results of round twelve were mixed, with the
negative balancing out the positive.
A. The Soviets showed some flexibility on several secondary
issues, but fell short of providing adequate basis for complete agree-
ment on any of them. Specifically, they:
(1) Agreed to specify the maximum aggregate annual capacity
(one metric ton) of a single facility for the production of super-toxic le-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
thal chemicals for non-hostile military purposes, but expressed a nega-
tive attitude towards other U.S. proposals related to this issue;
(2) Agreed that, subject to contrary decision by the first Revcon, the
use of super-toxic lethal chemicals in training should cease at the time
of such a conference—however, they did not accept the U.S. view that
the limitation should also cover other toxic chemicals;
(3) Moved from their stand of total opposition to the inclusion of
toxins in the coverage of a CW ban, but remained unwilling to include
all toxic chemicals regardless of origin (see para B(1) below);
(4) Implied that destruction of stocks could be subject to OSI proce-
dures similar to those offered by them in round nine for destruction of
facilities, i.e., notification 90 days in advance of specific destruction op-
erations and possibility of requests for OSI;
(5) Agreed to exclude from the coverage of a CW ban munitions
and devices for dissemination of irritants—see, however, para B(2)
below;
(6) Agreed to include in the general information on stocks to be ex-
changed bilaterally the quantitative category of “over 150,000 tons”
and to having such exchange take place 15 days before submission of
the convention to the U.S. Senate for ratification—they made the ex-
change contingent, however, on signature of the convention by all five
permanent members of the UN Security Council;
(7) Accepted in principle the concept of joint inspection teams, but
with reservation regarding the type of OSI it would apply to and the
composition and authority of such teams;
(8) Agreed to the establishment of a consultative committee within
30 days after the entry into force of the convention, rather than six
months as they had originally proposed, although they did not agree to
having the committee convene within the same time limit.
B. The significance of this limited movement in the Soviet position
was diminished by their negative stand on some issues, especially
those in the crucial area of verification. In particular, the Soviets:
(1) Excluded from a prohibition toxic chemicals capable of antigen
activity or of engendering immunity, thus restricting the significance of
their move on the toxin issue (para 5.A. (3) above);
(2) Remained unwilling to accommodate the U.S. position on irri-
tants in a satisfactory manner, asserting that they could not agree to le-
galizing unilateral reservations to the Geneva Protocol;
(3) Refused even to discuss provisions regarding the disposition of
facilities on the grounds that obligation to cease production was al-
ready covered by the basic prohibition and, in that connection, objected
to the U.S. proposal to prohibit construction of new CW production fa-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
cilities because such a provision could entail requests for OSI also of fa-
cilities constructed for permitted purposes;
(4) Continued to reject any provision involving declaration of facil-
ities early in the implementation of a convention;
(5) Rejected the distinction between “implementation” and “com-
pliance” as based on the U.S. concept of verification, which they did not
accept;
(6) Strongly reaffirmed their approach to verification, making it
clear again that no pre-agreed (i.e., mandatory) OSI’s were acceptable
and that the concept of “voluntary” OSI’s should apply to all obliga-
tions regarding destruction, production, and non-retention;
(7) While expressing willingness to continue the search for
methods of using NTM for monitoring a CW prohibition, questioned
the U.S.–suggested measures for facilitating verification by NTM, in
particular since they would involve declaration of locations of facilities.
6. In view of the fact that none of the issues on which language
could be developed was sufficiently resolved, and also because of the
Soviet refusal to discuss provisions regarding the disposition of facil-
ities, the drafting group did not actively consider any specific formula-
tions. A major portion of the group’s time and effort was devoted to the
development of the joint report to the CD.
7. In sum, round twelve was not very productive, although at this
juncture probably no different results could have been expected. At the
same time, Soviet behavior in the bilaterals, in the process of the devel-
opment of the joint report, and in connection with the CD’s working
group on CW suggests that the Soviets continue to attach importance to
the bilaterals. It was clear that they feel much more comfortable dealing
with the U.S. alone than having to protect their position against a multi-
tude of differing views, as they had to do in the CW working group
with regard to issues to be dealt with in negotiations on a convention.
8. It is difficult to tell at this point what the eventual objective of the
Soviets may be concerning a CW agreement, or whether they have even
decided themselves. Early in round twelve Amb Israelyan told Amb
Flowerree not to expect much progress and said that the Soviets would
be re-evaluating their positions on arms control issues in the light of the
outcome of the U.S. elections. At least the first part of this statement
was borne out by the results of the round. The Soviets have talked
about the possibility of a new round in January 1981. In the interim,
consideration might be given to approaching them through diplomatic
channels to probe their inventions and to reemphasize to them the cru-
cial importance of reaching agreement on satisfactory verification pro-
visions if any real progress is to be made toward a joint initiative.
Helman

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
137.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
19227. Subject: (S) U.S./UK Consultations on Sverdlovsk Anthrax
Outbreak. Ref: State 219868.2
Secret—Entire text
1. Summary: U.S.–UK consultations on the 1979 Sverdlovsk an-
thrax outbreak were held in London on September 10. U.S. team,
headed by Amb. Ralph Earle, presented U.S. assessment of what hap-
pened in Sverdlovsk, summarized U.S.-Soviet diplomatic exchanges,
and suggested that next step be a UK de´marche to the Soviets. UK team
concurred in U.S. assessment and outlined alternative possibilities for
the next step. The two sides also explored possible strategies for
multilateral involvement at a later stage. In subsequent meeting,
Douglas Hurd (FCO No. 3) told Amb. Earle that he would recommend
to Foreign Secretary Carrington that UK make a bilateral de´marche to
the Soviets. End summary.
2. U.S. team, headed by Amb. Ralph Earle, Director, U.S. Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, met with UK officials from FCO
and MOD for consultations on the 1979 Sverdlovsk anthrax outbreak.
UK team was headed by Sir Antony Acland, Deputy Undersecretary,
FCO. (Delegation lists contained para 15 below.)
3. Earle began by summarizing U.S. assessment of what had hap-
pened in Sverdlovsk and U.S.-Soviet diplomatic exchanges over the
outbreak:
A. What happened:
—We are confident that there was a serious outbreak of human an-
thrax in Sverdlovsk in April 1979. However, we have been unable to
determine with confidence what caused the outbreak. In particular, we
have not concluded that the Soviets have violated the Biological
Weapons Convention.
cret; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.
bassy that ACDA Director Earle had been informed that the Foreign Office believed that
the “bilateral process” between the United States and the Soviet Union over the Sverd-
lovsk incident was “almost exhausted” and that there was “merit in broadening the
scope of diplomatic action” to include UK involvement. The Foreign Office also warned
that the Soviets “might conclude that there was little risk in taking chances with arms
control agreements, and the prospects for a good CW agreement would be worse.” (Na-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
—The information available provides a basis for serious concern
about the possibility of an accident at a BW-related facility, the nature
of activities at such a facility, and whether those activities were incon-
sistent with obligations under the BW Convention.
—These concerns are based on judgments that the outbreak in-
volved the inhalation form of anthrax, not the intestinal form as as-
serted by the Soviets and that the outbreak occurred in the immediate
vicinity of a military facility which has been suspected for some time of
BW-related activities.
—The possibility that the outbreak resulted from airborne contam-
ination produced by an accident related to protective or prophylactic
work with biological agents permitted under the convention cannot be
ruled out. On the other hand, there clearly is a basis for concern that ac-
tivities not permitted by the Convention may have been conducted at
Sverdlovsk and this is the basis for the U.S. proposal for consultation.
B. Diplomatic exchanges:
—Since March of this year we have raised the Sverdlovsk case with
the Soviets on a number of occasions.
—In these exchanges, we have stressed four major points:
1. There is sound reason to question the cause of the outbreak of
disease in Sverdlovsk;
2. This issue could be discussed by the U.S. and the Soviet Union in
a setting similar to the one that has been so practical under SALT;
3. Resolution of this problem would be a positive development for
arms control, but failure to deal with it in a mutually satisfactory way
could have serious implications for arms control and further compli-
cate U.S./Soviet relations; and
4. This issue will not go away.
—So far, the Soviets have been quite unresponsive to our concerns.
4. Earle said that the Soviet explanation that the outbreak was due
to meat from anthrax-infected cattle seemed quite unlikely. It is also
disturbing that the Soviets have denied that our concern in any way
obligates them to hold consultations to clarify the disease in Sverdlovsk
is not related to the Biological Weapons Convention. So, beyond ques-
tions relating to compliance with Article I, Soviet behavior poses a se-
rious question with respect to their compliance to Article V of the Con-
vention and to their attitude on the importance of consultative
undertakings more generally.
5. Present USG assessment, Earle noted, was that further U.S.
de´marches were unlikely to produce a more satisfactory Soviet re-
sponse. However, U.S. will continue to press them. In the USG view a
UK bilateral approach to the Soviets had some slight chance of leading
to constructive discussions; it thus seemed to be the most desirable next
step.
6. Acland responded that a UK intelligence review, completed in
April 1980, had reached conclusions very similar to those arrived at by
the U.S. UK shared U.S. concerns about the cause of the outbreak and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
about Soviet unresponsiveness. Present UK assessment of diplomatic
situation was that Soviets were unlikely to change their attitude to-
ward U.S. bilateral de´marches and that other approaches now had to be
considered.
7. In UK view, the objectives of future steps should be to:
—Maintain the credibility of the Convention;
—Make clear to the Soviet Union that compliance with the Con-
vention was being carefully monitored;
—Demonstrate domestically and internationally that the Sverd-
lovsk issue was being pursued seriously;
—Stress the importance of verification provisions in agreements
under negotiation.
8. Acland said UK tends to favor a process of slow escalation of
diplomatic steps. Alternatives of simply dropping the issue or con-
tinued U.S. bilateral de´marches would not promote satisfactory resolu-
tion. UK will consider U.S. suggestion that next step be a UK de´marche
to the Soviets. Other possibilities include parallel bilateral de´marches
by the U.S. and others (perhaps by a neutral country such as Sweden)
or a proposal for a meeting of the three depositaries (U.S., UK and
USSR). Earle reiterated U.S. preference for a de´marche by the UK.
9. Both sides agreed that once bilateral (or trilateral) approaches
had been exhausted, convening a consultative meeting of states parties
was the logical next step. Palmer (U.S.) outlined preliminary U.S.
thinking about such a meeting. He said that the purpose of a meeting
would be to conduct a thorough and responsible analysis of available
information by qualified experts in order to clarify the cause of the out-
break. Even if this effort were unsuccessful, the meeting would provide
us with an opportunity to achieve a much wider understanding within
the international community on the nature of the problem. This step
would entail certain risks. Some of the risks are procedural since there
is no established practice for raising this type of compliance issue
under the BW Convention. Other risks relate to our ability to persuade
others that a serious issue is involved. It would also be desirable to ap-
proach such consultations in a way that might set a valuable precedent
for improving the future operation of the treaty, including the possi-
bility of periodic consultative meetings, and which would in general
strengthen the credibility of the multilateral arms control process.
10. Palmer stressed that before committing ourselves to seeking a
consultative meeting, it would be important to take soundings with key
states to ensure that a proposal would be broadly supported. In view of
the seriousness of the issue, U.S. believes that it would be important to
engage a significant number of concerned BWC parties, particularly
Non-Aligned, in the consultative process. The views of Sweden would
be particularly important because of their past advocacy of a BWC con-

Chemical and Biological Weapons
sultative committee and of their influential role in the neutral/non-
aligned group. The U.S. would prefer to have Sweden take the lead in
calling a consultative committee meeting.
11. A discussion of the timing of the next steps ensued. Earle noted
that if Lord Carrington planned to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko at the beginning of the UNGA session later in September, this
could provide an opportunity for a UK de´marche. He said U.S. believes
that next step should not be delayed too long. It is important that So-
viets not get the perception that the issue is being dropped.
12. Acland asked U.S. views on foreshadowing to the Soviets what
future steps were being considered and also on public release of a
“white paper”. Earle responded that U.S. had already indicated to the
Soviets that multilateral involvement was a possibility, but that being
more explicit could lead to Soviet efforts to block the steps we had in
mind. Regarding a “white paper”, the U.S. believes it important for the
near term to maintain as much confidentiality as possible. We might
well provide a classified background paper to others in the near future,
but we see public release as something for a later stage. (Comment: UK
team appeared satisfied with these responses and did not press either
point. End comment).
13. Acland concluded by expressing UK concern about the Sverd-
lovsk issue and emphasizing usefulness of US–UK consultations. UK
will consider U.S. suggestions and views and respond as soon as
possible.
14. In a subsequent meeting, Douglas Hurd (FCO No. 3) told Amb.
Earle that he would recommend to Foreign Secretary Carrington that
the UK make a bilateral de´marche to the Soviets to express concern
about the Sverdlovsk incident, as the U.S. team had proposed. Hurd
promised a prompt UK response.
[Omitted here is the list of participants.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
138.
Message From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1
WH07366. Forwarded per request of Secretary Muskie. Please de-
liver as soon as possible. Subject: Muskie-Dobrynin Meeting: Follow-
up to Gromyko Bilateral.
1. (S—Entire text).
2. Begin summary. Secretary Muskie met with Ambassador Do-
brynin October 42 to take up several issues which time had prevented
his raising with Gromyko in New York:3 Poland, the Sverdlovsk an-
thrax outbreak, the September 14 Soviet high-yield test, prospects for
Madrid,4 including human rights issues, and a problem affecting con-
tinuation of construction of the new Moscow Embassy complex. He
also responded to a question which Gromyko had raised during the
New York bilateral on PD–59.5 In response, Dobrynin complained that
most of what the Secretary had to say was negative, that there was
nothing very positive about it. On the specific issues raised, Dobrynin
said the Poles knew how to handle their problems without outside in-
terference; there was no utility in continuing to discuss Sverdlovsk; he
had no information as yet on the September 14 test; our plans for dis-
cussing human rights issues at Madrid would have a very negative ef-
fect; and he could understand that the construction problem was one
that might bother us. The Secretary pointed out that the fact that we
continued to set forth our views frankly, in an effort to lessen the differ-
ences between us, should not be regarded as “negative.” He also
stressed the importance of resolving issues which would facilitate our
efforts to achieve ratification of SALT II. End summary.
Sensitive; Eyes Only; Nodis. Sent from the White House Situation Room. The initial “C”
written in the upper right-hand corner of the message indicates that Carter saw it. Carter
spent October 4 and 5 in a fishing cabin in Spruce Creek, Pennsylvania. (Carter Library,
Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) The message is printed in full in Foreign
Union, Document 303.
VI, Soviet Union, Document 302.
4 Delegates of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe met in Ma-
drid to discuss implementing the Final Act of the 1975 Helsinki Conference. For more on
5 Presidential Directive 59, “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” was issued on
tional Security Policy.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
3. The Secretary told Dobrynin he thought his talk with Gromyko
in New York on September 25 had been very useful and that he had ap-
preciated Gromyko’s frankness and relaxed tone. Despite the fact that
the meeting had been extended beyond the agreed time, however,
there were several subjects we had not had time to cover. He thought
the best way to treat these was to set out our position on each of them in
a Non-Paper, briefly and without any polemics, which Dobrynin could
transmit to Gromyko. If there were additional subjects which Gromyko
would like to bring to the Secretary’s attention in a similar manner he
would be glad to consider them.
4. The Secretary then summarized each of the issues orally and at
the end of his presentation handed Dobrynin the following Non-Paper:
Begin text:
Follow-up to September 25 meeting.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
On arms control matters, we wish to reaffirm the U.S. commitment
to SALT II ratification and to the achievement of progress in CTB,
MBFR, CW, and ASAT. We would also like to raise two matters which
could have far reaching implications for the future of arms control ne-
gotiations in general and, in the near term, for SALT II ratification.
First, the inability to find a suitable means of resolving the concerns ex-
pressed by the United States regarding the April 1979 outbreak of an-
thrax in Sverdlovsk raises serious questions concerning Soviet compli-
ance with the Biological Weapons Convention. This is a problem that
will not simply go away with the passage of time. We continue to be-
lieve that the best way to resolve our legitimate concerns in this matter
would be to arrange for technical discussions among experts. Although
we prefer to resolve this matter on a bilateral basis, the U.S. Govern-
ment will also consider other ways to resolve our concerns in accord-
ance with the terms of the Biological Weapons Convention—including
possible multilateral action. Soviet cooperation in resolving this matter
would be a very positive step.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
5. Dobrynin said he would of course report the Secretary’ remarks
to Gromyko. Overall, however, his impression was that they, quite
frankly, were not very encouraging. He then commented briefly on the
individual issues raised as follows:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
—The U.S. knows the Soviet position on arms control very well:
The Soviets favor a continuation. But we have discussed Sverdlovsk
“hundreds of times” and he doesn’t see anything useful in discussing it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
further. As for the September 14 Soviet nuclear test, he has no informa-
tion as yet.6
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
6 On October 27, Dobrynin presented an oral note from Gromyko to Muskie in re-
sponse to the Non-Paper. Muskie’s claim that the U.S. wanted “normal relations” with
the Soviet Union, the note said, was belied by the Secretary’s October 4 comments. “The
choice of the questions and the way they are posed,” the note contended, “do not indicate
a readiness by the US side to seek mutual understanding. We have no desire to engage in
polemics for the sake of polemics. But we, understandably, cannot silently pass over
statements and actions of the US side with which we cannot agree.” Regarding Sverd-
lovsk, the note said “We reaffirm our position on the question regarding an outbreak of
anthrax in the area of Sverdlovsk.” (Telegram 287283 to Moscow, October 28; National
139.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-SCC Meeting1
Washington, November 26, 1980
Subject
Chemical Warfare (U)
Participants
State
OSTP
Reginald Bartholomew, Director,
Ben Huberman, Asso. Dir., Natl.
Political-Military Affairs
Security, Intl. & Space Aff.
Mark Palmer, Director, Disarm. &
Margaret Finarelli, Senior Policy
Arms Control
Analyst
Charles Thomas, Dir., Off. of Eur.
JCS
Aff. & Eur. Security
Gen John Pustay, Assistant to the
Robert Pace, Political-Military
Chairman
Officer
Col. John A. Tengler, Chemical
OSD
Staff Planner
Walter Slocombe, Dep. Undersec.
for Policy Planning
[name not declassified]
Thomas Dashiell, Staff Specialist
[name not declassified]
for Chemical Technology
White House Situation Room.

Chemical and Biological Weapons
OMB
White House
Edward Sanders, Asso. Dir., Natl.
David Aaron (chaired)
Security & Intl. Affairs
NSC
Robert Howard, AF Branch Chief,
Victor Utgoff
Natl. Security Division
Gen Jasper Welch
ACDA
Jerry Oplinger
George Ashworth, Asst. Dir.,
Weapons Eval. & Control
Robert Mikulak, Staff Member
The meeting began with a discussion of the basic objectives of the
proposed binary chemical weapons program, as currently seen. This
agent tons JCS CW munitions requirement for Central Europe remains
to be made; (2) A more modest stockpile of several thousand agent tons
would accommodate a shift to a better mix of CW munitions, particu-
larly more air-delivered weapons; and (4) Binary munitions offer the
possibility of multipurpose artillery shells that could be normally con-
figured as smoke or HE rounds, but with a quick change of inserts con-
verted to CW munitions. (S)
The Chair noted that the value of the binary CW program seems to
depend significantly on forward-deploying some of these weapons in
Europe and in particular, in Germany. Defense generally agreed, but
stated that the binary program would probably be worth pursuing
even if forward-deployment of binaries were to prove impossible. The
Chair stated that the question still seems to be: Will we be able to de-
ploy binaries in Europe? (S)
State (after noting that the CW issue has not yet been addressed by
the Secretary), argued that the problem of deploying binaries in Europe
is manageable if approached correctly. State argued that presenting a
major new CW program all at one time to our Allies wouldn’t work. On
the other hand, a phased approach beginning with deployment of air-
delivered CW munitions in the UK, and then leading to replacement of
stocks in the FRG, perhaps using the multipurpose shell idea, could be
worked out. (S)
The Chair stated that if the value of binaries is strongly dependent
on forward-deployment, we must know Allied—particularly FRG—at-
titudes. Defense argued that we should not ask the Allies to participate
in this decision. State agreed, but said that the US should discuss the
management of the CW problem with the Allies. JCS noted that we
might point out the changed importance of a credible CW deterrent,
given changes in the nuclear balance. State said any suggestion of a
changed role for CW weapons would doom any hopes we have for
modernizing the forward-deployed CW stockpile. State then argued
that the program of improvements we are discussing involves a long

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
series of actions and consultations that should probably be carried out
by the next administration. (S)
The Chair argued that we need to make a decision on the program
for the ’82 DOD budget, and that we are likely to create a major
problem for the next administration if we simply include funds for the
binary plant without consulting with the FRG. Chancellor Schmidt
would likely be pressed at home for his reaction to our decision, and his
reaction might very well be to say binary weapons will never be de-
ployed in Germany. (S)
After a short discussion of the specific decisions that must be
made, the mini-SCC agreed to recommend the following course of
action:
(1) Do nothing to oppose the Congressional initiatives to fund the
binary plant in 1981.
(2) Sign the appropriations bill without comment and place what-
ever funds the Congress provides for 1981 on the deferred list, pending
decision by the new administration.
(3) Make our final decision on the binary CW plant in the course of
the President’s ’82 DOD budget review.
(4) If the Congress’ actions lead to a need for significant funding in
1982, and if the President decides to fund the program, consult with
Chancellor Schmidt to give him advance warning of our intentions.
(5) Let the next administration decide how to complete the re-
quired restructuring of the binary program. (S)

Comprehensive Test Ban; Peaceful Nuclear
Explosions
140.
Editorial Note
During the 1976 presidential campaign, the Democratic Party in-
cluded a comprehensive test ban in its party platform. (“Widely Dif-
fering Platforms Offer Voters a Clear Choice,” Washington Post, August
ernor Jimmy Carter, the Democratic Party’s Presidential candidate,
said if elected he “would urge the Soviet Union to join the United States
in agreeing to a ‘total ban’ on all nuclear explosions, including so-called
peaceful devices, for five years.” Carter “further said he would ‘follow
through’ on his belief that a ‘comprehensive’ test ban treaty should be
negotiated, which presumably would include the underground tests
now permitted by [the 1963 Limited Test Ban] Treaty.” (“Carter Vows a
Curb on Nuclear Exports to Bar Arms Spread,” New York Times, Sep-
tember 26, 1976)
The United Nations General Assembly also called for a test ban. A
December 10 Resolution condemned “all nuclear weapons tests, in
whatever environment they may be conducted;” declared “its pro-
found concern that substantive negotiations towards a comprehensive
test ban agreement have not yet begun and reemphasizes the urgency
of concluding a comprehensive and effective agreement;” called for
“all nuclear-weapon States to suspend the testing of nuclear weapons
by agreement, subject to review after a specified period, as an interim
step towards the conclusion of a formal and comprehensive test ban
agreement;” and noted “the particular responsibility of the nuclear-
weapon States which are parties to international agreements in which
they have declared their intention to achieve at the earliest possible
date the cessation of the nuclear arms race.” (“General Assembly Reso-
lution 31/66: Urgent Need for Cessation of Nuclear and Thermo-
nuclear Tests and Conclusion of a Treaty to Achieve a Comprehensive
On January 23, 1977, during a press interview with selected re-
porters, President Jimmy Carter discussed a number of arms control
issues. In response to a question about the Strategic Arms Limitations
Talks (SALT), he said “I would like to proceed quickly and aggressively
with a comprehensive test ban treaty. I am in favor of eliminating the
testing of all nuclear devices, instantly and completely.” Asked if this
included underground tests, Carter replied “Yes. And whether or not
the Soviets will agree to do that, I don’t know yet. They have sent an en-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
couraging message back, but the exact caveats might not yet be in view.
I can’t answer that question.” (“Press Interview of President Carter [Ex-
A day later, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, according to a Los An-
geles Times story, “tersely and unequivocally denied that there had been
any ‘response from the Soviet Union on this particular issue’.” Later
that day, the Department of State issued a statement that “clarified”
Carter’s remark. “There has not been any official Soviet message on the
subject,” according to the statement. Rather, the President had actually
referred to “a series of public and private signals since last fall that the
Soviet leadership is interested in a wide variety of arms control initia-
tives,” particularly Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko’s call for a
comprehensive test ban during a speech at the United Nations in Sep-
tember 1976. (“Carter Proposes Halt to All Nuclear Testing,” Los An-
geles Times, January 25, 1977)
141.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–161
Washington, January 25, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Administrator, Energy Research Development Administration
SUBJECT
Nuclear Testing
randum from Brzezinski which advised Carter to “immediately” sign the PRM in order
to “show the seriousness of your purpose” to end all nuclear tests. (Ibid.)

Comprehensive Test Ban
In order to follow up immediately on my remarks concerning the
elimination of testing of all nuclear devices,2 I wish the Special Coordi-
nation Committee to undertake a preliminary review of the major
issues involved in the termination of all nuclear testing.
This initial review should be completed for my consideration by
February 9 and should include:
1. A preliminary analysis of the major problems of verifying a com-
plete ban on all testing weapons as well as peaceful nuclear explosions
by the US and the USSR, and other nuclear powers.
2. The effect of such a ban on US weapons testing programs as well
as the likely effect on Soviet programs.
3. Alternative diplomatic scenarios that might be adopted to move
towards this goal, including the advantages and disadvantages of sev-
eral alternatives: a unilateral US moratorium; a bilateral US/Soviet
moratorium; and approaches to other nuclear powers to join such a
moratorium. Consideration should also be given to a more permanent
arrangement; for example, amending the Limited Test Ban Treaty.3
There should also be an examination of the advantages and disadvan-
tages of moving ahead with or holding the Threshold Test Ban Treaty4
and PNE Agreement5 already before the Congress.
Jimmy Carter
2 See Document 140.
3 The 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty among the United States, the United Kingdom,
and the Soviet Union prohibited nuclear weapons tests or any other nuclear explosion in
the atmosphere, outer space, and underwater.
4 The 1974 Threshold Test Ban Treaty between the United States and the Soviet
Union prohibited nuclear weapons tests underground as well as tests with a nuclear
yield exceeding 150 kilotons.
5 Along with the Threshold Test Ban Treaty, the 1976 PNE Agreement between the
United States and the Soviet Union allowed each country to conduct underground nu-
clear explosions for peaceful purposes. The two countries, however, were prohibited
from enjoying “weapons-related benefits” from such explosions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
142.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Anatoliy Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Affairs Assistant
Strategic Issues
President Carter began by stating he would like to move rapidly—
aggressively—on arms control issues with the Soviet Union. He men-
tioned that he had been encouraged by the messages he received this
summer from Secretary General Brezhnev. He would like to see
Brezhnev’s good wishes translated into positive results. The President
added that his Inaugural Speech2 and his recent letter3 to Secretary
Brezhnev expressed his views on U.S.-Soviet relations.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Comprehensive Test Ban
The President asked about the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB).
Dobrynin raised the issue of French and PRC compliance. The Presi-
dent responded that a CTB might be initialled for a limited time, such
as 2–4 years. It would be subject to renewal. Both the United States and
the Soviet Union would attempt to get France and the PRC to comply
fice. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 3.
2 For Carter’s Inaugural Address and his remarks to other nations on U.S. foreign
3 On January 26, Carter wrote Brezhnev that he wanted to “improve relations with
the Soviet Union on the basis of reciprocity, mutual respect and benefit.” He mentioned a
number of arms control issues, and said that he hoped “we can promptly conclude an
adequately verified comprehensive ban on all nuclear tests, and also achieve greater
openness about our respective strategic policies.” Brezhnev answered Carter on February
4 and said that he wanted to “strictly observe the fundamental principles of equality, mu-
tual consideration of legitimate interests, mutual benefit and non-interference in the in-
ternal affairs of the other side.” After raising SALT and other arms control issues, he said
“it is also necessary to put into force without delay the Soviet-US treaties on the limitation
of underground nuclear weapon tests and on the explosions for peaceful purposes. At the
same time efforts should be intensified—–and we are ready to cooperate with the United
States in this matter—–for complete and general cessation of nuclear weapon tests and
the prevention of proliferation of such weapons.” The letters are printed in full in Foreign

Comprehensive Test Ban
with the CTB. The President said he envisioned the test ban applying to
peaceful nuclear explosions. Dobrynin mentioned that the Soviets have
two peaceful nuclear explosions scheduled, although the dates have
not been fixed. The President said his preference would be to stop all
testing.
Dobrynin asked about the two nuclear treaties pending before
Senate. He asked if the President supported them. The President said
he did, but as first steps. Dobrynin said that he was not prepared to
offer a Soviet view on peaceful nuclear devices. The President indicated
that the United States had tested peaceful devices and had not been en-
couraged. The President went on to say that he would be willing to in-
clude in the Comprehensive Test Ban an understanding that would
allow the Soviets to conduct their two tests, if observers were present.4
Dobrynin responded that “this is fair enough.” The President added,
“We’ll try to get France and the PRC to comply.”
Compliance and “Matters of Concern”
The President asked for some assurance of compliance. He men-
tioned that Gromyko has said consideration should be given to on-site
inspection. The President went on to say that he would like to be able to
write Secretary General Brezhnev on “matters of concern,” such as
compliance and other sensitive activities which might be susceptible to
misinterpretation. Dobrynin responded that this would be “a good
idea.” The President added that each side would reserve the right not
to reply.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
4 An unknown hand circled the word “tests” in this sentence and wrote “?” in the
right-hand margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
143.
Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the Department of State1
600. Subject: Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB): The NATO Perspec-
tive. Ref: State 24133.2
1. There are three areas on which we think we can usefully com-
ment from NATO on Allied attitudes toward a CTB: the need for con-
sultations, concern about US–Soviet bilateralism, and the implications
for Allied security.
2. We can not emphasize strongly enough the need for full and
timely consultations with the Allies at NATO on any US initiatives or
changes in long-standing US positions regarding a CTB. While we
leave to Washington’s judgement the manner and timing of consulta-
tions, we believe it would be helpful to the development of support for
US initiatives if the Allies could be apprised promptly of the general
lines of US thinking before final positions are worked out in Wash-
ington. Allied support would be greatly enhanced if we can convince
the Allies that their views will be taken into consideration in the devel-
opment of the US approach, and that they are not simply being in-
formed about what the US intends to do after inter-agency study has
been completed in Washington. If there are options being considered
regarding such issues as verification, PNES, a possible moratorium,
and who should be party to a treaty, we should make every effort to
present these options to the Allies and to consider their views. The need
for timely consultation is particularly evident when we consider the
tacit support the Allies have generally accorded our long insistence on
on-site inspections—even when in recent years not all Allies were con-
vinced of the technical requirements for such inspections. The CTB is
an issue political as well as military importance to a number of Allies.
Hence, they must be brought sufficiently abreast of US thinking in
order to undertake whatever internal consultations and adjustments
they feel are necessary. In short, let us tell them as much as we can as
early as possible, even if our initial presentations are brief and
tentative.
dential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Bonn, London, Paris, Rome,
Tokyo, USUN, and the Mission in Geneva.
2 In telegram 24133 to Bonn, Paris, London, Rome, Tokyo, USUN, USNATO, and
the Mission in Geneva, February 3, the Department solicited attitudes of a number host
countries on the question of a CTB. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770058–0808)

Comprehensive Test Ban
3. On modalities, we believe that the more technical aspects of a
CTB can be dealt with at the level of NATO disarmament experts,
whose next meeting is scheduled for April 21–22. However, to deal
with the broader political and military implications of this issue, we
propose instructed permrep discussions; and at an appropriate stage, a
visit by an Assistant Secretary-level official to brief Allies on our views
and to hear their reactions.
4. Concerns about US–Soviet bilateralism can be accommodated
through effective consultations and by the way we proceed with the de-
velopment of a possible CTB. While the Department will recall the
strong cautionary statement of FRG Ambassador Pauls on US–Soviet
bilateralism during the Vice President’s meeting with the council,3 we
would like to point out that this problem transcends the simple ques-
tion of whether we touch base with the Allies before negotiating with
the Soviets. While the Allies will appreciate that bilateral US–Soviet ne-
gotiation must be an important part of the process of achieving a CTB,
they will wish to be associated with the process of negotiations as
closely as possible at all stages and, in some instances, to be seen pub-
licly as participating in this process. Moreover, the handling of the
question of which nuclear states must be parties, and whether non-
nuclear states will be welcome to join, as well as other issues related to
a CTB, will be judged by the Allies in terms of whether only US and So-
viet interests are accommodated or whether the needs of individual
Allies are also considered.
5. Allies security concerns, too, can be accommodated through
consultations. The underlying concern, in our view, is likely to be a
vague worry that a CTB might somehow affect, in technical or psycho-
logical terms, the long-range reliability of the US strategic and theater
nuclear deterrents. The Allies will be interested, in this regard, in meas-
ures the US will undertake to maintain our major nuclear laboratories
and our views on the relevance of the argument, sometimes heard, that
top US scientists will be less interested in the nuclear program if they
cannot test. Another concern will be the implications of a CTB for the
possible development, at some distant time in the future, of a credible
independent European nuclear deterrent.
6. Some Allies may also be concerned about the effect on Allied
solidarity if strongly differing views are evidenced on certain aspects of
a CTB. We will be interested in the views of other addressees on the at-
titudes of individual Allies. Our preliminary assessment is that the
non-nuclear Allies will welcome any progress toward a CTB, although
the Italians may have some minor lingering misgivings. The UK will
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
likely see no security problem. The French, however, may feel under
particular pressure regarding both the maintenance and development
of their nuclear forces and the question of whether and how they might
participate in negotiations. A suggestion of negotiations among nuclear
states might appeal to the French, but it would have a wrenching effect,
we believe, on the FRG and the smaller Allies.
6. In sum, a central US objective should be to proceed in this en-
deavor in a manner that will enhance, and not undermine, Allied
solidarity.
Strausz-Hupe
144.
Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State1
334. Subj: Comprehensive Test Ban: Allied Views in UN Context.
Ref: State 24133.2
1. Begin summary: At the UN, our allies have long supported CTB
objective and share the general view that its attainment is the single
most important UNGA disarmament goal. Majority of them voted for
1976 resolution “condemning” all nuclear tests.3 Regardless of their
own security concerns, allied attitudes at the UN also reflect deep and
growing concern that failure to attain CTB will undermine and may fi-
nally defeat efforts to prevent further nuclear proliferation. Major non-
aligned States insist there is direct link between CTB and progress
in non-proliferation, and our allies accept this asserted linkage—re-
gardless of its objective validity—as important political reality. Many
allies believe US and USSR should move initially to limited-
participation CTB rather than seek all-nuclear-weapon state agreement
as demanded by Soviets. While allied views on proper forum for nego-
tiating CTB are somewhat flexible, they generally favor CCD and en-
visage CTB as multilateral agreement in tradition of Limited Test Ban
Treaty (LTBT) and NPT. End summary.
Confidential. Sent for information to Bonn, London, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, USNATO, and
the Mission in Geneva.
3 See Document 140.

Comprehensive Test Ban
2. Allied views on the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) issue as ex-
pressed at the UNGA largely coincide in broad principle, though there
are significant differences in emphasis on subsidiary questions, such as
verification and PNES. All our allies support the objective of a CTB, and
most share the prevailing UN view that the prompt achievement of a
CTB is the highest priority disarmament issue in the UN context. Sup-
port for intensified efforts to reach agreement on a CTB was voiced in
the 1976 UNGA at the Foreign-Minister level by several of our allies
(including Japan, Netherlands, Australia, and Denmark) and virtually
all our allies reiterated their commitment to the objective in the first
committee disarmament debate.
3. A significant indication of the strength of this commitment on
the part of several of our allies is their willingness to vote for, and even
cosponsor, the annual CTB resolutions even though they contain lan-
guage “condemning” all nuclear weapon tests—i.e., language gener-
ally reserved for such issues as apartheid and South Africa. The ma-
jority of our allies voted for the 1976 resolution, despite this extreme
language; they were Australia, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Japan, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, and Turkey. New Zea-
land, in fact, played a leading role in drafting the resolution, on which
the US, UK, France, FRG, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, and Greece
abstained.
4. For most of our allies (other than France and to a lesser extent
FRG and Italy), positions taken at the UNGA on the CTB issue are not
primarily based on specific perceptions of national security interests.
Support for the CTB idea or CTB resolutions does not necessarily reflect
a specific judgment that a CTB would enhance a country’s own security
or a judgment that there are no military or security risks in a CTB.
Rather, the key to allied CTB attitudes at the UN is their growing
concern that failure to achieve a CTB and more broadly to make prog-
ress toward nuclear disarmament is seriously undermining, and may
eventually defeat, efforts to prevent the horizontal spread of nuclear
weapons.
5. This asserted linkage between progress in nuclear disarmament
and progress in non-proliferation has long been a major tenet of
leading nonaligned and neutral activists, including Mexico, Yugo-
slavia, Sweden, and Nigeria. We, and some of our allies have rejected
the implication that non-proliferation efforts should, in effect, be held
hostage to progress in nuclear disarmament, insisting that horizontal
proliferation poses clear and grave threat to all countries, regardless of
the state of negotiations on “vertical proliferation.” But, however valid
or realistic this argument may be objectively, it is politically unaccept-
able to most countries. Its unacceptability has been reflected in the
slackening of support, particularly among the nonaligned, for concrete

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
measures to strengthen the non-proliferation regime as well as in the
growing concern of our allies over the lack of progress toward a CTB
and measures of nuclear disarmament.
6. Thus, whether they like the idea of a linkage or not, many of our
allies now openly acknowledge it as a political reality. A Japanese state-
ment at the 1976 UNGA is characteristic of many of our allies’ views:
“The prevention of horizontal proliferation presupposes progress in
the prevention of vertical proliferation. If there is no progress in pre-
venting vertical proliferation, or it becomes clear that none is in pros-
pect, the justification for seeking the prevention of horizontal prolifera-
tion will be greatly reduced.”
7. The consequences of this view are evident in the Swedish non-
proliferation resolution adopted by the 1976 UNGA. The resolution
places at the top of the list of measures needed to strengthen the non-
proliferation regime “determined efforts” by the Nuclear-Weapon
States (NWS) to (A) halt the arms race, (B) make progress toward nu-
clear disarmament, and (C) solve the difficulties impeding a CTB. No-
tably, the resolution did not call for adherence to the NPT as a means of
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Against this background,
some of our allies, and many nonaligned, have noted a growing dis-
parity between US emphasis on such areas as strengthening safeguards
and stiffening export controls and the predominant UN stress on nu-
clear disarmament and security assurances.
8. In our view, this is the most important characteristic of the CTB
issue in the UN context, the factor uniting most of our allies in support
of CTB resolutions that we do not accept. (Many of our allies, of course,
also support a CTB on its [garble].) The UNGA also provides an oppor-
tunity for annual statements of view on subsidiary issues such as verifi-
cation and PNES. Views on these questions differ in substance as well
as emphasis, and cannot be accurately reflected in a brief summary. We
would thus leave it to others to describe individual allied positions in
these questions. However, two other issues with a specific UN angle
should be mentioned—the issues of participation and negotiating
forum.
9. The question of participation has always been latent in CTB de-
bated—i.e., must all NWS participate in a CTB from the outset, or can
(or should) a CTB begin with the US and USSR? The question was
brought to the fore in 1975 when the Soviets submitted their draft CTB
treaty requiring the participation of all NWS, a position they have con-
tinued to maintain publicly since then. Many of our allies have been the
most vocal critics of this position. Australia, Canada, the FRG, Japan,
the Netherlands, Norway, and New Zealand are among those that have
insisted on the possibility of a limited-participation CTB, at least as a

Comprehensive Test Ban
first step. Some have asserted more than the possibility, stressing the
special responsibility of the US and USSR to take the lead.
10. The issue of the proper forum for CTB negotiations was also
raised by the 1975 Soviet proposal, which envisaged a new negotiating
body composed of all NWS and 25–30 NNWS. (The inclusion of the
NNWS was at Mexican insistence, evidence of the political unaccepta-
bility at the UN of a restructured NWS negotiation.) Several of our
allies have strongly defended the role of the CCD in CTB negotiations,
pointing out that CTB has been the “highest priority” issue in the CCD
for years. While the forum question is perhaps of secondary impor-
tance, and to some extent a corollary of the participation issue, the im-
plications of choosing any forum (whether the CCD, a separate com-
mittee, or bi- or trilateral meeting) will necessarily have to be weighted.
If a CTB is to be, as our allies and most nonaligned expect, a multilateral
instrument in the pattern of the LTBT and the NPT, or to have broad in-
ternational support, it will be important to ensure broadly-based par-
ticipation throughout the negotiating process. Participation will be par-
ticularly important in connection with development of solutions to the
verification and PNE problems.
11. There has been relatively little specific reaction so far in New
York to President Carter’s statement,4 which has been somewhat over-
shadowed by other recent events, but it is certain to promote wide in-
terest and raise expectations that the long-standing stalemate may be
broken in the relatively near future. Expectations had already been
raised to some extent last fall, when the Soviets announced a new posi-
tion on CTB verification envisaging a “voluntary framework” for on-
site inspection. At the same time, however, there is certain to be a
degree of skepticism on the part of many unless and until there are spe-
cific signs of possible negotiations, new proposals, or changes of posi-
tion. Indications that new developments may be at hand are likely to
have a favorable impact on UN (and CCD) disarmament activities in
the coming months, but we can also expect to be brought to account in
the absence of real movement.
Bennett
4 Ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
145.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Sloss) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Test Cessation and PNEs
This Agency believes there are serious risks in attempting to ac-
commodate “peaceful nuclear explosions” under a comprehensive test
ban treaty. The purpose of this early warning is simply to prevent fur-
ther steps that could be construed as prejudging the issue before it has
been thoroughly examined and Soviet positions tested in negotiations.
Such an accommodation—which may well not prove necessary to
achieving Soviet agreement on a CTB—would introduce a major short-
coming in the treaty, provide the USSR with an important military
asset, weaken the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and do incalculable harm to
our non-proliferation efforts. Early encouragement of a Soviet impres-
sion that the US may already be persuaded that a PNE allowance in a
CTB is necessary and tolerable could quickly grow into a serious im-
pediment to negotiation with the USSR of an advantageous agreement.
We offer the following points for your consideration:
SEPARATION OF PNEs FROM WEAPON TESTS
(1) Both the US and the USSR have acknowledged that the tech-
nology of nuclear explosive devices for peaceful purposes is indistin-
guishable from that of nuclear explosive devices for weapon purposes.
(2) Point (1) is the central difficulty of the “PNE verification
problem.” No techniques have been devised to verify that a nuclear ex-
plosion in a PNE project is not also a weapon test simply because there
are no meaningful criteria on which to base the distinction. This in-
trinsic difficulty cannot be eased by international arrangements for “in-
spection” or other procedures.
(3) Criteria to govern PNEs in ways that do not substantially com-
promise the objectives of an agreement limiting a weapon test can be
devised if, and only if: (a) the constraints to be imposed on weapon ac-
tivities are less than complete, and (b) the weapon benefits available
under the permissive PNE regime do not extend substantially beyond
those permitted in the weapon test regime.
Fri, and Turner.

Comprehensive Test Ban
(4) Much of the international discussion of CTB benefits has
dwelled on interrupting the process of developing new improved nu-
clear weapons; and recent Soviet statements at the UN have also taken
this line. This way of thinking about the matter is deficient on two
counts:
(a) basic advancement of nuclear weapon technology is not the
only substantial reason for nuclear weapon testing—it may no longer
even be the main reason. Primary reasons for such testing now and in
the foreseeable future are to prove out weapon designs that have been
tailored in detail to best match new delivery systems; to test the effects
of nuclear explosions on other military equipment, and to verify experi-
mentally the functional soundness of weapons in the stockpile. All of
these can be done through PNE operations;
(b) any meaningful PNE program will, itself, include development
efforts to advance and test nuclear explosive technology and specific
designs. The civil engineering reasons for such continued development
and testing (e.g., to reduce the diameter of a device, to establish designs
that are more economical of fissionable materials, to establish the
ability of the device to deliver reliably its design yield with acceptable
precision) could not be challenged as unnecessary or inappropriate;
however, they generally parallel corresponding desiderata in the mili-
tary field. Some of the kinds of device advancements to be sought for
PNE applications are on the frontier of current nuclear weapon R&D.2
US PNE PROGRAM
(5) The US does not have a significant PNE program; and, based on
current estimates of economic value in the US plus environmental and
regulatory factors, there is no evident justification for a significant US
program.
WEAPON-TEST ASYMMETRY
(6) Because of the inactive current and projected status of the US
PNE program, allowing an active Soviet program under a complete
ban on acknowledged weapon tests would extend to the USSR a sub-
stantial unilateral military asset (i.e., a clear basis for indirect contin-
uance of weapon testing).
2 Carter wrote Brezhnev on February 14 and said that he welcomed “your will-
ingness to intensify efforts to reach agreement on a comprehensive test ban. I recognize
that there are remaining issues with respect to other countries who continue to have test
programs and the possible use of peaceful nuclear explosions for mining or construction,
but I believe there are satisfactory ways of dealing with these issues. I intend to ratify the
existing agreements which have been negotiated between our two governments but I
consider these only steps toward a common objective of a complete cessation of nuclear
tests. In the meantime these unratified agreements will be honored by our government.”
The letter is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Docu-
ment 7.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
NEGOTIATING FACTOR
(7) The actual PNE plans of the USSR are not reliably known to the
US Government. More importantly, the depth of political support for
PNE plans is very unclear. We certainly do not know how far the USSR
would go in order to retain a PNE allowance against US negotiating op-
position. While we surely should display a complete willingness to
consider any proposals of the Soviet side, it would be very disadvanta-
geous to provide them at an early stage with any reason to believe that
a PNE allowance has been accepted by the US as necessary or tolerable
in a CTB.
THE LIMITED TEST BAN TREATY OF 1963
(8) Discussions in the open literature of Soviet PNE interest in-
clude canal building and river diversion projects (primarily the Kama-
years). The kinds of nuclear explosions necessarily involved in river-
diversion or canal building would, with virtual certainty, violate the
LTBT. The USSR has played fairly loose with LTBT compliance in their
nuclear weapon test program but has always retained the “out” of
claiming accident or technical deficiencies if need be. A planned, an-
nounced and described PNE excavation project (perhaps with US ob-
servers present) would stand naked of any supportable defense in vio-
lating the LTBT. The Soviets have labored under this burden for many
years, and have not gone forward with any river-diversion or canal-
building project. What they have tried to do is co-opt the US into
sharing this problem with them—e.g., by advocating international
agreement on “acceptable” levels of radioactivity, which could then be
“interpreted” as an adequate index of compliance with the LTBT. Such
a relaxation of the radioactivity prohibition would both loosen the
present inhibitions on underground weapons testing and weaken the
protection which the treaty affords to the environments of neighboring
states and international waters.
3 In a February 8 news conference, Carter said that he had “called upon the Soviet
Union to join us in a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an ex-
explosives to divert the course of a river in Northern Russia. I don’t think they need to
test any more. If they want to put that as a proviso in the agreement that they would like
to go ahead and divert that river, I think that would be something that we could negotiate
and let us have observers there to learn from them and vice versa. But I think that the ini-
tiation of proposals that might be mutually acceptable of the kind is very, very impor-

Comprehensive Test Ban
(9) The USSR has not expressed any interest in seeking an amend-
ment to the LTBT to accommodate excavation-type PNEs. Amendment
would not be possible without the assent of the US and the UK. More-
over, an amendment that relaxed the radioactivity limitation of PNEs
for all parties would reduce the value of the LTBT as an inhibition on
nuclear explosive development by non-nuclear-weapon states, while
an amendment which relaxed that limitation only for nuclear-weapon
states might well fail to be adopted by the requisite majority of parties
to the treaty.
(10) The Soviet Union did agree to inclusion in the PNE Treaty of
an operative reaffirmation of the obligation to comply with the LTBT—
albeit with a display of real or feigned reluctance.
(11) The draft text of a CTB Treaty proposed by the USSR in the
UNGA would prohibit all nuclear weapon tests but would allow PNEs
to continue under the terms of a separate agreement.4 The language of
their proposed preamble and operative provisions point rather clearly
to a process in which the new treaty would replace the LTBT and the
LTBT would cease to be operative. This scheme, if allowed to proceed,
would leave PNEs to be governed by new provisions which would pre-
sumably not include the “no radioactive debris” element that is the
substance of LTBT limitation on underground nuclear explosions.
NON-PROLIFERATION
(12) If any technological criteria—valid or contrived—ever are set
forth to distinguish between weapon and non-weapon explosions or
explosives, then a principle argued by many potential proliferators will
have been explicitly affirmed. There were some discussions of this
matter during the PNET negotiations, and the point was clearly taken
as a very serious one by the Soviet side.
(13) A major objective of establishing a CTB would be to help pre-
vent the further spread of nuclear explosive capabilities. A test ban
which made an exception for PNEs would:
(a) legitimize PNEs as distinct from weapon tests and thus do
major damage to our efforts to establish that PNEs must not be con-
ducted by any non-nuclear-weapon state, since the technology of a nu-
clear explosive device for a peaceful application is indistinguishable
from that of a weapon and its development is the development of nu-
clear weapons.
(b) if limited to nuclear-weapon states, create an excuse for not
joining the CTB on the grounds that the treaty was “discriminatory” for
a number of those non-nuclear-weapon states that we are most inter-
4 “Soviet Draft Treaty Introduced in the First Committee of the General Assembly
on the Complete and General Prohibition of Nuclear-Weapon Tests,” November 22, 1976.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ested in having join the treaty (e.g., India, Israel, Pakistan, Argentina,
Brazil). Joining in a CTB that banned PNEs for all parties is probably
the most promising way to head off a second Indian explosion.5
(c) if not limited to nuclear-weapon states, undermine the non-
proliferation benefits of the CTB, create an intractable problem of de-
vising criteria and verification schemes and negotiating them with all
parties involved, and discriminate against parties to the NPT (who
have foresworn such explosions) in favor of non-parties.
Leon Sloss
Acting
146.
Paper Prepared by the Special Coordination Committee
Working Group on Nuclear Testing1
Washington, undated
[Omitted here are a cover page and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. Introduction
PRM–16 of January 25 directed that the Special Coordination Com-
mittee undertake a preliminary review of the major issues involved in
the termination of all nuclear testing.2 Included were to be an analysis
of the problem of verifying a complete prohibition of weapons tests
and peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), an analysis of the effects of
such a prohibition on the US and Soviet nuclear weapons programs,
and a discussion of the various scenarios which might be utilized in
moving toward this goal, including both moratoria and more perma-
nent types of agreement. A discussion of the pros and cons of moving
ahead with ratification of the Threshold Test Ban (TTBT) and Peaceful
Nuclear Explosion (PNET) Treaties currently before the Senate was
also to be included. The attached report was prepared by an SCC
Working Group in response to PRM–16.
randum from NSC Acting Staff Secretary Michael Hornblow to Mondale, Vance, and
Brown. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 141.

Comprehensive Test Ban
II. Recent US and Soviet CTB Statements
The US has long declared its support of the goal of an adequately
verified prohibition of nuclear testing and has undertaken commit-
ments in treaties such as the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT), and Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT) to
work toward that goal. Since assuming office, the President has on sev-
eral occasions strongly expressed his intention to move immediately
and aggressively toward cessation of all nuclear weapons testing.
Advocacy of a complete cessation of nuclear weapons testing has
long been a central feature of Soviet declaratory foreign policy. A recent
public declaration of this policy was contained in the September 23
speech of Foreign Minister Gromyko before the UNGA3 and a Soviet
memorandum on disarmament4 which was subsequently circulated as
a UNGA document. The two statements were notable in that they con-
veyed the impression that verification measures beyond national tech-
nical means, including some limited form of on-site inspection, might
be negotiable. This position had been signaled to US Ambassador
Stoessel last Spring by Gromyko and one of his deputies in conversa-
tions which also hinted at some flexibility in the established Soviet po-
sition that all nuclear powers would have to participate in a CTB.5 A
draft CTB Treaty tabled by the Soviets at the UNGA in November con-
tains a provision for “voluntary” acceptance of on-site inspection,6 but
does not extend the scope of prohibition to include PNEs.
III. Historical Background
The concept of nuclear test bans as measures independent of more
comprehensive disarmament arrangements dates from the middle
1950s when first India and later the Soviets proposed test bans that did
testing should be stopped everywhere and by all. This would put an end to the qualita-
tive improvement of those weapons.” He also charged that “the start of negotiations on
this question is being unjustifiably delayed. The problem here is not the absence of objec-
tive conditions—–they have long existed—–but the unwillingness of some nuclear
eral Assembly that claimed it was “prepared, as it has been in the past, to conduct negoti-
ations on the most radical disarmament measures, going even so far as general and com-
plete disarmament.” Among other measures, the resolution called for “the prohibition of
all nuclear-weapon tests. This problem,” the Soviets contended, “should be tackled
without waiting for the outcome of negotiations on complete nuclear disarmament.”
(“Soviet Memorandum on Questions of Ending the Arms Race and Disarmament [Ex-
Policy File, D760143–0740.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not contain verification provisions. In March 1956 the Soviets declared
a suspension of testing and called upon the West to follow their ex-
ample, but the US and UK declined to do so because of the verification
problem, and in October the Soviets resumed testing.
In the summer of 1958 the US, UK and USSR agreed to commence
negotiations for a test ban treaty that would include an international
system of control posts, and the US and UK proposed a reciprocal sus-
pension of testing for one year from the commencement of negotia-
tions. The Soviets ceased testing in November, and this moratorium
lasted until 1961. In December 1959, we announced that we felt free to
resume testing but did not do so. In 1959 and in March of 1961 the So-
viets informed us that they considered that continued testing by France
was giving NATO a unilateral advantage. In August 1961 they an-
nounced that they would resume testing and did so with an intensive,
well-planned program. Although the US responded with a proof test of
a stockpiled weapon within a few weeks, due to the decline of the
weapons program during the moratoria it was well over a year before a
developmental test of any significance could be conducted.
The first agreement concerning limitation of nuclear testing to be
achieved was the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 which banned explo-
sions in the atmosphere, outer space and under water. The Non-
Proliferation Treaty of 1968 recognized the connection between the ces-
sation of weapons testing and the achievement of non-proliferation
objectives, and obliged its parties to pursue good-faith negotiations
toward that end. The TTBT and PNET, signed in 1974 and 1976 respec-
tively, will, if ratified, limit the yield of individual US and Soviet nu-
clear explosions to 150 kilotons.
Although the US has long been politically committed to the con-
cept of an adequately verifiable CTB, the issues of verification and ad-
herence have been among the obstacles to a serious attempt to reach
that goal. We have taken the position that national technical means
alone are not adequate for verification and that some measure of on-site
inspection would be required for adequate assurance of treaty compli-
ance. The question of the need for adherence by all nuclear weapons
states has also been an obstacle, in that the Soviets have stated it as a
condition precedent to an agreement, and the PRC and France have
adamantly refused to consider a CTB. (For the last few years, the US
has not expressed a position on the adherence issue.) As discussed in
Section II, there are now some indications of Soviet flexibility on these
issues.
IV. Key CTB Considerations
A. Verification Capability
The historical record shows that the Soviets, in complying with in-
ternational treaties and agreements, can be expected to exploit fully the

Comprehensive Test Ban
limits specified in these treaties. This has been our own experience in
verifying both the SALT ONE accords and LTBT and, more recently,
the 150 kt limit of the TTBT. However, a nuclear test under a CTB
would constitute a major and deliberate violation and despite their ten-
dency to take advantage of loopholes, we have no evidence of any such
gross violation of an arms control agreement. Nonetheless, it is impor-
tant in any CTB considerations to recognize the limits that can be
achieved in detecting and identifying nuclear explosions and to under-
stand fully the impact that testing at or below these limits would have
on US national security. At the same time, it is important to recognize
that the Soviets would be uncertain as to the specific limits of our detec-
tion capability, and the potential consequences of being caught could
be expected to constrain the political leadership from cheating unless
there was an urgent national security reason for doing so. The US can
verify a comprehensive test ban only above certain yield thresholds
which are established by the capabilities and limitations of US national
technical means, and by the extent of Soviet efforts to evade US surveil-
lance. At current test sites and under current Soviet test practices, this
threshold is very low. However, assuming they are willing to test un-
derground in seismic or remote ocean areas and take measures to con-
ceal the nature of their test operations, [14 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
The Soviets undoubtedly have a better capability than the US to
marshal resources to accomplish evasive testing at yields of a few
kilotons. If the Soviets were to carry out nuclear tests in evasion of the
provisions of a CTB Treaty, they could continue the development of
some nuclear weapon systems. By conducting tests at or below our de-
tection threshold, they would be able to improve their design capabil-
ities in areas such as tactical weapons, certain ABM systems, and
weapons effects. The conduct of such tests would make it easier in the
long term for them to maintain some measure of their scientific, engi-
neering and computer capabilities relating to the design and stockpile
maintenance of nuclear weapons.
There are, however, several factors that would mitigate the incen-
tive to conduct such low-yield evasive testing. [4 lines not declassified]
the possibility that even a low-yield test might be detected and identi-
fied. The Soviets would also have to take into account the fact that in-
formation on an evasion program might become available from human
sources.
B. Impact on US/Soviet Weapons Programs
The US has conducted over 480 underground nuclear weapons
sified] The US in general has developed a wider selection of nuclear

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
warheads which probably are more advanced technologically. [3 lines
not declassified]
A mutual cessation of testing would essentially freeze nuclear
weapons technology at current levels for both sides.
In the short term, the effect of a CTB on US strategic systems would
be to inhibit development of optimum, cost-effective upgrades in US
strategic deterrent and warfighting capability. Weapons which could
be affected to some degree include B–77 (the new strategic bomb), M–X,
Evader MARV and MK–12A. The impact would be much more severe
on the tactical nuclear systems upgrade currently planned. An imme-
diate cessation of testing would preclude much of the theater nuclear
forces improvement program which is currently underway. These im-
provements are designed to provide tactical weapons with increased
flexibility, reduced collateral damage, improved safety and security,
and faster response time. The major portion of our current tactical nu-
clear weapons stockpile was developed prior to 1965 and lacks these
features. As indicated in Table I,7 a prioritized test program of up to one
year’s duration would permit completion of some of this programmed
improvement in the tactical area, but completion of some strategic pro-
grams would require two years. (The MK–12A warhead and B–77
bomb could probably be completed within one year, however.)
Some of these key programs, including the low SNM options for
the MX, and the Cruise Missile, may well experience one or more test
failures and therefore be impossible to complete in the projected time
frame. There are others for which development has been started at
DOD request, but for which testing could not be completed within two
years under the most optimistic conditions. These include Standard
Missile 2, PERSHING II and the Minimum Residual Radiation (MRR)
tactical bomb. Under normal conditions, these programs would be con-
tinued for as long as necessary to complete their essential testing.
In the longer range (out to twenty years), US research shows that
the US should be able to achieve many new capabilities to meet antici-
pated DOD requirements. These include, as examples: (1) New designs
employing current technology to meet new, more stringent Defense re-
quirements for radiation hardness, warhead size and weight, and war-
head delivery modes; (2) Higher yields with reduced weight and
smaller size to meet the requirements for the next generation MIRVs, or
for new artillery shells; (3) Whole families of low residual radiation
bombs and warheads which obtain a very small fraction of their yield
from fission; (4) Very small, very clean weapons that provide a few tens
of tons yield in a few tens of pounds; and (5) New bombs and warheads
7 Attached but not printed.

Comprehensive Test Ban
which are safe against misuse, tampering, HE detonation from impact,
and plutonium scattering.
A mutual cessation of testing would prevent the Soviets from fully
exploiting their missile throw-weight advantage through optimum
MIRVed warhead development. This probably would not affect cur-
strain their expected follow-on ICBM, SLBM and cruise missile sys-
tems. [2 lines not declassified]
Design capability on both sides would degrade eventually under a
mutual cessation of tests. The Soviets might have some advantage in
slowing this degrading through provision of domestic political incen-
tives to their scientists and if necessary conscripting their services, and
through evasive testing (although, as noted earlier, this would involve
a major decision by the Soviet leadership, and slowing this degradation
might not offer enough advantage to justify the risk). On the other
hand, the US leads the USSR in computer hardware and software to
simulate and model new weapons design, but would probably not
stockpile new weapon designs without testing.
It is difficult to assess the relative impact of a mutual testing cessa-
tion on stockpile reliability. This is a very contentious issue and little is
known about whether present reliability levels can be maintained
under a CTB or, if not, about the strategic significance of any degrada-
tion. The Soviets might have an advantage due to [less than 1 line not de-
classified] their ICBM throw-weight advantage, and perhaps a better
ability to marshal laboratory resources in a CTB context. On the other
hand, the US might have an advantage due to its better quality control,
computer simulation and componentry testing. Because of the rela-
tively rapid introduction of new systems in the US stockpile, it has not
been generally necessary to conduct confidence testing in order to
assess reliability. [less than 1 line not declassified] There is general agree-
ment that stockpile reliability degradation would be slight over the
short term (e.g., up to 5 years) but could become more significant in the
longer run (e.g., 10 to 20 years). The degree to which stockpile reli-
ability degradation would be significant to national security would de-
pend on our ability to continue manufacture of old designs and compo-
nents, and on perceptions of the relationship of stockpile reliability for
deterrence and war-fighting capability.
Many weapons design experts believe that in the long run (20
years), there would be a nearly complete loss of confidence in the reli-
ability of our stockpile. Others believe, however, that this judgment
overstates this loss of confidence since a properly drawn CTB agree-
ment would impose substantially similar constraints on the US and
USSR and it may overstate the stockpile reliability problem in that no

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
comprehensive effort has yet been undertaken by the US to establish
designs, facilities and procedures to cope with this unique situation.
It would be appropriate to consider possible safeguards in the con-
text of a mutual cessation of testing, such as the ones which were
adopted following the LTBT. These safeguards would include at-
tempting to maintain an R&D and production capability, simulation,
and readiness to resume testing if necessary; and pursuit of an aggres-
sive program to improve US verification capabilities.
C. Significance of Low-Yield Clandestine Testing. Although the signif-
icance to deterrence and stability of a possible decline in nuclear
weapons design capability and a stockpile reliability is difficult to
assess, it is in this area that concerns about possible asymmetries are
most acute. [5 lines not declassified]
Thus it is important to examine the military importance of testing
in these low-yield ranges. There are defense needs for very low-yield
nuclear weapons such as the HARPOON anti-ship missile, anti-
submarine torpedoes, air defense weapons and precision guided air-to-
surface weapons. These warheads could be developed with testing in
the sub-kiloton range, and it is obvious that such testing would con-
tribute significantly to maintaining a viable weapons design capability
and some stockpile reliability problems could be solved. [5 lines not
declassified]
It is questionable whether such [less than 1 line not declassified]
testing would provide such sufficient military advantages that the So-
viet leadership would be willing to assume the risk of violating the CTB
Treaty with its attendant costs to their relationship with the US and
their international stature. Nevertheless, it might be possible to signifi-
cantly reduce such incentives and asymmetries by defining nuclear
tests under a CTB as applying to events of nuclear origin [1 line not de-
classified] At least at these larger yields, however, the treaty should
clearly be labeled a threshold ban rather than a CTB, and the perception
that testing would continue would reduce the non-proliferation ben-
efits. It could be defended, however, as [7 lines not declassified] Little
work has been done on this definitional issue, and further study would
be necessary to determine whether a definition could be found that
would minimize possible asymmetries in the areas of stockpile reli-
ability and maintaining design capability without significantly under-
mining the non-proliferation impact of a CTB. Alternatively, it can be
argued that the Soviets would not exploit such opportunities and that,
in any event, the national security significance of these potential asym-
metries would be outweighed by the beneficial impact of a CTB on
US-Soviet relations and in limiting nuclear proliferation.
D. Nuclear-Weapons States Participation
Even after a bilateral/multilateral CTB has been achieved, it is
likely that China, France, and perhaps other nations would continue to

Comprehensive Test Ban
test. China has accorded high visibility to weapons testing which it has
indicated that it would continue, and could be expected to severely crit-
icize a CTB as superpower collusion. While we could not expect to alter
Peking’s opposition to a CTB, we should consult with them early in the
process to minimize any possible concerns that we would seek to iso-
late or embarrass them through a CTB.
Similarly, it may be expected that France will be reluctant to ad-
here to any test-limiting agreement within the near term. (Embassy
Paris reports that even a leftist government would be expected to con-
tinue testing in the near term.)8 They are currently in the midst of major
strategic and tactical weapons modernization efforts. The UK, on the
other hand, although concerned as to whether its Polaris Improvement
Program could be completed, could be expected to respond favorably
to a US CTB initiative and adhere to a CTB agreement.
The fact that some nations, particularly China, will continue to de-
velop nuclear explosives would undoubtedly be viewed with concern
by the Soviet Union. However, since current Chinese weapons tech-
nology is believed significantly inferior to that of the US and USSR, the
Soviets would probably be less concerned about a short-term continua-
tion of Chinese testing. In the long term, this situation would be viewed
as a serious problem by the Soviets and could even pose a problem for
the US from the national security standpoint. The result is that an indef-
inite duration CTBT without periodic reviews is unlikely to be accept-
able to the Soviets. A more realistic test ban goal for both US and Soviet
interests would be a treaty which had to be reviewed periodically and
which provided a supreme interests escape clause.
E. Allied Perceptions
Allied confidence in the reliability of our commitment to their se-
curity is based on their perceptions of a number of factors including the
quality and level of US conventional forces assigned to their defense,
the quality and level of US tactical and strategic nuclear forces relative
to those of their potential adversaries, alliance doctrine and declaratory
policy on the use of nuclear weapons and their perceptions of US polit-
ical will to defend them. A mutual cessation of testing by the US and
USSR would probably not, in and of itself, particularly concern them.
Indeed, most have strongly supported the concept of a CTB in their de-
claratory policies. However, if it were to be interpreted by them as a
signal of the beginning of US disengagement from its commitment, this
would create the potential for serious political and non-proliferation
considerations. Thus, while all our allies except France would publicly

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
support a US CTB initiative, careful consultations would be required to
reassure them as to the constancy of our purposes.
There is a special problem with NATO allies who regard our the-
ater nuclear capability as a major deterrent against Soviet aggression in
Europe. We have assured the allies that we intend not only to maintain
but to upgrade and modernize this capability unless mutual reduction
of forces with the Soviet Union are negotiated. Allied concern has been
with war-fighting capability as it affects deterrence, but we believe they
would be willing to forego modernization in a CTB context. In fact,
while the Allied interest in maintaining a large and viable stockpile re-
mains high, there has been some concern over technological improve-
ments that could be viewed as increasing the likelihood of using these
weapons on Allied territory. While theater force modernization is not
an issue with our Allies in the Far East, there is still some concern re-
sulting from the Vietnam debacle that the US may lose interest in the
region. Thus they would be sensitive to any implication that the US
might be less willing and less able to carry out its security commit-
ments. Steps would have to be taken to assure all our allies that we
could maintain a credible nuclear deterrent posture under CTB
conditions.
F. Non-Proliferation
The objective of preventing the proliferation of nuclear explosive
capabilities has been identified as a major focus of US foreign and na-
tional security policy. A CTB is widely perceived as an important step
towards this objective. A prohibition on nuclear testing would impose
a significant constraint on the development of a nuclear weapons capa-
bility for those states adhering to the measure, even though the possi-
bility exists for technically advanced states to obtain a relatively crude
nuclear weapons capability without testing. In addition, a CTB is seen
by non-nuclear weapon states as a key step by the nuclear powers re-
quired to balance the self-denying obligations other countries accepted
in the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
It is doubtful that states apparently intent on keeping the nuclear
explosives option open (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Taiwan, South Korea,
and Pakistan) would, at least at present, be prepared to join a CTB, but
the political costs to them of a decision to go nuclear would be in-
creased. On the other hand, a number of states that have not adhered to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty but have gone on record as supporting a
CTB, might well decide to join. Examples are South Africa, Spain,
Turkey, Chile, Algeria, Indonesia, and Egypt. Even in the case of India,
an early cessation of US and Soviet testing might persuade them to
defer further testing.
The conclusion of a CTB can be expected to improve international
perceptions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and raise the barriers to

Comprehensive Test Ban
possible withdrawal from the treaty. The practical implications of this
perception are difficult to predict, especially for those states that cur-
rently pose the most serious proliferation risks. However, for some
countries, a CTB might well tip the balance of a decision against going
nuclear or retaining a nuclear option.
An important factor enabling most of our NATO allies, Japan and
South Korea to foreswear the development of nuclear weapons has
been confidence that their security requirements would be adequately
met in the context of their alliance relationship with the US. If the CTB
were perceived as indicative of a general US intention to withdraw
over time from its military and political commitment, it could have ad-
verse implications for non-proliferation. CTB negotiations should
therefore be accompanied by extensive consultations and corollary pol-
icies to assure our allies that a CTB will not erode their security.
G. Stability Implications
It is difficult to assess the impact of possible diminished confi-
dence in stockpiled nuclear weapons on stability. To the extent that
some degradation were perceived to occur, a nuclear weapons state
would have somewhat less confidence in its ability in the future to de-
velop and maintain a disarming first-strike capability against the other
side’s strategic missiles and reduced confidence in its second-strike ca-
pability or any other strategic objectives as well. In either case, possible
degradation would be less significant in the shorter run. In any event,
despite possible decreased reliability of their weapons, both sides
would continue to be able to inflict massive damage on soft targets and
population of the other side, due to the large numbers and capabilities
of present strategic weapons. If the numbers of weapons were reduced
to much lower levels, under a future SALT agreement, however, their
decreased reliability could be more important.
Some believe that a CTB could enhance strategic stability in that
due to gradual degradation in stockpile reliability of both sides, there
would be reduced confidence in abilities to successfully carry out a dis-
arming first-strike. Others believe that a CTB could create instabilities
since if first use of nuclear weapons was considered less likely, the So-
viets might be tempted to take advantage of their conventional superi-
ority in Europe. Finally, if numbers of weapons were reduced to very
low levels and if the decline in their reliability was perceived as asym-
metric, there could even be incentives to strike first while there was still
high confidence in one’s own weapons, or, subsequently, to strike first
if the other side’s retaliatory forces were perceived to be ineffective.
H. Impact on US-Soviet Relations
Comprehensive test ban negotiations would be but one strand in
the interlocking web of US-Soviet relationships in which vital arms

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
control negotiations and agreements play a central role. A ban on nu-
clear weapons testing is a declaratory goal of Soviet foreign and arms
control policy, and successful conclusion of such an agreement would
have certain beneficial results for the overall US-Soviet relationship.
The Soviets view a ban on nuclear weapons testing as a means
both to separate Washington and Peking and to de-emphasize the com-
petitive military component of US policy toward the Soviet Union—
both primarily political goals which fit in with Moscow’s other efforts
to derive the benefits of a more composed relationship with the West.
Secondarily, the Soviets hope to isolate France, as well as China, as
arms control hold-outs, and to lessen the likelihood of nuclear prolifer-
ation, particularly along the Soviet periphery.
Given the limited sphere of US and Soviet overlapping interests,
movement toward further limits on nuclear testing would serve as a
counterweight to more competitive aspects of the relationship (for ex-
ample, potential US-Soviet disagreements on southern Africa, the
Middle East, or Eastern Europe). US movement toward testing re-
straints before Chinese accession would compensate, at least partially,
in Moscow’s eyes, for American actions to normalize relations further
with Peking. The divisive potential of a comprehensive test ban for
Sino-American relations, however, may be a central element in Mos-
cow’s calculations.
The political benefits to US-Soviet relations of further testing limi-
tations would be lessened to some extent by whatever strains emerged
in negotiating mutually acceptable provisions on verification, peaceful
nuclear explosions, and, possibly, participation. Nonetheless, a negoti-
ated long-term agreement would greatly reduce the possibility of using
renewed testing as a political tool (as the Soviets did in the 1958–61
Berlin crisis).9
A moratorium on weapons testing as an interim measure before
negotiation of a full test ban agreement would probably have an ini-
tially positive effect on US-Soviet relations, but would run the risk both
of being manipulated for political ends and of reducing pressure for
early conclusion of a negotiated agreement.
V. General Conclusions
This section sets forth general conclusions on some of the issues
raised in PRM–16; the following sections present general options for
decision.
would unilaterally recognize Eastern Germany as a sovereign state, touching off the
and workers began building the Berlin Wall.

Comprehensive Test Ban
A. TTB/PNE Ratification
As requested in the PRM, the issue of ratification of the TTB/PNE
Treaties has been analyzed in the context of alternative approaches to a
CTB. Arguments in favor of ratifying these treaties include:
—The Soviet leadership is firmly committed to these treaties as
tangible evidence of the benefits of US-Soviet cooperation, and have re-
peatedly stressed the importance of their ratification.
—There would appear to be a distinct advantage to the US in codi-
fying the innovative verification provisions of these treaties both in the
CTB context and in other arms control areas.
—The treaty provisions would be helpful in verifying the present
mutual restraint in limiting tests to 150 kt, particularly if CTB negotia-
tions are prolonged.
—It would also be advantageous to ratify the treaties to preclude
Soviet renouncement of this constraint and resumption of high-yield
testing.
On the other hand, critics of the treaties have argued that the 150 kt
threshold is too high and that the PNE Treaty would legitimize PNEs.
However, these treaties represent the first real progress towards a CTB
in many years and an Administration perceived as urgently working
towards a CTB should have little difficulty in overcoming any opposi-
tion to ratification.
As a result, there is consensus in the Working Group that these
treaties should be ratified as a common step in all of the alternative ap-
proaches to a CTB which follow.
B. Participation in Negotiations. There is also interagency agreement
that, whether or not preceded by a moratorium, a CTB should be em-
bodied in a binding international agreement open to all states; that any
CTB initiative should be preceded by thorough consultations with our
allies; and that CTB negotiations should begin with a bilateral US/So-
viet phase (possibly trilateral, including the UK), and should eventu-
ally proceed to a multilateral phase in which the agreement would be
concluded. There is also agreement that such multilateral agreement
would probably not take effect in the foreseeable future if it required
adherence by all nuclear powers before entry into force. Accordingly, if
we decided to commence CTB negotiations at this time, the most real-
istic near-term possibility would be an agreement of limited duration
that needed only US and Soviet adherence to enter into force. The ques-
tion of possible LTBT amendment as the enabling mechanism for a CTB
was investigated on a preliminary basis. There would be obvious diffi-
culties in managing a 103-nation negotiation and some risk that the
LTBT might be undermined in the process. It might be possible to
“bind” countries, such as Egypt, Israel or Brazil, who are parties to the
LTBT but have refused to accede to the NPT. However, these countries
could find a pretext to withdraw from the LTBT if they perceived it in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
their interest to do so. These issues are complex and would require ex-
tensive further study both from a policy and legal standpoint prior to a
determination whether LTBT amendment could be a desirable multila-
teral basis for a CTB.
C. Moratorium Concerns. The implications of both unilateral and bi-
lateral moratoria have been considered as a means to a cessation of
testing. As noted above, our previous experience with the Soviets con-
cerning a testing moratorium in the late 1950s was an unfortunate one,
and as a result there would be substantial opposition to a moratorium
without active CTB negotiations at this time. A unilateral moratorium
might have non-proliferation advantages but would suffer from the se-
rious disadvantage of permitting the Soviets to continue testing and
might allow them to complete priority tests before halting their own
program. Even if the moratorium were bilaterally undertaken, there
would be an obvious disadvantage in that there would be no verifica-
tion provisions to assist us in monitoring Soviet compliance. As a result
there is interagency agreement in the Working Group that a morato-
rium should only be considered during negotiations toward a formal
verifiable agreement and that, even in this case, the moratorium should
have a tight time limitation to provide leverage in the negotiations and
avoid an indefinite moratorium.
VI. The CTB Decision
This section discusses the national security advantages and disad-
vantages of a CTB. The arguments which favor a CTB are:
—A CTB is a key element in achieving the US objective of curbing
nuclear weapons proliferation, because:
(1) As indigenous nuclear capabilities spread to many countries,
political decisions to refrain from building nuclear weapons will be in-
creasingly dependent on whether the US and USSR are perceived to be
accepting restraints on their nuclear arms. A CTB is widely considered
to be a main symbol of such restraint.
(2) Some states which have not signed the Non-Proliferation
Treaty might accept the constraints of a CTB.
(3) The Non-Proliferation Treaty regime would be strengthened,
and potential withdrawals made less likely, if the nuclear powers ful-
filled their pledge in that treaty to stop nuclear testing.
—A CTB would reinforce SALT agreements and have a positive ef-
fect in improving the overall US–USSR relationship.
—A CTB would impose significant restraints on the US–USSR
arms race by prohibiting further refinement of nuclear warheads and
by prohibiting nuclear weapon effects tests.
—By reducing Soviet confidence in the long-term reliability of
their missile warheads, a CTB would reduce the risk of their employing
a first-strike strategy.

Comprehensive Test Ban
—A CTB would be responsive to growing international and do-
mestic political pressures to end nuclear testing. It would fulfill US
pledges to seek this goal which have been made in the Limited Test Ban
Treaty, the Non-Proliferation Treaty, UN and CCD speeches, and most
recently, by President Carter.
Arguments against a CTB are:
—Since World War II the US has depended on nuclear weapons to
deter nuclear and conventional attacks on the US and its allies. In par-
ticular, nuclear weapons have served to counterbalance the over-
whelming superiority of Soviet conventional forces in Europe. A CTB
will inevitably result in some deterioration of US nuclear weaponry.
—If the Soviets decide to violate or circumvent the CTB Treaty and
are successful, at least in the low-yield range, this could result in fur-
ther military asymmetries favoring the Soviet Union.
—Future foreign concern over US capability to oppose Soviet ag-
gression in the event of a perceived degradation in our nuclear deter-
rent could result in international realignments and possibly further
proliferation.
—Specific strategic and tactical weapons will not be optimized and
may even have to be cancelled because of technical difficulties.
—Continued testing by other weapons states, notably China,
could eventually have an adverse effect on US national security.
—An early cessation of nuclear testing would eliminate our cur-
rent objectives to improve the safety, security, command/control fea-
tures, and reduction of collateral damage from all classes of nuclear
weapons.
—The Soviets could have an asymmetric advantage in maintaining
stockpile reliability and nuclear weapons design capability.
—[2 lines not declassified] Such testing could be important for de-
velopment of some tactical weapons.
VII. CTB Implementing Options
A. Negotiations with Continued Testing
Under this option we would initiate CTB negotiations with the So-
viets as soon as practicable, but would continue testing pending con-
clusion of a CTB Treaty. (It is considered likely that negotiation of a
CTB would take at least a year, particularly if PNEs were allowed.)
Advantages
—Together with renewed SALT negotiations, would demonstrate
US commitment to arms control and enhance prospects for our non-
proliferation objectives.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Would be constructive step in US-Soviet relationship and could
improve prospects for accomplishment of other US bilateral objectives
with the Soviets.
—Due to likelihood of protracted negotiations, would permit ac-
complishment of some planned US weapons testing objectives.
Disadvantages
—Could be criticized for permitting continued testing, particularly
if negotiations were protracted.
—Alternatively, if negotiations were completed quickly, could
preclude completion of any remaining US weapons test objectives.
—Similarly, the Soviets might exploit the situation by announcing
an immediate moratorium and calling for the US to halt testing, thus
making it difficult for the US to continue testing.
B. Negotiations with Cessation of Testing
This option is essentially the same as option A, except that we
would seek a time-limited bilateral moratorium on testing during the
negotiations.
Advantages
—It would restrain the Soviets from improving their nuclear war-
heads or correcting possible deficiencies during a possibly protracted
period of negotiations.
—It would be widely supported internationally as clearly demon-
strating US and Soviet good-faith commitments to fulfill their non-
proliferation treaty pledge to end nuclear testing.
—It would strengthen US efforts to dissuade India and other na-
tions from further testing.
Disadvantages
—It would preclude completion of certain planned strategic and
tactical weapons tests programs.
—During the period of the moratorium, we would be limited to
national means of verification only, thereby increasing the risk of clan-
destine Soviet testing at low yields.
—If prolonged, a moratorium could result in loss of skilled per-
sonnel from the US weapons program, as well as funding reductions by
the Congress. In that case, subsequent failure to achieve a permanent
CTB and resumption of testing by both sides could leave the US at a
disadvantage.
C. Phased Approach
The primary difference between this option and Option A above is
that this option would defer CTB negotiations for perhaps two years to
provide for a deliberate linking of the various steps required to reach
any CTB with satisfactory progress on a wide variety of other arms con-
trol measures and demonstration of Soviet commitments to a stable
US/USSR national security relationship.

Comprehensive Test Ban
The following pros and cons are in addition to those in Option A
above.
Advantages
—Provides time for multinational exploration on verification
measures which could be incorporated in an eventual CTB.
—Provides experience in implementing TTB/PNE Treaties and in
assessing Soviet cooperativeness with regard to these treaty provisions.
—Provides time for a US assessment of progress on a broad range
of the US/USSR security relationships.
Disadvantages
—Would be viewed by some as inconsistent with stated US objec-
tive of prompt cessation of testing, and thus could complicate TTB/
PNE ratification.
—Would probably delay the earliest date of a CTB agreement.
—Possible non-proliferation benefits would be deferred until
favorable CTB decision is clearly demonstrated by initiating CTB
negotiations.
—Would defer possible benefits to US-Soviet relationship.
D. Lowered Threshold
This option could be accomplished as an additional step in either
Option A or C above. It would involve lowering the threshold at an
early date to perhaps 75 kt or so, and could also include further sched-
uled reductions towards a very low threshold or CTB. This might pro-
vide some of the non-proliferation advantages of a moratorium with re-
duced verification risks, and at 75 kt would permit completion of much
of our tactical weapons modernization effort. It could also assist us in
ratification of the TTB/PNE Treaties by demonstrating the President’s
commitment to progress in this area and would mitigate criticisms that
the 150 kt threshold is too high. If the period of testing at 75 kt were
prolonged, however, it would be desirable to review and possibly
amend the TTB/PNE Treaties to ensure adequate verification. (This
could be a complex negotiation in itself.)
VIII. PNE Accommodation Considerations
A. Introduction
Since the initiation of US arms control policy to limit nuclear
weapon testing, it has been recognized that peaceful nuclear explosions
(PNEs) present special and difficult problems for the achievement of an
adequately verified test ban. In seeking a test ban agreement with the
Soviet Union, the US must take account of the facts that the US cur-
rently has only a very small PNE program while the Soviets have an ac-
tive PNE program and have expressed their desires and plans for con-
tinuing that program during a test ban. Because of economic factors,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
environmental concerns, and other factors, it is assumed unlikely that
the US would embark on a large-scale PNE program after entering into
a weapons test ban. However, it is possible that the US would pursue a
limited PNE program, possibly within the confines of the Nevada Test
Site.
The Soviet PNE program is very broad in scope and includes water
resource development, oil and gas stimulation, mining, storage and
disposal of wastes, storage of petroleum and other hydrocarbons, and
extinguishing gas well fires. The Soviets claim to have reduced the last
two applications to practice, but most of their PNEs have been experi-
mental in nature. The best known Soviet PNE project is their plan to
build a canal to reverse the head waters of the Pechora River to flow
into the Kama, Volga, and then the Caspian Sea. This is a major project
which at one time was described as requiring as many as 250 nuclear
explosives fired in salvos of up to 20 explosives at a time. The Soviets
conducted one PNE salvo along the canal route in 1971 and have had a
second apparently ready for firing for more than a year. There is some
uncertainty as to whether the Soviets will proceed with this project, and
substantial engineering and feasibility questions probably remain.
However, at least five other PNE tests (for other applications) are
known to be in preparation and the Soviets seem determined at present
to continue their overall program. However, it is difficult to assess how
strongly the Soviets would resist a US proposal to ban PNEs in the con-
text of a CTB other wise acceptable to them, particularly if the PNE ban
were only for a limited number of years.
B. National Security Implications of PNEs under a CTB
There is international agreement that the technology required for
PNEs is indistinguishable from that required for nuclear weapons tests,
and that any country engaged in PNE device development or testing
inevitably receives weapons-related benefits. This agreement is re-
flected in the NPT, and one of the key objectives of our non-
proliferation policy has been to deter non-nuclear weapon states from
indigenous development of PNE technology.
Because of the indistinguishability of PNE technology and
weapons technology, our lack of interest in PNE applications, and be-
cause of nuclear weapon proliferation considerations, there is complete
agreement among the participants in this study that a CTB banning all
nuclear explosions is more desirable from the US national security
standpoint than a ban which accommodates PNEs. In the context of a
ban of all nuclear explosions, including PNEs, the capability to verify
whether a nuclear explosion has taken place is the same for both a PNE
and a nuclear weapon detonation.
If peaceful nuclear explosions are allowed to continue in some
form in the context of a comprehensive test ban, an opportunity for

Comprehensive Test Ban
evasion of test ban constraints is immediately introduced. Without ade-
quate restrictions, ostensible PNEs could be exploited to gain practi-
cally any nuclear weapon-related benefits that can be achieved by a de-
clared nuclear weapon test of equivalent yield.
Further, there is concern that an accommodation for PNEs could
increase belief in the value of PNEs, thereby stimulating interest in in-
digenous PNE programs. This would diminish one of the principal
non-proliferation benefits of a CTB which prohibited PNEs—namely, a
closing of this avenue to potential weapons development (as in the case
of India). A contrary but probably weaker effect would be that some
states, which felt that they had a real economic need for PNEs, would
continue to have an alternative to indigenous PNEs and thereby might
accede to such a CTB.
Even with a PNE allowance, a CTB would act as an important po-
litical restraint on a decision to develop nuclear weapons overtly, and
would deter overt political use of a weapons capability. Thus, while it
is clear that a CTB banning PNEs would be highly preferable, one
which allowed PNEs (if necessary to accommodate Soviet interests)
would still probably contribute to our non-proliferation objectives and
might have enhanced value in terms of its impact on the US-Soviet
relationship.
C. PNE Accommodation Options
If the Soviets insist on a PNE accommodation, the fundamental
issue is whether a verification arrangement can be devised that would
adequately protect US security interests. To reduce the weapon-related
benefits attendant on accommodating PNEs under a test ban, restric-
tions would have to be devised that guard against: substitution of a
weapon or weapon development explosive for the ostensible PNE ex-
plosive; detonation of a collateral weapon or weapon development ex-
plosive near the PNE, simultaneously or nearly simultaneously, with it;
or acquisition of weapon effects data. A number of specific PNE verifi-
cation procedures have been considered in an attempt to satisfy these
general objectives; however, none would provide adequate unilateral
assurance that the country testing the PNE would not obtain weapons-
related benefits. Consequently, our attention has focused on highly in-
trusive cooperative verification arrangements which would seek to en-
sure that the US would share at least equally in any weapons-related
data generated in PNE activities.
These procedures are extensions of the PNET provisions and as
common elements include: (a) certification of the nature and peaceful
purpose of each PNE project; (b) review of the proposed project by the
verifying party on the basis of data supplied by host party; (c) observa-
tion of the preparation, emplacement, execution, and post-shot activ-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ities; and (d) on-site seismic monitoring. Opportunities for detection of
a collateral clandestine test or weapons effects experiments would de-
pend on the details of the on-site observation and monitoring that was
permitted, the relative yields of the PNE and the clandestine weapons
test, and national technical means. Four alternative, supplementary
procedures are considered below:
(1) Registration and Measurement of Explosive Characteristics
This procedure consists of (a) registration of the characteristics of
a limited set of explosives; (b) firing of the explosives by observers;
(c) on-site electronic monitoring; and (d) collection of post-shot radio-
chemical samples. For this system of constraints, the parties would
have to make available to each other the electronic signatures and ra-
diochemical samples from the explosives they propose to use.
Advantages:
—May be easier to negotiate than other options considered; it
permits host to use his own explosives.
—Least complicated of options.
—May be made multilateral.
Disadvantages:
—Stockpile reliability testing could be accomplished by preregis-
tering stockpile weapon signatures.
—Radiochemical and electronic signatures may not suffice to
identify adequately the character of the registered explosive.
—Radiochemical samples could be difficult and costly to obtain
from deep contained explosions.
—Unforeseen circumstances may require new PNE explosive de-
signs which could not be accommodated.
(2) Warehousing
This procedure involves international warehousing, whereby a
stockpile of PNE devices provided by the US and Soviets adequate for
several years of PNE applications would be established under interna-
tional surveillance and used as needed for PNE applications.
Advantages:
—Reduces opportunities for checking weapon stockpile reliability.
—May be as negotiable as option (1).
—May be made multilateral.
Disadvantages:
—Requires large initial stockpile with attendant security problems
and cost.
—Poses problems related to how the explosives in the stockpile
could be maintained and how to replenish the stockpile without per-

Comprehensive Test Ban
mitting the introduction of new weapons for testing or the disclosure of
design information.
—Unforeseen circumstances may require new PNE explosive de-
signs which could not be accommodated.
—Some stockpile reliability testing could be accomplished by put-
ting certain weapons in the PNE explosive stockpile.
(3) Explosives Supplied by Observing Party
This procedure would include a provision that the observing party
would supply, maintain custody of, and detonate the explosive. The
procedure would presumably have to include a veto right for the sup-
plying State with respect to safety and treaty obligations.
Advantages:
—Makes explosive substitution very difficult for PNE projects in
host country.
—Because of possible large Soviet PNE program, US may supply
many explosives helping to maintain US nuclear explosive design
capability.
—Similar to IAEA PNE supplier approach, making it more accept-
able internationally.
Disadvantages:
—Probably not negotiable because of Soviet concern that military
advantages accrue to US, and because of US veto power.
—US may have problems of explosive supply, logistics and liability.
—Melt material left in host country is revealing of explosive design.
—Has US/USSR condominium aspects to other nations.
—USSR may test new weapon designs by providing PNE services
to friendly states.
(4) US/USSR Cooperative PNE Program
This last procedure is based on the establishment of a comprehen-
sive and effective US/USSR PNE cooperative program that encom-
passes all aspects of PNE technology, including mutual disclosure or
joint development of explosive designs. Such a cooperative program
must include verification procedures that assure that the explosive
used is of the same design as that disclosed or developed for the proj-
ect. Both sides would share in the weapons-technology benefits of
PNEs. This procedure could also include provisions to maximize non-
nuclear assistance in the proposed projects in an attempt to reduce the
numbers of nuclear explosives required.
Advantages:
—Allows US to obtain large amount of information concerning So-
viet PNE program, and some insight into Soviet explosive design.
—Cooperative aspects could enhance US/USSR relations (de´-
tente), and might be negotiable for that reason.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Cooperative US/USSR program may provide international PNE
benefits not otherwise attainable.
Disadvantages:
—Arrangement might be criticized as a cooperative US/USSR
weapon development program (condominium).
—Requires extreme care in the disclosure of design information to
avoid enhancing existing Soviet weapon design capabilities.
—May not be negotiable with Soviets because of high degree of
intrusiveness.
D. Negotiating Strategy
As outlined above, it would appear to be clearly in our interest to
exert maximum pressure to convince the Soviets that PNEs should be
banned under a CTB. If this proves unacceptable to the Soviets, an al-
ternative would be to include in the CTB agreement a provision for
consideration of a PNE accommodation at a later time. This was the
final resolution of the Soviet desire for PNEs above 150 kilotons during
the PNET negotiations.
If this approach proved unsuccessful, we might attempt to nego-
tiate a PNE accommodation that would be restricted to the Pechora-
Kama Canal project. This might be negotiable, would limit the scope of
the Soviet PNE effort, and upon completion could lead to a complete
test ban. There would be important disadvantages, however, in that
since only the Soviets would benefit, other nations could criticize it as
discriminatory.
More importantly, the project would involve only excavation ex-
plosions and we have repeatedly stated that major PNE excavation
projects would violate the LTBT. This would preclude treating the
LTBT problem as we did in the PNET by including a provision for strict
LTBT compliance and not differentiating between contained and exca-
vation PNEs. Finally, the project is so large, and would take so long
(perhaps 10 years), that this option would not significantly reduce
weapons-related benefits compared to a general PNE accommodation.
Under either the restricted Pechora-Kama or an unrestricted PNE
accommodation, their negotiability would obviously depend on the de-
gree of intrusiveness of the accommodation arrangement we selected.
None of the four such arrangements outlined above has been examined
in detail, and all should receive further careful review before pro-
ceeding with negotiation of any PNE accommodation.

Comprehensive Test Ban
147.
Letter From the Acting Administrator of the Energy Research
and Development Administration (Fri) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 17, 1977
Dear Dr. Brzezinski:
Subject: Accommodating PNEs Under a Weapon Test Ban
This is to confirm ERDA’s position on identifying the dangers to
national security of a comprehensive test ban which accommodates
PNEs. The original request to Heads of Agencies in PRM–162 included
a preliminary review of the major problems of verifying a complete ban
on all testing; weapons, as well as peaceful nuclear explosions. Since
that time, the possibility of accommodating Soviet interest in using
PNEs in the Pechora-Kama River Project has become a factor in the
PRM–16 test ban review.
It has been established in technical reviews within ERDA and its
weapon design laboratories that there is no known way to prevent the
Soviet Union from gaining military benefits from a comprehensive test
ban through low yield clandestine testing if a PNE accommodation is
permitted. In addition, it will increase significantly both the opportu-
nities and the yield ranges available for the Soviet Union to exploit for
military advantage. Even under the situation of maximum use of U.S.
nuclear explosives for PNEs in the Soviet Union, it would still be pos-
sible under a CTB for the Soviets to mask their own weapon tests as
collateral explosions which would not necessarily be detected and
identified.
As presently described, the Pechora-Kama Project is estimated to
require 5–10 years for completion. In analyses conducted by the Law-
rence Livermore Laboratory prior to the PNET, it was estimated that
would be required. Bilateral treaty constraints on individual explosions
to 150 kt and 1500 kt for salvo yield in accordance with the PNET
would increase the numbers significantly, providing ample opportu-
nity for Soviet weapon testing and technology acquisition under the
guise of PNE.
In the past, the Soviets have made it clear that they are interested in
a comprehensive test ban which accommodates PNEs. They have
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 1977. Secret. Copies were sent to Harold Brown, Vance,
George Brown, Sloss, and Turner.
2 See Document 141.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
stated in recent exchanges that they view the PNET as a basis for estab-
lishing a PNE accommodation under a CTB. The PNET threshold is
tied directly to the 150 kt limit of the threshold test ban, with the under-
standing that the PNET threshold will be reduced with any reductions
in the TTBT limit and that PNEs will not be allowed under a CTB. It is
essential that this view of TTBT and PNET relationships be maintained.
It should be anticipated that the Soviets could continue to endorse
a general PNE accommodation. Under this condition, which involves
both low fission, relatively clean nuclear devices used for excavation
and fission devices for contained explosions, the Soviets could have
access to the full spectrum of weapon design and effects otherwise
banned in a CTB. Under conditions of general accommodation of
PNEs, it becomes even more difficult to deny military benefits.
ERDA strongly recommends that any accommodation of PNEs
under a comprehensive test ban be thoroughly analyzed for its adverse
impact on the treaty, our ability to verify that military benefits are not
being obtained from PNEs, and the relative impacts on U.S. and Soviet
national security.
Sincerely,
Robert W. Fri3
Acting Administrator
3 Printed from a copy that indicates Fri signed the original.

Comprehensive Test Ban
148.
Memorandum From the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, March 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban Issues (U)
1. (C) The purpose of this memorandum is to transmit the views of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) issues
and to provide a basis for the DOD response to PRM/NSC–16.2
2. (S) After a careful review of the Interagency Working Group’s
response to the PRM,3 the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that, al-
though the facts developed in the response do not support a CTB at this
time, the presentation of the substantive issues in the Executive Sum-
mary could result in misleading conclusions upon which future US se-
curity policy and negotiating strategy may be based. It is, therefore, es-
sential that these issues be clarified. The issues of utmost importance
concern the impact of a CTB or moratorium on US military capabilities
and the adequacy of US intelligence capabilities both to ascertain the
status of Soviet weapons programs and to monitor compliance with a
CTB agreement.
3. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize the longstanding US policy
regarding a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing within the context of
an adequately verified agreement, including the commitments made in
the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), Non-Proliferation Treaty, and
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT). It must be pointed out, however,
that this policy was developed at a time when the United States was in
a position of clear strategic superiority. Presumably, a CTB at that time
would have slowed the rate at which the Soviet Union could have im-
proved its strategic forces and would have delayed the point at which it
could have achieved parity. The strategic situation has changed drasti-
cally in the last few years, and, although there are differing opinions as
to the relative military advantages held by either the United States or
the Soviet Union in specific areas, it is generally agreed that the two
powers are now in a state of overall rough equivalence.
fense Intelligence Agency (Tighe) and the Director of the Defense Nuclear Agency
2 See Document 141.
3 See Document 146.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4. (S) Whether the trend of increasing strength of the Soviet Union
relative to the United States will taper off in the future is a matter of
considerable debate within the Intelligence Community; [3 lines not de-
classified] It is impossible to project the threat which may now be devel-
oping and which may not be clearly perceived by the United States
until such time as a CTB would make it difficult or impossible to
respond.
5. (S) Current US force improvement initiatives have been taken
primarily to respond to threats which have been postulated with some
certainty. A CTB agreement will limit US ability to develop military
systems which are essential to respond to these postulated threats. It is
recognized that a CTB which includes prohibition of peaceful nuclear
explosions (PNEs) will constrain the Soviet Union’s ability to develop
new initiatives. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff emphasize that a CTB
may render the United States virtually unable to respond to the future
threat which may now be developing and, thus, is unconstrained by the
effects of a CTB.
6. (S) National policy calls for development and maintenance of a
deterrent and warfighting capability across the spectrum of warfare,
ranging from strategic nuclear offensive and defensive operations
through tactical nuclear, conventional, and unconventional operations.
To support this policy, the existing strategy provides for forces which
are highly selective, effective, flexible, and responsive to the require-
ments of the National Command Authorities. By continuing a strong
technological capability made possible under the constraints of the
LTBT through the maintenance of a viable underground test program,
the United States has continued the development of nuclear capabilities
which will assist in the fulfillment of national policy objectives. How-
ever, without the present underground testing capability, the US
Armed Forces could not confidently exploit advanced nuclear weapons
development technology or nuclear weapons effects technology to pro-
vide these capabilities nor could they assure the reliability either of new
designs, of older nuclear weapons which have been stockpiled over
long periods of time, or of replications of older tested designs. There-
fore, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that, for the foreseeable future,
continued nuclear testing will be necessary.
8. (S) In the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the adequacy of veri-
fying a CTB agreement is dependent on the ability unequivocally to as-
sure the national authorities that no potential adversary is achieving
military benefits through nuclear testing. Although the PRM–16 re-
sponse points out that improvements to US national technical means
could reduce the likelihood of undetected tests, the Executive Sum-
mary [10 lines not declassified]

Comprehensive Test Ban
9. (S) The Executive Summary overemphasizes the probabilities
that the leadership of the Soviet Union would be unwilling to conduct
an evasion program. In the past, the United States has officially notified
the Soviet Union of 21 violations of the LTBT, but all charges have been
denied by the Soviet Union. There is also some question by experts in
the United States about two Soviet detonations which may have ex-
ceeded the 150 kt limit in the informal understanding regarding the
TTBT. It is recognized that these instances may be considered by some
as of a different nature than a violation of a CTB. However, it must still
be pointed out [3 lines not declassified] that even when clear evidence
of a violation exists, any charges against the Soviet Union may be
meaningless.
10. (S) In view of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that a
CTB is not in the best interests of the United States at this time because
of:
a. The potential adverse effect on military capabilities caused by
US inability to develop military systems required to respond to current
and future threats, US inability to maintain a nuclear weapons tech-
nology base, and US inability to insure continued nuclear systems
reliability.
b. The known limits on US verification capabilities.
c. [2 lines not declassified]
d. [2½ lines not declassified]
11. (S) If a decision is made to proceed with negotiations for a CTB,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider the following points to be pertinent:
a. An unverified or unilateral moratorium should be avoided.
b. Nuclear testing should continue during CTB negotiations, and
the effective date of a CTB should be selected so as to permit the com-
pletion of testing for key systems. Although some systems now under
development might be placed in the stockpile without further planned
testing, it would be at the cost of significantly reduced effectiveness
and reliability. It should be noted that testing [4 lines not declassified]
c. [1½ lines not declassified]
d. PNEs should not be permitted in a CTB environment. Despite a
lengthy exploration in the PRM–16 response to find ways of accommo-
dating PNEs in a CTB with minimum risk to national security, there ap-
pears to be no feasible way to prevent military advantages accruing
from the conduct of PNEs.
e. All nuclear powers should eventually be signatory to a CTB. In
the short term, only the Soviet Union threatens US security. However,
long-term advances by the PRC or other countries also could become a
factor. Therefore, any cessation of testing must allow for periodic re-
view and a clear opportunity to renew testing if all nuclear weapon
states do not adhere within a reasonable period of time.
f. The TTBT and Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty should be ra-
tified as soon as possible.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
12. (U) The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you consider their
views in concluding your review of PRM/NSC–16.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
George S. Brown
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
149.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Conversation with The President on CTB Considerations
At your suggestion, I conveyed my misgivings about the peaceful
nuclear explosions loophole in CTB to the President in a conversation
yesterday.2 Moreover, I described the JCS position that a ban on nuclear
testing would be contrary to our national security interests. I assured
him that I would be working on the broadest, most balanced view pos-
sible here in the Defense Department.
The President agreed that CTB would be a useful topic for a lunch-
eon discussion by him with the Joint Chiefs, Charles Duncan, you and
me.
Harold Brown3
2 No record of this conversation has been found. According to the President’s Daily
tial Materials)
3 Brown signed “Harold” at the end of the memorandum.

Comprehensive Test Ban
150.
Letter From the Director of Military Application of the
Energy Research and Development Administration (Bratton)
to the Chairman of the Military Liaison to the Energy
Research and Development Administration (Cotter)1
Washington, March 15, 1977
Dear Mr. Cotter:
In anticipation that underground nuclear testing might be further
curtailed or prohibited in the relatively near future, ERDA is taking
prudent steps to revise the underground nuclear test program for FY
accomplishment of those tests most urgently needed to meet presently
known, high priority defense requirements for nuclear weapons at the
earliest possible date. Our understanding of these requirements and of
the relative priority of each is summarized in Enclosure 1.2
We have formulated plans to complete at minimum cost the
testing required for all the weapons listed in Enclosure 1. All advanced
development tests, except those for which preparations are already
well advanced, have been proposed for deferment until late FY 1978.
These plans are summarized in Enclosure 2.3
Although the revised number of tests for each fiscal year is not sig-
nificantly different than in our previous plans, the nature of the tests is
such that the cost would exceed our budget amounts for testing by
possible to obtain additional funds by reprogramming actions within
the weapons program or from some other ERDA account, it is first es-
sential to verify that each of these potential weapons should be devel-
oped before further restrictions or a ban on testing.
The plan we have formulated is basically a reordering of already
planned tests in order to accomplish the most critical tests as soon as
possible. For each program the point at which these most critical tests
are completed is indicated on Enclosure 2. If testing were stopped after
successful completion of these critical tests but before completion of all
the tests required for the full development of a particular warhead, it
may be possible to stockpile that warhead. However, it may not meet
all required military characteristics, and some of its yield options may
not be fully verified. The impact on each program of completing only
2 Not attached.
3 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the critical tests is given in Enclosure 3.4 It should be recognized that
the schedule shown in Enclosure 2 is optimistic in that all tests may not
be completed on time and all may not be successful.
If additional resources cannot be obtained from outside the
weapons program, it may be necessary to reprogram funds from the
weapons production budget. This would result in delays in the de-
livery of weapons to the DOD. For example, one option for reprogram-
ming an additional $6 million for testing in FY 1977 would delay the
scheduled delivery of the B61–5 bomb by six to nine months. Repro-
gramming $13 million in FY 1978, in addition, would delay delivery of
the B77 bomb by one year if all the funds were applied against that pro-
gram. We would not, of course, initiate any reprogramming action
which would impact agreed IOC or delivery commitments without
coordinating fully with the DOD.
I would appreciate your concurrence in our proposed revised test
program and its associated priorities. Further, I would welcome com-
ments regarding programs which you believe should be deleted or
slowed in order to save resources or programs which should be added
to provide further options during a possible test ban. For example, the
DOD views on the type of reprogramming referred to above would be
useful.
I look forward to hearing from you on this matter, and I shall en-
deavor to be as responsive as possible to DOD suggestions in meeting
our mutual nuclear testing goals.
Sincerely,
J.K. Bratton
Major General, USA
Director of Military Application
4 Not attached.

Comprehensive Test Ban
151.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 23, 1977
SUBJECT
SALT, CTB, Indian Ocean, Africa, Middle East, Belgrade Conference, Vietnam,
Fukuda Visit, Claims/Assets, Exchange Program
PARTICIPANTS
People’s Republic of China
Ambassador Huang Chen
Counselor Tsien Ta-yung
Third Secretary Hsu Shang-wei
United States
The Secretary
Richard Holbrooke, EA
Harry E.T. Thayer, EA/PRCM (Notetaker)
Michel Oksenberg, NSC
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
The Secretary said that another subject for discussion would be the
issue of a comprehensive test ban. We would discuss the possibility of
negotiating for a ban on all tests of nuclear weapons for a limited pe-
riod. As the President had indicated to Huang,2 this is an issue between
the Soviets and ourselves; but we would hope that some time in the fu-
ture other nations would join such an agreement.
The Secretary said he expected that a number of issues would be
raised in this connection, such as peaceful nuclear explosions being
permitted under this test ban. Second, what kind of verification would
be required under such an agreement? Third, whether or not the So-
viets are prepared to enter such an agreement if it is only a bilateral one.
The Secretary said that, at this point, we have no idea as to how the dis-
Drafted by Thayer; and approved in S on April 5. The memorandum is printed in full For-
2 On February 8, Carter told Huang Chen “We have offered the Soviet Union a com-
prehensive test ban treaty. This would be a bilateral agreement with the Soviets. If it can
be worked out, then perhaps others such as China or France can consider joining in some
form, but at the present time this is just an effort with the USSR. At the same time we will
maintain our equivalent strength and will keep the Chinese Government informed.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Far East, Box 55, Oksenberg

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
cussions will come out or if the Soviets have a serious interest in such a
discussion.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Ambassador Huang
Ambassador Huang, after thanking the Secretary, said that some
of the issues already had been touched on in his meeting with the Presi-
dent. Nevertheless, he would repeat some points made then. With re-
spect to the US-Soviet talks and relations, China’s basic view was still
the same. The U.S. had vested interests to protect around the world and
the Soviet aim is expansion. This is unalterable.
SALT, CTB
As he had said to President Carter, the PRC had never been inter-
ested in the so-called disarmament agreements reached by the Soviet
Union and the U.S. He had already explained the reason to President
Carter. President Carter had mentioned the comprehensive test ban, in-
cluding asking others like France and China to join following Soviet
and U.S. agreement. China’s consistent policy, Huang told the Secre-
tary, is to oppose nuclear blackmail proposed by the Soviet Union and
the U.S., and China will not take part in any of these activities. The PRC
felt that the Soviet Union and the United States now had conducted
enough tests and don’t want to allow others to do so. There is no reason
for this under Heaven.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]

Comprehensive Test Ban
152.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
66861. Subject: Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB): Consultations
With French.
1. Politico-Military Affairs Director Gelb met with French Charge´
Boyer March 24 to review arms control subjects on eve of Secretary
Vance’s departure to Moscow. Drawing on President’s statements and
Gelb March 21 statement to North Atlantic Council,2 Gelb reviewed
SALT, CTB, MBFR, Indian Ocean, conventional arms transfers,
anti-satellite capabilities, and prior notification of missile launches.
2. On test ban, Gelb noted President’s proposal for US-Soviet bilat-
eral moratorium on nuclear testing for two, three or four years,3 ex-
plaining that if other nations cared to associate with it, this would be
welcomed, but it was not a precondition. US was prepared to hear So-
viets out on PNEs, but we did not favor them. Gelb specifically noted
that:
A) Our test ban initiative was not intended to give problems to our
allies, in particular France;
B) US of course would welcome it if France or others chose to asso-
ciate with a cessation of testing;
C) Such a cessation of testing would not adversely affect NATO
strategy or targeting. In our judgment, a CTB was not to our military
disadvantage;
D) Before going forward with specific CTB negotiations, we would
consult with our allies, including France.
3. Boyer noted French position was that a certain time was needed
for other military tests. France would not rpt not join any moratorium
at present. Boyer did not rpt not know about the future. Boyer added
that, as Gelb had noted, there was the hope that a US-Soviet cessation of
testing would be joined by other powers in the future.
4. In response to a question, Gelb confirmed position of adminis-
tration favoring ratification of Threshold Test Ban Treaty.
Christopher
cret. Also sent to USNATO, Moscow, London, the Mission in Geneva, USUN, the Liaison
Office in Peking, and the IAEA in Vienna. Drafted by Mark Ramee (PM/DCA); cleared
by James Dobbins (EUR/CE), Peter Sebastian (S/S), and Robert Rochline (ACDA); and
approved by Gelb.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
153.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Middle East, Arms Control
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary Arthur
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M.
Hartman
Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. Leslie Gelb
Notetaker—Name Unknown
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
Gromyko said that, as the Secretary would know, the Soviet Union
was in favor of resolving the problem of completely stopping nuclear
weapon testing. The USSR had proposed that all nuclear powers,
without exception, enter into discussions as soon as possible, with the
participation of non-nuclear states, with a view to conclusion of a treaty
on this subject, providing for a complete and universal ban on testing
nuclear weapons. In connection with that proposal, the question of ver-
ification would arise, and the Soviet Union had taken it into account, al-
though he was convinced that given today’s level of technology, verifi-
cation by national technical means should be sufficient. Still, the Soviet
Union was prepared to go further and find mutually acceptable under-
standings that would preserve the framework of voluntary decisions in
the context of on-site investigation of certain phenomena. This should
be aimed at providing assurances for all parties to the treaty that obli-
gations under the treaty were being complied with. Something of this
kind had been suggested by the Swedes. The Soviets would suggest
proved by Hyland (in draft), and Twadell on May 9. The meeting took place at the
Kremlin. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, So-
viet Union, Document 20. Vance reported on his conversation with Gromkyo to Carter
and Brzezinski in Secto 3033 from the Secretary’s Delegation, March 29. (National Ar-

Comprehensive Test Ban
that our two countries act promptly, considering the fact that this issue
was currently under discussion in the Disarmament Committee. To
translate these considerations into the text of a mutually acceptable
treaty would be a major step forward.
Gromyko wanted to suggest an idea that the Secretary might not be
able to answer now. Perhaps he could reflect on it, and reply after he
returned to Washington. Such a treaty could initially be signed by our
two countries, and be accompanied by a simultaneous appeal to other
nuclear states, and even to non-industrial countries, to accede to it.
When signing the treaty, the United States and Soviet Union could de-
clare that for a specified period of time, say one and a half to two years,
they would refrain from testing nuclear weapons; in other words, they
would declare a moratorium on their own testing. If other nuclear
powers did not accede to the treaty within that period of time, the So-
viet Union and the United States would be released from their obliga-
tions under such a moratorium. Gromyko believed that such a step
would impel certain powers to take positive action and would, in gen-
eral, favorably influence the whole international situation. That would
be a good thing. It was hard to imagine who could criticize the new Ad-
ministration for taking such a step. In the Soviet Union, and he was
quite sure in saying this, such a step would meet with understanding;
people would regard it as positive. However, one could not consider
peaceful nuclear explosions in one and the same category with the
testing of nuclear weapons. Peaceful nuclear explosions were used in
the Soviet Union to accomplish major economic tasks. Certain plans
had been made involving PNEs. He would point out that, taking into
account US views, the Soviet Union had agreed to limit the yield of
such explosions under an agreement signed last year. At the same time,
that agreement provided that nuclear explosions for solely peaceful
purposes would be subject to a system of verification that would be
worked out in detail, envisioning in certain cases access by the repre-
sentatives of one side to the explosion site of the other. It would repre-
sent a substantial step forward, a radical solution to the problem of
ending nuclear testing, curbing the arms race, and protecting people
against the harmful consequences of such tests, if ratification of the
Threshold and PNE agreements already signed by our two countries
were completed. The Soviets did not lack readiness to do so. They were
waiting to see when the new Administration in Washington would be-
come more active in this area. Who could deny the positive significance
of the agreements already on the table in signed form? He thought that
each member of the US Senate and House of Representatives would ap-
prove. The US could take this important step toward strengthening
peace and security, strengthening Soviet-American relations, and thus
reinforce some of the positive statements made in the US. It seemed to
the Soviets that the Carter Administration could do this if it wished.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The Soviet Union had tabled a draft treaty banning all nuclear
weapon testing. Surely the Secretary was aware of it, and Gromyko
would not repeat its provisions. It was now before the appropriate in-
ternational organizations.
The Secretary said with respect to the two treaties we had already
signed, that, as he had indicated yesterday, he had urged the Chairman
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to take positive action to
ratify these treaties.2 The Chairman had indicated that he would take
the necessary steps to move Congress to act. In addition, the Adminis-
tration will indicate its support for this ratification, so as to assist in
urging that Congress take prompt action in the near future. The Secre-
tary said he would be less than frank if he did not tell Gromyko that
there will be some in Congress who will ask why these treaties should
be signed, in view of the fact that a comprehensive test ban treaty was
being urged by the Administration. The comprehensive test ban could
be strongly supported by the administration and he believed that this
would be an indication of our wish to cooperate with the Soviet Union
and strengthen our bilateral relations.
Gromyko suggested that the Secretary explain to those who do not
understand that these agreements do not run counter or contradict the
other one.
The Secretary said that we will argue that these agreements are
steps on the way to a comprehensive test ban.
Gromyko said it would be good if progress were achieved. He
would also point out that their own instruments (national means) here
in Moscow had so far registered even weak explosions.
The Secretary was sure that our efforts to get ratification would be
aided if both our countries were clearly cooperating toward achieve-
ment of a comprehensive test ban.
Gromyko suggested that we not only cooperate on the technical as-
pects of verifying peaceful nuclear explosions, but also make the coop-
erative work much more intensive than it was now.
The Secretary said he found this idea very interesting. He would
point out, however, that we had grave concerns for allowing exceptions
for peaceful nuclear explosions. The reason for that was that it was al-
most impossible to conduct peaceful explosions without weapons-
related benefits. Therefore, we favored elimination of all nuclear
explosions.
2 A day earlier, Vance had told Brezhnev that the U.S. was “moving promptly to se-
cure Congressional ratification of the Treaty on the Threshold Test Ban and the Treaty on
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions. What we accomplish during our meetings here would help
us in the ratification of those treaties.” This conversation is printed in full in Foreign Rela-

Comprehensive Test Ban
Gromyko asked what exceptions the Secretary had in mind. After
all, there were provisions for verification. He would suggest that those
who shouted the loudest in the US be sent along as observers on PNE
verification assignments.
The Secretary agreed that verification was one of the matters that
needed to be pursued further. However, experts in the area said that
even with verification it would be possible to develop information that
was contrary to a comprehensive test ban. Therefore, he would suggest
that we have our respective experts get together for bilateral discussion
of this subject in the near future.
Gromyko did not believe there would be any insuperable obstacles
in the way of resolving this problem. One should not forget that all
along in the course of discussing these matters on a bilateral basis the
Soviets had proceeded from the premise that there was a significant
difference between weapons testing and PNE. It was for this reason
that they had signed the two treaties. He would suggest to the Secretary
that we should avoid taking any step that would turn us backward.
One could find skeptics on any question. He supposed one could even
find someone who would maintain that Earth was not turning around
the sun, but that it was the other way around.
Smirnov said that this was probably asserted by those experts who
did not want to see that kind of treaty signed. He pointed out that this
was a specific technical problem. “Let your experts come and see, they
could even take the top off the cylinder of the explosive device to make
sure that it was not a weapon.” (The Secretary asked Gromyko if he
agreed; Gromyko did not reply.)
Gromyko said that, put in other words, the sooner the US Govern-
ment obtained ratification of these treaties, the better. If that were done,
there would be nothing but applause for both sides.
The Secretary said he would be happy to respond. If we could agree
upon a satisfactory CTB treaty, we would be very much in favor of
signing it with the Soviet Union, even though others did not sign it
initially.
Gromyko said that if the US was ready to accept the idea in prin-
ciple, he would suggest that the two sides agree to hold bilateral discus-
sions at the level of experts. He asked when the US would be prepared
to begin.
The Secretary consulted with Mr. Warnke, who informed him that
we could do so very rapidly. He would accordingly inform Gromyko
and would assure him that it could be soon.
Gromyko said that Mr. Warnke had given the Secretary good ad-
vice. The Soviet side would await advice as to when the experts would
be ready.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
BAN ON NEW WEAPONS SYSTEMS
Gromyko said he would briefly touch upon a question the Secretary
would be familiar with—possible conclusion of a treaty or agreement
on banning new types of weapons or weapons systems of mass de-
struction. The Soviet Union had raised this question in all seriousness
some time ago. It had hoped that the US would also emphasize the im-
portance of this question and would join in working on the problem.
From time to time, representatives of past administrations had sporadi-
cally touched on this subject, perhaps sometimes at Soviet initiative, at
other times on their own accord, and had told the Soviet Union of their
views in this regard. An exchange of views had taken place in the CCD
in Geneva and in the United Nations in New York, but these discus-
sions had been of a very general nature. At the same time, some serious
discussions were held in Geneva. At first, the US reaction had consisted
in asking the Soviets question after question and in evading discussion
of specifics. Gromyko noticed that and had been amazed at such an ap-
proach. Then, probably after those who had asked the questions real-
ized that this could not go on endlessly, another question was asked—
what was meant by new types of weapons systems? Soviet repre-
sentatives found themselves forced to name several such types, stating
that theirs was by no means an exhaustive list, and that representatives
of all other countries were equally free to name what they felt could be
weapons of mass destruction. What serious man could deny the exist-
ence of this serious problem? Should we simply permit rocks to roll
down the mountain without our doing anything to stop them?
Surely we should attempt to take steps to restrain all countries
from developing new types of weapons of mass destruction; otherwise,
everything that had been accomplished; most notably in the field of
strategic arms limitation, would become worthless. If we were on the
one hand to attempt to limit strategic arms, while others produced new
types of weapons of mass destruction, this would be tantamount to the
right hand not knowing what the left hand was doing. He did not know
whether he had expressed his thoughts clearly, but it should be clear
that the United States and the Soviet Union should combine their ef-
forts. If that were done, other nations would join in, and that would
benefit the general cause of world peace and the peoples of our coun-
tries. Gromyko hoped the Secretary would not think that the Soviet
Union was pursuing some sort of advantage or political capital in this.
He thought that a solution that would benefit all would be facilitated
by developing cooperation between our two countries, provided, of
course, that the United States was interested and willing. The Soviets
would even be prepared to consider the question of concluding sepa-

Comprehensive Test Ban
rate agreements banning the development and manufacture of radio-
logical weapons, taking into account the interest in this question which
was displayed by the US side. Repeated contacts on this matter had al-
ready taken place. It had also been discussed in the UN General As-
sembly. This was a major question, one that had significance not only
for today, but also for the future.
The Secretary said he would respond briefly by saying that we had
found on the basis of experience that for arms control agreements to be
effective, they had to be precisely defined and capable of verification.
Quite frankly, we had problems with the Soviet proposal because of its
broad and general nature. It would be difficult to deal with. However,
we continued to be interested in banning specific weapons categories,
such as the radiological weapons Gromyko had mentioned.
Gromyko said that when the US was ready to engage in specific dis-
cussion of this concrete issue, it should inform the Soviets accordingly.
As for the Soviet draft treaty which appeared to the Secretary to be gen-
eral in nature, in the context of exchanges of views already held at the
level of experts, some specific information was developed. He would
suggest that the Secretary take a look at these materials. Soviet experts
had named some very specific weapons categories. He would ask the
Secretary to signal him when the specialists were ready to exchange
views.
PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS
The Secretary agreed. He wanted to say before we got too far away
from the issues of non-proliferation and CTB, that agreement on a com-
prehensive test ban without an exception for peaceful nuclear explo-
sions would do much to stop proliferation and discourage others from
following India’s example. He feared that if an exception were per-
mitted for PNE, we would soon find other threshold countries.
Gromyko said the new treaty would require careful discussion and
drafting but, completely to preclude PNE—could that really be done?
Smirnov said the time would someday come when Americans, too,
would realize the benefits of PNE for national economic purposes.
Soviet scientists had suggested using PNE to provide storage
space for wastes and for other purposes. He repeated his suggestion
that an expert be assigned to monitor a peaceful explosion for verifica-
tion purposes. An expert could always determine by examining the ex-
plosive device whether it was a weapon or not. He pointed out that the
Soviet Union had also made use of conventional explosives for peaceful
purposes. There were no technical difficulties here, only a desire was
needed for verification to be effective.
Gromyko recalled some films that had shown PNEs. Any expert
who could not assure himself that an explosion was not carried out for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
weapons purposes either did not understand the subject or did not
wish to see an agreement of this sort. He recalled that a few years ago a
representative of the United States had talked with him about the pos-
sibility of using PNEs to dig a new Panama Canal. He asked if the US
did not expect that PNEs might be very advantageous in the future.
The Secretary responded that he was familiar with the suggestion
for construction of a new Panama Canal. The project had been exam-
ined in great detail and we had come to the conclusion that the results
of digging a canal in this manner would be unacceptable—PNEs would
produce fallout dangerous to people in the area. Consequently, the
plans had been abandoned. We also had acquired a great deal of expe-
rience in testing PNEs, but had concluded that such explosions pre-
sented environmental dangers. We had also concluded that the prob-
lem of weapons-related information were quite real. One of the
problems that arises with the weapons aspect was the fact that it would
be necessary closely to examine the explosive device itself. This created
many problems.
Gromyko suggested that the Secretary inform him when the US side
would be prepared to enter into discussions of all the questions arising
in this connection.
The Secretary agreed.
Gromyko suggested that several groups of experts could examine
the non-political questions involved.3
[Omitted
here
is
discussion
unrelated
to
peaceful
nuclear
explosions.]
3 Vance summarized this conversation with PRC Ambassador Huang Chen on
vol. XIII, China, Document 25.

Comprehensive Test Ban
154.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Underground US Nuclear Weapons Test Program for the Second Half
of Fiscal 1977
With regard to the test program proposed by ERDA2 for the
second half of Fiscal 1977, I recommend:
1. a review of the present US policy for tests near the 150 kiloton
limit established by the Treaty on the Limitation of Underground Nu-
clear Weapon Tests,3 and deferral of a decision regarding REBLO-
CHON and SCANTLING—the two proposed tests near this limit—
pending the completion of such a review. The current policy of al-
lowing tests at design yields of up to 150 kilotons in face of the actual
yield limit of 150 kilotons specified by the Treaty is defective because it
allows tests with an unacceptably high risk of violating the Treaty. A
more prudent approach should be adopted. The best approach appears
to be limiting tests to devices having a maximum credible underground
yield no greater than 150 kilotons;
2. an interagency study of the military utility and the arms control
implications of developing and deploying nuclear weapons with in-
sertable nuclear components, and, pending completion and review of
this study, deferral of a decision on the conduct of the KNIGHTHEAD
test in support of such development. I am concerned about the adverse
aspects of this technology with regard to:
(a) our non-proliferation and other arms control goals, since it
would lower and blur the nuclear threshold,
(b) the security against theft of the small and highly portable re-
movable nuclear components, and
(c) degradation of conventional capabilities if the weapon is to
function in this mode as well as in the nuclear mode;
3. deferral of a decision regarding BEAFORT and DANBO pend-
ing comments and decision on the interagency study regarding the
2 See Document 150.
3 Or the Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT), signed by the U.S. and the Soviet Union

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not to request the ERDA to initiate a phase 3 program this month,5 such
a deferral should not materially affect a future positive decision re-
garding a nuclear warhead for SM–2. I am not persuaded by the ERDA
representatives’ certification that DANBO has significant technology
implications over and above those established for the SM–2 as a justifi-
cation for carrying out this test.
Paul C. Warnke
4 The Ford administration issued National Security Decision Memorandum 341 on
November 24, 1976. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, National Security Decision
and Study Memoranda, Box 1, NSDM 341)
5 Not found.
155.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 2, 1977
SUBJECT
Underground Nuclear Weapons Test Program for the Second Half of FY 1977
(FULCRUM II) (U)
(U) I have reviewed and approve the draft Memorandum for the
President on FULCRUM II.2 The “Recommendations” section of the
memorandum should reflect that:
—The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff recommend specific approval of the detailed test program for the
second half of FY 1977 (FULCRUM II) as proposed by the Adminis-
trator of ERDA.3
(SRD) If recommendations by the Secretary of State and the Di-
rector of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency are forthcoming
as now reflected in the draft memorandum, then I desire that the
2 Not found.
3 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
following comments be incorporated in the Memorandum to the
President:
—The DoD believes that current TTBT test policy correctly reflects
US obligations under the TTBT. Further, the policy provides an oppor-
tunity for further review, as warranted, of each test near the 150KT
threshold prior to granting final detonation authority. The proposed
FULCRUM II tests are in accord with present test policy. We do not
concur that any tests be deferred on the basis of yet-undetermined
policy revisions. Doing so would be equivalent to unilateral assump-
tion of a lower threshold than agreed to by us or observed by the USSR.
—The proposed tests which ERDA has designated as possible
SM–2 warhead candidates should not be deferred or deleted from FUL-
CRUM II. As I indicated in my memorandum of April 6, 1977, which
accompanied the NSDM 341 study, no decisions have yet been made
with regard to warhead production nor to request ERDA to initiate en-
gineering development of an SM–2 warhead. These issues are currently
being addressed within the DoD. Deferral of these tests, one of which
has significant warhead technology implications, would unnecessarily
foreclose on future DoD warhead options (not just for SM–2) and will,
in effect, prejudge the outcome of the SM–2 study.
—The insertable nuclear component (INC) test, KNIGHTHEAD, is
designed to establish the technical feasibility of the INC concept. The
test should not be deferred. While DoD has not requested engineering
development of INC for a specific system, the concept remains of great
interest for possible future warhead options. The INC concept has the
potential to provide enhanced nuclear safety and warhead security
with a reduction in operational costs.
(C) The ongoing CTB discussions make it appropriate to move our
testing program along, avoiding delays. Our program should establish
as many warhead options as possible should they be required for our
national security in the future. This does not imply an accelerated test
schedule, and I understand that the draft memorandum does not pro-
pose one.
Harold Brown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
156.
Letter From the Acting Director of the Energy Research and
Development Administration (Fri) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 9, 1977
Dear Dr. Brzezinski:
The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA)
has reviewed the recommendations of the Director, Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, set forth in a memorandum to you dated April
[Omitted here is a brief history of 1974–1976 deliberations on nu-
clear testing.]
Redefining the yield upon which the threshold is based in the
manner recommended by ACDA would unilaterally and significantly
lower the yield threshold to which the United States could test and
would be asymmetrically unfavorable to the United States. [2 lines not
declassified] ERDA and DoD testing prior to the effective date of the
Threshold Test Ban Treaty was based on the ability to test up to
a design yield of 150 kilotons after this treaty was implemented.
When testing at design yields up to 150 kilotons, the potential excur-
sions above 150 kilotons are insignificant in comparison [4 lines not
declassified]
[4 lines not declassified] If the ACDA proposal of 150 kilotons max-
imum credible underground yield were accepted, this development
technique could not be performed for certain weapon systems. [11 lines
not declassified]
With regard to ACDA’s comments concerning insertable nuclear
component (INC) warhead technology, the concept of utilizing insert-
able components for safety and security purposes is an old one. [2 lines
not declassified] The recent renewed United States interest in this con-
cept arises from both the added safety and security that could be
obtained from separable components and from the economic and oper-
ational advantages offered by convertible weapons. A unilateral deci-
sion to arrest the development of such warheads for United States use
would in no way impede Soviet use of this concept. [4½ lines not
declassified]
Brown, Lance, George Brown, and Turner. A stamped notation at the top of the first page
reads “SEC DEF HAS SEEN.” Harold Brown initialed the top right-hand corner of the
memorandum and wrote “5/10.”
2 See Document 154.

Comprehensive Test Ban
[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
Sincerely,
Robert W. Fri3
Acting Administrator
3 Printed from a copy that bears Fri’s stamped signature.
157.
Memorandum of Conversation1
London, May 9, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
UK
Foreign Secretary Owen
Deputy Under Secretary Hibbert
Mr. Ferguson, Principal Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary
France
Foreign Minister DeGuiringaud
Political Director DeLaboulaye
Mr. Andreani, Director for European Affairs, Foreign Ministry
FRG
Foreign Minister Gencher
State Secretary Van Well
Mr. Terfloth, Foreign Ministry Press Spokesman
Mr. Weber, Foreign Ministry Interpreter
US
Secretary of State Vance
Assistant to the President Brzezinski
Assistant Secretary Hartman
Mr. Hunter, NSC Staff
Mr. Dobbins (Notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
meeting occurred at 10 Downing Street. The memorandum of conversation is scheduled
to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Comprehensive Test Ban
DeGuiringaud said that this was a subject of extreme sensitivity to
France. While he understood the American reasons for proceeding,
among which was an effort to embarrass the Soviets, he wished to reit-
erate what he had told Vance2 and his President had told President
Carter,3 which was that France could not envisage any adherence to
such a ban at this stage.
Owen said his government saw the problems involved but would
be willing to see a ban of U.S. and Soviet tests and would like to be asso-
ciated with the discussion. At the same time, he said, his government
recognized the French position and that of China.
Vance said that one of the most difficult issues in negotiating a
comprehensive test ban with the Soviets would be the issue of peaceful
nuclear explosions. The U.S. had indicated to the Soviets that it be-
lieved that a fundamental aspect of such a treaty would be a ban on
such explosions. There was not any way to prevent the use of such ex-
plosions to develop military technology.
DeGuiringaud wondered whether the U.S. believed that nuclear
explosions could serve any legitimate non-military purpose. Vance re-
plied that the U.S. had given this considerable thought and study. Ex-
tensive experiments had been conducted in the 1960s, under Project
Plowshare,4 on both the technology and economics of peaceful nuclear
explosions. The results of these studies were quite negative on both
counts. He did not think that the Soviets had looked at these problems.
The U.S. was quite willing to share its data.
Owen suggested that perhaps states such as France and China
should be asked to accept a ban on peaceful nuclear explosions
without, initially, at least, necessarily associating themselves with a
2 Not found.
3 Earlier that morning, Carter and Giscard had met at the French Ambassador’s res-
idence in London. Regarding a CTB, Carter explained that “we have called for a joint test
ban with the Soviet Union, without France or China for a period of 2–3 years. During that
time, we would like others to join. We have a few tests we would like to do. The Russians
do, too. We won’t permit a stop to military testing, and let PNE’s go on, since there really
is no difference from this point of view. We will move as far as the Soviets in reducing
nuclear weapons, ending tests, and limiting new systems. There has been great Soviet
progress on design and development of new weapons. He hoped we could get them to
reverse this process, and a test ban is part of it.” According to the record of the conversa-
tion, Giscard replied that “some subjects should be saved for the Four [UK, U.S., French,
and German talks].” (Memorandum of Conversation, May 9; Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Staff Material, Meetings File, Box 75, Subject: Box 1 (II)) The Carter-Giscard
conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe.
4 Established in 1957 by scientists at the Atomic Energy Commission and the Uni-
versity of California’s Radiation Laboratory, Project Plowshare explored the technical
feasibility of using peaceful nuclear explosions for industrial purposes.

Comprehensive Test Ban
comprehensive test ban. This might help get the Soviets to accept a ban
on peaceful nuclear explosions.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
158.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Keeny) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 18, 1977
SUBJECT
The Meaning of “Yield” in the Treaty on the Limitation of Underground Nuclear
Weapon Tests
The May 9, 19772 letter to you from the Acting Administrator of
ERDA regarding the review of U.S. testing policy recommended by Mr.
Warnke in his memorandum of April 29, 19773 raises a number of ques-
tions which should be part of the recommended review, and on which
ACDA will defer further comment at this time.
The ERDA letter also raises a serious question as to whether there
is agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on the
meaning of “yield” in the Treaty on the Limitation of Underground
Nuclear Weapon Tests. The letter implies that an understanding exists
between the United States and the Soviet Union on the meaning of
“yield” to the effect that the United States would draw no distinction
between “design” and “actual” yield. This Agency is unaware of any
communication by the United States to the Soviet Union or of any
agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on this
subject.
The question of the definition of yield will presumably become
public during the pending Senate ratification hearings on this Treaty. If
the Soviet Union were to challenge the proposed “design” yield defini-
tion, the United States could find itself in an embarrassing position
and Turner.
2 See Document 156.
3 See Document 154.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
since the ordinary meaning of the term “yield” in the Treaty context
would appear to be “actual” yield.
Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr.
Acting
159.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
137685. Exdis USSALT Two also for Mission, USIAEA. Subject:
US–UK Bilateral Discussions on Comprehensive Test Ban. Ref: London
1. Summary. US and UK
On June 3 in preparation for forthcoming US–USSR and US–
USSR–UK discussions on a comprehensive test ban. Initial round will
be between US and USSR beginning June 13, 1977. UK desires to be in-
volved at earliest date possible and will join with US and USSR after in-
itial round. It was agreed to continue US–UK bilaterals; next set is ten-
tatively scheduled for last week in June. The channel for all exchanges
preparatory to this meeting was agreed to be Edmonds for the UK side
and Davies for the US side. Press statement for release during or after
conclusion of US–USSR discussions was worked out on ad referendum
basis. UK Del expressed general agreement with tentative US position.
End summary.
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Moscow, USNATO, Bonn, Paris, the Li-
aison Office in Peking, the Mission in Geneva, USUN, and Vienna. Drafted by Pierre
Corden (ACDA/MA); cleared by Homer Phelps (PM.DCA), Duff (ERDA), Robert Squire
(OSD), Frank Murphy (JCS), John Marcum (NSC), and Lewis MacFarlane (S/S); and ap-
proved by Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA). In a June 1 memorandum, Brzezinski informed
Carter that British Prime Minister Callaghan had thanked the President for allowing his
government to participate in the CTB negotiations. At the bottom of the memorandum,
Carter wrote “I see no reason for delaying Britain’s immediate involvement. Get US &
UK together before meeting with Soviets. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
the CTB talks between the United States and the United Kingdom which had been held in
0725)

Comprehensive Test Ban
2. UK Delegation, consisting of John Edmonds, FCO; Victor Mack-
len and Michael Harte, MOD; and Anthony Reeve and Drake Seager,
UK Embassy, met on June 3, 1977 with a US Delegation chaired by
ACDA Assistant Director Thomas D. Davies. The meeting covered a
number of issues concerning the forthcoming discussions with the
USSR of a comprehensive test ban.
3. Edmonds stated UK objectives for the meeting as:
(A) To implement full support of President Carter’s objective of
achieving a comprehensive test ban;
(B) To agree on an appropriate time for the UK to join the US–
USSR discussions beginning on June 13;
(C) To get a fuller understanding of the substance and tactics of the
US position for the bilaterals beginning on June 13;
(D) To ensure that the UK views are made known for those bilat-
erals; and
(E) To seek agreement on a Western approach to negotiating a
CTB.
4. Edmonds summarized UK CTB position as follows:
(A) The UK has consistently supported an adequately verified
comprehensive cessation of nuclear explosions, including nuclear ex-
plosions for peaceful purposes;
(B) The UK wishes to be fully associated with the negotiation of
such a ban, and therefore wishes to be brought into the discussions at
the earliest possible stage;
(C) A moratorium on testing is acceptable if it is in binding form
and of fixed duration, and is intended to lead to a CTB treaty;
(D) The timing of the beginning of a cessation of explosions is im-
portant for the UK;
(E) Any security difficulties for the West need to be minimized;
and
(F) The UK reserves the right to express itself on any issue that is
discussed bilaterally between the US and the USSR.
5. Davies said the US position had not yet been established, but is
likely to include the following points:
(A) A comprehensive cessation of nuclear explosions would be
embodied in a multilateral treaty, but would not require adherence of
the PRC or France for entry into force;
(B) The treaty would prohibit nuclear explosions for peaceful pur-
poses as well as “weapons” tests;
(C) In addition to a “supreme interests” withdrawal clause there
would be, in connection with a Review Conference, a provision en-
abling parties to withdraw after about five years;
(D) The US is considering verification by national technical means,
including for this purpose the UK seismic assets; by international ex-
change of seismic data; by use of secure seismic instrumentation within
the USSR and US; and by some form of on-site inspection; and
(E) After agreement is reached among the US, UK and USSR on
key elements of a CTB treaty, these would be referred to the CCD for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
elaboration in treaty form. Trilateral consideration of a number of
issues would continue among the US, UK and USSR at the same time
that multilateral work was proceeding.
6. The US side made clear that the US position was still prelimi-
nary, in particular with respect to what elements of verification would
be included in the negotiating position and what would be required in
the final analysis, and with respect to form and timing of a cessation of
testing.
7. Edmonds agreed that adherence of the PRC and France for entry
into force of a comprehensive ban was not necessary, and that the UK
envisions a multilateral treaty open to all nuclear and non-nuclear
weapon states. While such a treaty was being negotiated, a halt to
testing could be arranged by the US, UK and USSR with an open invita-
tion to France and the PRC to join. He thought the PRC was a problem
for the USSR to handle, and that although the UK position on adher-
ence was in fact the same with respect to the PRC and France, the UK
did not consider the situation the same; i.e., it intended to establish
some channel of communications with the French on this subject.
Davies agreed on contacts with the French and added that such com-
munications should be low key, with no pressuring involved.
8. The US side asked what the UK had in mind regarding a binding
agreement for test cessation before the entry into force of a treaty in-
volving the non-nuclear weapon states. Edmonds said the UK envi-
sions an interim treaty. The US side said it has in mind a more informal
arrangement (i.e., parallel announcements of intent), bearing in mind
that a formal agreement of the type described by the UK would, by law,
require the approval of Congress. It was left that these two possibilities
could be the subject of later discussions. The UK side was asked
whether there were any reasons that testing could not be halted imme-
diately. Macklen responded that, from the MOD point of view, they
would like to complete one more warhead test, which has now been
moved up six months to March of 1978. They are confident that they
can meet this test date. However, the UK side realized that a political
decision could be taken to end testing sooner, and it is prepared to ex-
amine any date for a test cessation at the time the question arises.
9. On nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, Edmonds said the
UK has no flexibility at all, the only question being the tactical one of
how and when this is made clear to the USSR. The US side said it sees
the prospect of a prohibition of nuclear explosions for peaceful pur-
poses, as well as weapon tests, as a major opportunity to influence and
constrain NPT holdout states. Edmonds agreed.
10. It was agreed in principle to have bilateral discussions before
each round of trilateral discussions, and to be flexible with regard to
subject matter (of both a technical and a “technical-political” nature) for

Comprehensive Test Ban
these meetings. Tentative agreement was reached to have the next US–
UK bilateral in Washington the last week in June, with the agenda
open. The channel for all exchanges preparatory to the meeting was
agreed to be Edmonds for the UK side and Davies for the US side. The
UK will join the US–USSR discussions at the beginning of the second
round.
11. The two sides agreed that the bilateral and trilateral talks
would proceed on a confidential basis, with no external observers
present, and that the Delegations should be kept small. It was also
agreed that there would be a series of meetings, with breaks in between
whose length would be established on an ad hoc basis. With regard to
venue for the trilaterals, there was discussion of Washington, London
or neutral cities such as Geneva or Vienna (see para 14 below). Chair-
manship would be on a rotating basis. Each party would keep its own
records.
12. Edmonds said that the Prime Minister would like to announce
the entry of the UK into the discussions when this takes place. For
briefing NATO, Edmonds said their present thinking is to tell NATO
shortly before the Prime Minister makes his public statement, with
Paris and Bonn perhaps receiving earlier notification. Davies suggested
that, in general, NATO be provided joint briefings by the US and the
UK as the discussions proceed.
13. Edmonds was given a list of the Soviet Delegation coming to
Washington for the US–USSR bilaterals and the UK Embassy has been
given a list of the US Delegation.
14. US and UK sides have subsequently agreed ad referendum to
following text of announcement to be issued during or after conclusion
of US–USSR discussions. Final UK response is expected shortly, and
USSR is being consulted. Begin text: following exploratory consulta-
tions, the US, the UK, and the USSR have agreed to enter into discus-
sions with a view to the negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty.
The first round of these tripartite discussions will take place in Geneva
beginning July 13, 1977. End text.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
160.
Letter From the Acting Director of the Energy Research and
Development Administration (Fri) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 24, 1977
Dear Dr. Brzezinski:
Subject: Preparations for Trilateral Comprehensive
Test Ban Negotiations
I understand that we have just completed exploratory bilateral dis-
cussions with the Soviet Union on comprehensive test ban treaty issues
and that we are preparing for bilateral talks with the British before en-
tering into the trilateral negotiations. I wish to reinforce Paul Warnke’s
statement in his 20 June report2 to the President on this subject that it is
very important that we finalize our U.S. negotiating position before the
bilateral talks with the British. I realize that you also are much aware of
the urgency and are planning to have an SCC meeting of agency prin-
cipals on this subject during the last week of June. It is for that reason
that I would like to register the ERDA position on the key CTB issues
which are still being debated in varying degrees between agencies.
PNE
You will recall our letter to you of February 17, 19773 on the PNE
accommodation issue. This continues to be a matter of primary concern
to ERDA because of our strong convictions that there is no way to pre-
clude military benefits to any state allowed to conduct nuclear explo-
sions under a CTB regime. Our concern in this matter has been rein-
forced by the efforts of the PNE oriented Soviet Delegation during the
recent exploratory talks. The Soviet exploratory proposals concerning
constraints on PNE device development and standardization would
not preclude large military benefits and would not in fact prevent de-
vice design testing of key components and features of nuclear explo-
sives. The key test objective of determining yield would remain un-
controlled and in any case the Soviet proposal would not prevent the
so-called standardized PNE devices from being used as nuclear weap-
ons against military targets. It appears we should agree that there is no
known way to accommodate PNE under a comprehensive test ban.
right-hand corner of the memorandum and wrote “6/28.”
2 Not found.
3 See Document 147.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Verification
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
There must be agreed and emplaced, the best possible verification
system. It must be capable of the highest degree of certainty that explo-
sions can be properly identified and categorized. This will require max-
imum upgrading of our current National Technical Means in all pos-
sible test environments. National means must be supplemented with
the required number of tamperproof seismic observatories to form an
effective network internal to the Soviet Union and rights must be pro-
vided to perform mandatory on-site inspections which would act as an
effective deterrent to clandestine explosions. Even a few surreptitious,
very low yield, explosions could permit weapon design improvements
and permit the maintenance of high quality weapon design and design
surveillance teams.
Negotiating Tactics and Cessation of Testing
I remain concerned over the continuing trend in other agencies to
establish negotiating objectives designed to reach tactical agreement on
only the key elements of a CTBT and take them into the CCD for devel-
opment of treaty text through multilateral negotiation, while, at the
same time, it is indicated that a cessation of testing or a moratorium
could be declared during such a multilateral negotiation.
It is our conviction that such an arrangement could lead to a cessa-
tion of testing, under conditions and at a time, when it would not be
possible to verify that clandestine nuclear explosions are taking place.
Certain member states of the CCD have consistently maintained
that national technical means alone will provide adequate verification.
This position was reestablished by the Soviet Union during the explor-
atory talks. The Soviets and the Swedes have already tabled draft treaty
texts in the CCD to which the U.S. could not agree.4 There is danger in
involving the CCD too early. It is essential that the U.S., UK, and USSR
reach full agreement on the details of verification prior to involving the
CCD in multilateral negotiation of a treaty text. In fact, if it is intended
to declare a cessation of testing concurrent with multilateral negotia-
tions in the CCD then it would be preferable to refer a tripartite treaty
The Soviets proposed that compliance would be verified by each signatory’s “own
national technical means of control, in accordance with the generally recognized rules of
international law.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770061–
The Swedes proposed that compliance would be verified by “inspection on its territory or
territory under its jurisdiction, such inspection to be carried out in the manner prescribed
by the inviting party.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770055–
0918)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
text and protocol containing agreed-upon verification details to the
CCD for negotiation. This text would be used as an interim treaty
during any cessation of testing. I understand that the UK Delegation
urged that we consider reaching a binding agreement before any cessa-
tion of testing and that as indicated in the report to the President, Dr.
Morokhov, the head of the Soviet Delegation, expressed his personal
view that a moratorium during multilateral negotiations could have
the adverse effect of removing the urgency of completing the treaty and
cause other countries to hold back because they already have a U.S.–
USSR cessation. I consider it essential that the detailed verification
system be installed and operating at the time any bilateral or trilateral
cessation of testing starts.
Duration
Finally, on duration of the treaty, it should be established that in
addition to the Supreme Interest withdrawal clause there should be a
provision establishing a Review Conference every five years with the
option to withdraw at that time.
I will be prepared to discuss these ERDA positions on the CTB
issues in greater detail during the forthcoming SCC meeting.
Sincerely,
Robert W. Fri5
Acting Administrator
5 Printed from a copy that indicates Fri signed the original.

Comprehensive Test Ban
161.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Underground Nuclear Weapon Test Program for the Second Half of FY 1977
(FULCRUM II)
ERDA has requested approval of its nuclear weapons test program
for the second half of FY 1977 (FULCRUM II).
As proposed, FULCRUM II includes tests related to the develop-
ment of warheads for new strategic and tactical bombs, the M–X, cruise
missile, and improved eight-inch artillery shell and other tactical sys-
tems, together with several related advanced development tests for
R&D purposes. (An ERDA summary of FULCRUM II is at Tab A.)2 This
program was not designed to implement an accelerated test schedule,
and it is recognized that it might have to be modified or terminated de-
pending on your decisions regarding cessation of testing and negotia-
tion of a CTB agreement. All agencies agree that FULCRUM II should
be approved, subject to resolution of three disputed issues:
Proximity of Test Yields to the 150 Kiloton Threshold. The design
yields of two tests in FULCRUM II are at or near the Threshold Test Ban
Treaty (TTBT) limit, and State and ACDA have recommended that you
defer approval of these two tests pending completion of a review of our
policy regarding tests near the 150 kt limit. Harold Brown objects to de-
ferral of these tests, arguing that our current testing policy is consistent
with our TTBT obligations. He notes that this policy provides for fur-
ther interagency review, as warranted, of each test near the threshold
prior to granting final detonation authority.
This matter was exhaustively reviewed on an interagency basis
under the previous administration, and a testing policy was adopted
which permits ERDA to test at design yields up to 150 kt by estab-
lishing stringent review procedures in order to reduce the probability
of actual yields in excess of this limit. (Additional details are provided
at Tab B.)3 We have reviewed this policy and feel that it reduces this
risk to an acceptably low level while ensuring against asymmetries
with regard to the Soviet testing program. This issue is peculiar to a
the memorandum.
2 Not attached.
3 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
partial test ban, and we see no purpose in reopening it at a time when
our agencies should be concentrating on negotiating a complete prohi-
bition on testing. Consequently, we recommend that you approve these
tests.4
Standard Missile-2 (SM–2). Two tests, BEAFORT and DANBO, are
related to development of a nuclear warhead for the SM–2, a naval air
defense system included in a counter to possible Soviet cruise missile
threats to our fleet. Originally, however, SM–2 was a tactical ABM, and
for this reason these tests are opposed by ACDA and State—as an un-
fortunate precedent undermining the ABM Treaty.
Harold Brown is in a bind. He feels the SM–2 (designed in the mid
1960’s) is obsolete and has indicated that he is not convinced that “the
military value of the SM–2 is worth the costs—financial, doctrinal and
political.” He feels that the high altitude cruise missile threat can be met
quite well by other systems. However, because of Navy pressure, he
has gone along with ERDA’s request for the tests to keep options open
should new studies change his mind. OMB objects on programatic
grounds and believes DOD should decide what it wants before testing
warheads.
Since the option to proceed with SM–2 will remain even without
the tests, and given the other considerations, we recommend deletion
of the BEAFORT and DANBO tests from FULCRUM II.5
Insertable Nuclear Warheads. The final issue concerns ACDA’s rec-
ommendation for deferral of a test, KNIGHTHEAD, which is related to
development of insertable nuclear components for naval weapons. De-
fense opposes deferral of this test, noting that it is of great interest for
possible future warhead options and could enhance nuclear safety and
warhead security with a reduction in operational costs. This concept
would permit storage of the nuclear components in a single area of a
ship and could effectively increase its conventional firepower since it
would permit conventional use of firing positions and magazine
storage currently reserved for nuclear weapons use. However, this de-
velopment would also make many conventional weapons into poten-
tially nuclear ones. This could have serious arms control implications
since it would complicate verification of any future limitations on nu-
clear weapons for naval systems. As a result, ACDA has recommended
that you defer approval of KNIGHTHEAD pending an interagency
study of the military utility and arms control implications of devel-
oping insertable nuclear components. We recommend that you ap-
4 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
5 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “deletion” next to it. He also
wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.

Comprehensive Test Ban
prove the test but require the study ACDA has requested prior to even-
tual decision on production of such components.6
[5 lines not declassified] They have made it clear, however, that they
strongly support your objectives and are prepared to do without this
test, if necessary. We recommend that you approve this test subject to
the conditions (treaty conformity, safety, press arrangements, etc.)
which have been agreed in our previous tests of their devices.7
Neutron Weapons. As a final point you should be aware that FUL-
CRUM II includes proof tests of enhanced radiation warheads for
LANCE and a new eight-inch artillery shell. I recommend that you
permit ERDA to complete these tests in order to maintain flexibility for
your decisions on production and deployment of these weapons in the
context of a review of our theater nuclear strategy.8
Subject to your decisions, I will prepare an appropriate memo-
randum to the agencies concerned.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
162.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
155109. Exdis—military addressees handle as Specat Exclusive.
you. Quote. NATO 06260. Subject: Warnke Briefing on CTB Discussion.
Summary: ACDA Director Warnke briefed the NAC June 27 on the
June 13–16 US-Soviet exploratory talks regarding comprehensive test
ban, noting in particular differences on PNEs, verification, and dura-
tion. The text of this report has been approved by Mr. Warnke. Action
cret; Exdis. Sent for information to all NATO capitals; the Secretary of Defense; the U.S.
Commander in Chief, Europe; the U.S. Naval Military Representative to the Supreme
Headquarters of the Allied Powers, Europe, in Belgium; the Commander-in-Chief, At-
lantic Command, Norfolk; and the U.S. Liaison Office to the Supreme Allied Com-
mander, Atlantic, Norfolk. Drafted by Eric Newsom (EUR/RPM); cleared by Homer
Phelps (PM/DCA) and James Timbie (ACDA); and approved by James Thyden (S/S).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
requested: Suggest Department repeat to AmEmbassy Moscow, all
NATO capitals, and appropriate military addressees. End summary.
1. Briefing on the US-Soviet exploratory discussions regarding a
CTB, which took place in Washington June 13–16, Warnke said the at-
mosphere was cordial and positive. The talks were very preliminary, in
anticipation of US–UK–USSR negotiations but were wide-ranging, cov-
ered key issues, and identified five important problem areas:
A) While both sides agreed that a CTB could make a real contribu-
tion to controlling the nuclear arms race and to non-proliferation, the
US referred to them as “comprehensive nuclear test ban” talks and the
Soviets referred to them as talks on “a general and complete prohibi-
tion of nuclear weapons tests,” the term used in the draft treaty sub-
mitted by the Soviets to the CCD at Geneva.
B) While both agreed that the talks should be conducted in a man-
ner that would elicit maximum support from other countries, the So-
viets wished to work out substantially full text of a possible treaty in
trilateral talks. The US on the other hand wanted to develop only the
key elements in the trilateral talks and then to elaborate a treaty in mul-
tilateral negotiations at the CCD.
C) The Soviets maintained that peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs)
are important to the Soviet economy, that a ban on PNEs would be in-
consistent with Article 5 of the NPT, and that technical means are avail-
able to insure that military benefits are not derived from PNEs. The US
on the other hand believed that a CTB must prohibit PNEs, and that no
valid claim could be made that nuclear parties to the NPT were prac-
ticing discrimination by not providing nuclear technology benefits if
they themselves had concluded PNEs had no such benefits and would
be foregone. Not to prohibit PNEs, in the US view, would encourage
proliferation and serve as a pretext for other countries to emulate the
example of India. The US believed that there is no technical way to pre-
vent either side from deriving military benefits from PNEs.
D) Regarding duration, the US and USSR agree that nuclear tests
could be suspended on a trilateral basis for a certain time. However,
there are differences regarding the length of time before withdrawal
provisions could be invoked. The US preferred a longer period than
does the USSR.
E) On verification, the Soviets stressed national technical means,
mentioned willingness to exchange seismic data, and also noted the
possibility of a type of voluntary on-site inspection by challenge,
whereby the challenged party could either agree to on-sites or take ac-
tion as it sees fit to satisfy the challenge.
2. In summing up, Warnke noted that PNEs seemed to be the big-
gest problem, that questions of verification remained to be worked out,
and that differences on duration did not appear to be insurmountable.
Trilateral CTB discussions, including the UK, would begin on July 13 in
Geneva.
3. Pauls (FRG) asked whether the US considered harmless or at
least tolerable small-scale tests that could not be detected by seismic
methods. He also asked about the relevance of Soviet interest in cra-

Comprehensive Test Ban
tering PNEs and about Soviet interest in standardizing and harmon-
izing the design of devices for PNEs to facilitate verification. Svart
(Denmark) asked about the genuineness of Soviet interest in PNEs for
the Soviet economy and possible differences among USSR officials in
this area.
4. Warnke said a great deal of work still had to be done before the
US could determine what would be satisfactory to verify a CTB. At the
same time, verification had to be considered from the standpoint of
both a suspecting country and a country that might be tempted to
cheat. While the US was an open society, the Soviet Union had the
problem of potential defectors and would have to be extremely cau-
tious not to place itself in a position where there is even a small chance
of its being found undeniably to be cheating on a CTB agreement. He
said the US had mentioned the possibility of tamper-proof unmanned
devices to improve seismic detection capabilities, and would be ex-
ploring such possibility further with the Soviets. As to the use of PNEs
for cratering, Warnke said the US believes that such use would be
greatly constrained by the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and this might
gradually limit Soviet interest in retaining PNEs for cratering. The So-
viets had expressed interest in standardizing PNEs and foregoing any
improvements in devices used for PNEs, as well as in facilitating
on-site inspection and outside participation in all stages of PNEs.
Warnke acknowledged that there might be differences among Soviet
officials regarding the utility of PNEs, but added that the head of the
Soviet Delegation appeared to have a deep interest in PNEs. End text.
Bennett.
Unquote.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
163.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Instructions for Trilateral CTB Negotiations
Following our bilateral CTB discussions with the British and So-
viets, the SCC has reviewed remaining issues in preparation for tri-
lateral CTB discussions, which begin next Wednesday2 in Geneva. This
session is expected to last about two weeks, and there is general agree-
ment that we should continue the exploratory approach you author-
ized for our bilateral talks,3 deferring firm decisions on verification and
moratorium questions pending further exploration of Soviet flexibility
on these issues.
This is particularly important in the verification area since we be-
lieve we should determine essential verification objectives and insist on
accomplishing them, rather than using verification as a bargaining
chip. If we establish excessive verification goals which would be re-
laxed in subsequent negotiation, we run the risk of generating criticism
as to the adequacy of the agreement in a crucial area.
We have prepared a proposed letter from you to Paul Warnke at
Tab A which is consistent with this approach and with your marginal
comments on Warnke’s recent CTB report.4 You may wish to give it to
him at your meeting on Monday.5
In addition, Harold Brown would like to add the proviso that we
should reach agreement with the Soviets on verification before we
would agree to a moratorium or a suspension of tests. State, Paul
Warnke and I believe that in this exploratory stage when we do not yet
have an official Soviet reaction on the question of a moratorium, it is
premature to begin imposing conditions. We have not even decided we
want one.
We believe you should keep your options open and reach a judg-
ment on this question in the context of deciding on our overall position.
Accordingly, the letter to Paul would have him stress the importance of
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner an unknown hand
wrote “All actions (Presidential annotations) completed per D.A.”
2 July 13.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
5 July 18.

Comprehensive Test Ban
verification but make no linkage one way or another to a moratorium.
If you would like Harold’s condition included in the letter, we will re-
vise it.
leave as is6
revise
The other issues covered in Paul’s instructions enjoy a consensus
in the SCC, at least at this stage.
Political Aspects. The Soviets can be expected to take advantage of
any opportunities to use the CTB to drive a wedge between us and the
Chinese and, to a lesser degree, the French. This is what lies behind
their suggestion of an agreement that would expire after 18 months if
France and China do not join. In view of the difficulties such a guillo-
tine approach could generate, particularly as we try to normalize rela-
tions with Peking, we recommend that Paul Warnke be instructed to
probe Soviet views more vigorously on this issue in the trilateral talks.7
Moratorium. Soviet Delegation Chairman Morokhov did not have
instructions on this issue when Warnke raised it with him last month,
and Paul is instructed to pursue it without commitment and subject to
your decision (above) on linking it to verification.
Relationship to CCD and SALT. The Soviets were not very receptive
to our approach of asking the Conference of the Committee on Disar-
mament (CCD) to negotiate the CTB treaty text as soon as trilateral
agreement is reached on so-called “key elements.” However, since
CCD involvement would be helpful in enhancing widespread adher-
ence to the treaty, we recommend that we continue exploring this ap-
proach, but indicate that we would want full elaboration of all issues of
national security importance prior to placing the negotiations before
the CCD.8
We are also concerned about the linkage between CTB and SALT.
The relationship of these two efforts will need to be considered in the
context of possible expiration of the Interim SALT Agreement,9 but we
recommend that Warnke keep the trilateral CTB discussions (and dele-
gations) separate from the SALT and CCD discussions at this point.
Soviets Statements on PNEs. The Soviet suggestion on PNE verifi-
cation could substantially reduce the military risks in permitting
6 Carter checked the “leave as is” option and wrote “But emphasize verification.”
An unknown hand wrote “Done” in the right margin.
7 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote “We need 3 years.”
8 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote “I’m not sure about this. Cy should get
PRC opinion on worldwide approach—informally from Huang.” An unknown hand
wrote “Done” in the right-hand margin.
uled to expire on October 3.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
PNEs, but a treaty allowing any PNEs would lose much of its non-
proliferation value. Since there is still a possibility that the Soviets
eventually will yield on this issue, we recommend that we continue to
press hard at present for a ban on PNEs while remaining attentive to
Soviet ideas on PNE verification.
On-Site Inspection (OSI). Although OSI would have little technical
verification value, a provision in the CTB treaty for on-site inspection is
believed to have considerable political value. The Soviets have offered
a voluntary provision, and there is general agreement that we should
attempt to build10 on this provision with the objective of obtaining the
strongest possible commitment from them in this area. We recommend
that Warnke explore alternative formulations with this objective in
mind prior to determination of our negotiating position.
Black Boxes. Our recommendation is that Warnke should continue
at present to explore black boxes with the Soviets but that the SCC
should more exhaustively explore their cost and utility, possible offset-
ting improvements in our national means, and the practicality of eva-
sion scenarios, prior to making a final decision.11
The Next Stage
We anticipate that the principal outcome of this next round of ex-
ploratory talks may be a decision to begin formal trilateral negotiations.
We can handle this in a way that either maximizes or minimizes the po-
litical impact. Paul will seek instructions on this point.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the instruction letter to Paul Warnke at Tab A.
10 Carter corrected the spelling of the world “built” here by writing a “d” over the
“t.”
11 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote “Check w/Press.” An unknown hand
wrote “Done” in the right-hand margin.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Tab A
Letter From President Carter to the Director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke)12
Washington, July 11, 1977
To Paul Warnke
In the trilateral CTB discussions which begin on July 13, I want you
to continue the exploratory approach that I outlined in my letter of June
13,13 with the following specific objectives:
—Explore Soviet views on the political aspects of a CTB, with par-
ticular emphasis on avoiding a participation and review formulation
that would be contrary to our bilateral interests with France and the
People’s Republic of China. You may indicate that a shorter duration of
perhaps three or four years would be acceptable if a satisfactory ap-
proach on this issue can be worked out.
—Determine whether the Soviets have an official response to your
exploratory question regarding the desirability of suspending nuclear
explosions at an early stage of the negotiations. I will want to review
their response before making a decision on this issue.
—Indicate that in the US view, we should reach full agreement tri-
laterally on all issues of national security significance, before for-
warding these key elements to the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament for negotiation of a complete treaty text.
—Continue to stress the importance the US attaches to adequate
verification. In this context you should:
• Reaffirm the US position that PNE’s should not be permitted
under a CTB, and comment on Soviet PNE verification proposals.
• Express the view the installations of internal networks of secure
seismometers in the US and USSR could contribute to increased confi-
dence in compliance with a CTB and seek Soviet views on that matter.
• Explore alternative formulations to the Soviet on-site inspection
proposal, with a view toward trying to get as strong a commitment
from them as possible, and indicate that all rights and functions of the
inspection teams should be agreed explicitly.
The SCC will continue its analysis of our CTB verification capa-
bility and requirements. I will want to review this analysis and the re-
sults of your discussions before making further decisions on these
issues.
Depending on the course of your exploratory discussions, I would
be prepared to enter into formal trilateral negotiations for the develop-
ment of a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions. You should con-
12 Secret.
13 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sider this issue with the British and the Soviets and seek instructions on
the substance and timing of any announcement.
I am encouraged by the progress you have made and want you to
continue to devote high priority to this effort. In this regard, you should
ensure that our CTB discussions proceed separately from the ongoing
SALT negotiations and the meetings of the Conference of the Com-
mittee on Disarmament in order to ensure adequate emphasis on this
objective.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
164.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, and Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, July 19, 1977
SUBJECT
SCC Work Program for Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) Discussions
The SCC Working Group should continue its review of verification
issues, taking into account developments in the ongoing trilateral CTB
discussions, with the following specific tasks:
—By August 1, prepare an analysis of the incremental contribution
of unmanned seismic stations to our national technical means, begin-
ning with an analysis of the cost, location and contribution of one sta-
tion or array, and including increasingly larger numbers of stations and
arrays as appropriate.
—By August 1, prepare an analysis of the technical feasibility,
utility, risks and costs of CTB evasion scenarios. This analysis should
include an evaluation of the implications of the improved method for
estimating the yield of nuclear explosions from seismic data.
At the request of the President, Frank Press will establish an ad hoc
scientific group to review and evaluate the responses to the above tasks
prior to their consideration by SCC.
In addition, the SCC Working Group should:
Warnke, George Brown, Turner, and Fri.

Comprehensive Test Ban
—By August 15, prepare a safeguards plan concerning measures
that could be taken under a CTB to adequately maintain our nuclear
weapons design capability and the reliability of our stockpiled
weapons, and to ensure readiness to resume nuclear weapons testing, if
necessary. This should include an analysis of the facility and test site
maintenance that would be required, and the types of experiments that
might be conducted under a CTB.
—By August 15, review our current and planned national tech-
nical means, including options for further improvements, and develop
a proposed interagency management plan to ensure the effective utili-
zation of all government resources in monitoring a CTB agreement.
David Aaron
165.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, August 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Report on Trilateral Consultations on a Comprehensive Test Ban
We have recently concluded two weeks (July 13–27) of consulta-
tions with the Soviets and British in Geneva on the question of a com-
prehensive test ban. This initial round of trilaterals, like the bilateral
discussions held in Washington with the Soviets in June,2 was explora-
tory and somewhat tentative in nature. Nonetheless, the three delega-
tions proceeded quickly beyond a general discussion of objectives and
negotiating procedures to an intensive and highly purposeful exchange
of views on the major substantive issues.
The question of peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs) was clearly the
dominant issue of the round, and the one which U.S. and Soviet posi-
tions diverged most sharply.3 The Soviets devoted most of their en-
ergies to making their case for a PNE exception, and were reluctant to
deal with other matters in comparable detail. All three Delegations
presently regard the PNE issue as, by far, the most serious obstacle to
an agreement. It could also become a critical bottleneck, with the So-
2 See Document 159.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
viets unwilling to adjust their positions on less central matters until the
PNE issue is resolved.
Despite the concentration on PNEs, the initial round gave us an
opportunity to probe Soviet thinking on the other substantive matters
covered in your instruction letter of July 11,4 including such verification
measures as secure, internal seismic networks and on-site inspections
as well as such political/legal issues as the adherence requirement for
entry into force, duration, and withdrawal provisions. Although the
Soviets consistently stood by the provisions of their draft CTB treaty
covering these matters, the consultations gave us a better impression of
where they may eventually be flexible.
The British were a positive factor in the talks, reinforcing our posi-
tions effectively on key matters while taking exception with us infre-
quently and only on minor issues. The Soviets see this as a two-sided
negotiation which, with the convergence of U.S.–U.K. positions and
close coordination between the U.S. and U.K. Delegation,5 it really is.
Both the British and the Soviets expressed reluctance to accept our
suggestion that the first round of formal negotiations be held in
London this Fall. They both expressed a preference for Geneva on the
ground that their facilities in Geneva were more adequate for their
purposes.
The three Delegations have agreed to resume the trilaterals in Ge-
neva on October 3 and to remain in close contact during the interval
preceding the next round.
The following is a summary of the major issues covered during the
initial round of trilaterals.
Peaceful Nuclear Explosion
Discussions on PNEs focused on two principal questions; whether
it is possible to carry out PNEs without acquiring military benefits and
whether non-proliferation objectives would best be served by a PNE
ban or a PNE accommodation.
On the first question, we explained in detail our position that PNEs
would inevitably provide military benefits, no matter how intrusive the
arrangements designed to constrain those benefits. In this connection,
we pointed out that a PNE program: would (a) provide the infrastruc-
ture to the state carrying out the program to maintain personnel and fa-
cilities specialized in the design, fabrication, and use of nuclear explo-
sives at a substantially higher level of competence and readiness than
4 See Tab A, Document 163.
5 The U.S.–UK discussions held before the trilateral talks are reported in telegram

Comprehensive Test Ban
would be the case if all nuclear explosions were banned; (b) provide in-
formation on the effects of nuclear explosions that would assist in the
design and protection of weapon systems; and (c) facilitate assessments
of the reliability of a state’s stockpile of nuclear weapons, whose explo-
sive design features could parallel or be identical to design features of
the explosives used in the PNE program. In addition, we indicated that
we were unaware of any reliable means of verifying that design im-
provements were not being introduced while conducting PNEs, but
emphasized that, even if device standardization could be guaranteed,
this would not eliminate the other military benefits enumerated above.
The Soviets, however, took a more narrow view of military ben-
efits, claiming that such could be precluded by freezing explosive de-
vice design and by prohibiting diagnostic measurements of explosions
and by verifying that each device used in the PNE program conformed
to certain specified parameters (in this connection, mentioning as ex-
amples total yield, fission yield, and the ratios of amount of selected ra-
dioactive debris products). Morokhov, head of the Soviet Delegation,
repeatedly sought to draw us into a technical examination of how de-
vice improvement could be effectively precluded. We resisted those ef-
forts, indicating that we did not consider it promising to get involved in
the technical consideration of proposals which, even if feasible and
practicable, did not even purport to deal with a number of important
military benefits (e.g., maintenance of nuclear explosive device “infra-
structure”) that we had identified. It should be noted that their pro-
posals as stated would not assure that some device development was
not being carried out.
On non-proliferation, the Soviet side contended that a ban on all
nuclear explosions would be resisted by non-nuclear weapon states
wishing to receive the benefits of PNE technology and would give
some of those states the excuse that only indigenous nuclear explosive
development would enable them to realize those benefits. On the other
hand, we maintained that non-nuclear weapon states have showed
little interest in PNEs, and that a number of critical states that have not
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty would almost certainly reject a dis-
criminatory agreement which permitted only existing nuclear powers
to carry out nuclear explosions.
It is still difficult to predict how firmly the Soviets will maintain
their position on PNEs. Morokhov, who represents the Soviet agency
responsible for PNEs, has certainly made every effort to demonstrate
inflexibility. He has claimed that all Soviet government agencies are
agreed on the need to preserve PNEs, that the USSR cannot afford to
give up a technology that will make a major contribution to the national
economy, and that there will be no CTB treaty without PNEs. The ques-
tion remains, however, whether the Soviet political leadership will

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
permit the alleged potential benefits of PNEs to stand in the way of an
objective to which the Soviets have long been committed and which
could have important effects on U.S.-Soviet relations as well as global
non-proliferation efforts. Interestingly, the Soviet military Delegate
volunteered to our military Delegate informally that military benefits
would accrue from PNEs, albeit he minimized their importance. It is
also interesting that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs representatives on
the Soviet Delegation, when asked this question, do not attempt to de-
fend the Soviet PNE position, but rather say that the issue will have to
be resolved at the highest levels.
Our overall impression is that the Soviet government has not made
the political decision to press ahead with PNEs at the cost of aban-
doning a CTB. However, it is clear to us that it will be futile to try to re-
solve the issue of PNEs solely in the context of the trilateral negotia-
tions. Our case will have to be presented at a higher political level. Cy
Vance’s meeting with Gromyko in early September would provide a
good opportunity to demonstrate our firmness on the issue and to ap-
peal to U.S.-Soviet interests that transcend the possible economic value
of PNEs.
Verification
Our presentations on verification were devoted mainly to out-
lining, and seeking Soviet reactions to, our ideas on the installation of
secure seismic stations on U.S. and Soviet territory, and to calling for a
stronger position on on-site inspections than the one contained in the
Soviet draft treaty. On the question of internal seismic stations, the So-
viet side expressed the view that such supplementary verification was
unnecessary in view of the adequacy of national technical means. This
response, however, was tentative and far from a categorical rejection.
They maintained, for example, that the U.S. side had failed so far to
submit sufficiently convincing technical arguments for internal sta-
tions. They did, however, exhibit a good bit of interest in the technical
details we presented. The Delegation has the impression that the So-
viets ultimately will be prepared to accept some number of secure sta-
tions on their territory—although we would not expect them to show
flexibility on this point until the PNE issue is resolved.
With respect to on-site inspections, we pressed the Soviets to go
along with the idea that, once an inspection visit is authorized, the
rights and functions of observers should not be left to ad hoc determina-
tion, but should instead be explicitly agreed upon in advance in an
annex or protocol to the treaty. Although the Soviet Delegation was not
prepared to say so formally, we received informal indications that such
a detailed annex or protocol would ultimately be acceptable. However,
the Soviets continued to emphasize the importance they place on the
“principle of voluntariness,” which, as contained in the Soviet draft

Comprehensive Test Ban
treaty, provides for on-site inspection only if the party suspected of a
violation agrees on the need for an inspection.
Entry into Force and Withdrawal
The Soviets continued to support the provisions in their draft
treaty which requires adherence by all nuclear powers before entry into
force. They also reiterated their suggestion that, upon signature of a
CTB treaty with such an entry into force provision, the U.S., U.K., and
U.S.S.R. should suspend testing for 18–24 months. If by the end of that
period the requirement for entry into force of the treaty was not met,
the three would be free to resume testing.
We pointed out that the Soviet idea was counter-productive in
terms of the objective of encouraging all nuclear powers to join a CTB,
that the scheme would at best result in a short hiatus in US–UK–USSR
testing, and that it would not as effectively constrain non-nuclear
weapons states not party to NPT from developing an indigenous nu-
clear explosive capability. We suggested instead a treaty that would
enter into force without adherence by all nuclear powers, but would
provide for the right to withdraw after about five years. From several
discussions with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs representatives on the
Soviet Delegation, we have the clear impression that the Soviets will
eventually be able to accept something along the lines of our proposal.
Moratorium
As instructed in your July 11 letter, I followed up on the explora-
tory question I had raised with Morokhov during the June bilateral
meetings about the desirability of suspending nuclear explosions at an
early stage of the negotiations. In a meeting of the heads of the two Del-
egations, he again maintained that such a moratorium would serve no
useful purpose, but might instead remove incentives for completing
the negotiations and could thus delay their conclusion. He went on,
however, to state somewhat cryptically that others might decide on a
moratorium “unconnected with the treaty.” I would suggest that we
hold off on the question of a moratorium at the Delegation level until
such time as we have reached trilateral agreement on the key elements
of a CTB treaty. At that time, the Soviets are likely to see the matter in a
different perspective.
Paul C. Warnke

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
166.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, September 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Strategy for CTB Negotiations
General Approach
The strategy suggested in this memorandum has two basic purposes:
—Accelerating the shift to concrete negotiation of practical solutions
with the Soviets;
—Increasing Soviet receptivity to sound solutions which will be ad-
vantageous over the long haul.
We believe we can now foresee the general shape of desirable, and
possibly negotiable, outcomes on the three major issues—peaceful nu-
clear explosions, verification, and participation by France and China.
Moreover, we can credibly portray these solutions as genuinely taking
into account the viewpoints of both sides. To give these approaches the
maximum weight possible, and to ensure that they are given serious
high-level consideration in Moscow, we recommend that you approve
our giving the attached draft memorandum (Tab A)2 to Dobrynin, for
transmission to senior levels in Moscow, as an authoritative statement
of U.S. views and proposals.
Realistically, such a memorandum may not persuade the Soviets
to see all the issues our way because, in fact, we are addressing
problems of great complexity and sensitivity. But the prospects of it
bringing the two sides closer together quickly are great enough, in our
judgment, to warrant the effort. Moreover, such an initiative would, in
the broadest perspective, be consistent with our basic strategy of stimu-
lating productive negotiations with the Soviets on an important arms
was attached to a September 15 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Harold
Brown and Fri which asked for their comments by September 20. In the upper right-hand
corner of Brzezinski’s memorandum, Brown wrote “9/16. MSH—I think it improper that
we are given 2 days to comment on a memo 10 days old. Perhaps this is [illegible] one I
should [illegible] to ZB’s attention. (perhaps [illegible] a cover [illegible]). HB.” Next to
Brzezinski’s signature, Brown also wrote “Walt—I have read the memo for President,
only scanned Tab A. This seems to [illegible] one of the better efforts. What does Gerry
[illegible] think? HB.”
2 Attached but not printed.

Comprehensive Test Ban
control subject—particularly since more time may be required for
meaningful progress on SALT.
Where We Stand
A report on the last round of consultations is attached (TAB B).3
We would add the following comments regarding the present
situation:
—We are now at an important moment of opportunity. Neither side has
locked itself into unbudgeable positions. Even on PNEs, the Soviets are
groping for ideas to make their approach workable.
—But much depends on us. The Soviets, in our judgment, have not
thought through the issues as well as we have. Well-reasoned and fair
proposals given to the Soviets soon could make a crucial difference in
whether we drift into stalemate or whether we lead the negotiations
towards early concrete progress.
—The senior political levels on the Soviet side should now be engaged.
We have had good exploratory discussions with the Soviets. But these
have been somewhat unusual in being dominated by a head of Delega-
tion who is primarily a technical official and—as the head of the Soviet
Government’s PNE program—one who has an understandably strong
personal interest in this particular issue. This could result in undue em-
phasis on preserving PNEs, and also, conceivably, failure to convey to
us fully Soviet feelings on such sensitive political issues as the Chinese
participation problem.
—The timing for the next round is favorable for U.S. leadership efforts. If
we can get the major lines of our approach to the Soviets soon, they will
have several weeks to think through the problems. They will naturally
already have before them an account of the arguments we presented
during the last round. If we waited until October to begin suggesting
approaches for reconciling our differences, we might find the Soviets
arriving in Geneva with little flexibility. An early presentation at a high
level could have maximum impact in getting the two sides lined up in
the same general direction on key issues. And this, of course, is a neces-
sary precondition to meaningful negotiation of precise language on
key issues. The deputy Soviet representative told us at the end of the
last round that he hoped “political decisions” might be made before
October.
Nature of Proposed Memorandum for Dobrynin
In preparing the proposed draft, we have kept several basic con-
siderations in mind:
3 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—We have concentrated on the individual merits of each of the
three main issues—portraying our approach in each case in terms of a
middle ground or a solution which serves both sides’ basic purposes.
We want to avoid a situation of appearing merely to request three
things from the Soviets so that, if they give us something on one of the
issues, they can claim that we owe them on the others.
—We have framed the arguments so that we would be mainly ex-
ploring and advocating key purposes and approaches, rather than pre-
senting detailed formulae. This will permit flexibility and room for ma-
neuver if the Soviets should develop variants or alternatives that have
some merit.
—Finally, we have framed the positions in the memorandum
having in mind that these should be reasonable and attractive enough
to stick with for some time if the Soviets do not come around suffi-
ciently. We will, of course, always retain the privilege of reassessing
any specific elements whenever circumstances seem to warrant.
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions
It seems to us important that we do our best now to get the Soviets
away from insistence on permitting peaceful nuclear explosions. On
the merits, we believe our position of seeking to halt all nuclear explo-
sions is right, and we should do everything reasonable to see that our
arguments are considered at a high political level. But, as we indicated,
given the personal stake of the Soviet Delegation head in his country’s
PNE program, we cannot be certain that our arguments have been
fairly reported up the line in the Soviet bureaucracy.
The main points we should continue to stress are these:
—A PNE program requires an infrastructure of test-experienced
nuclear explosive designers, manufacturing and testing facilities, and
the opportunity for testing which would support reliability estimates
of the weapons stockpile. We believe there is no way to exclude these
significant military benefits from such a program. Therefore, if PNEs
were permitted now under a CTB, whatever the effort at inspection, we
would almost certainly find ourselves and the Soviets competing with
PNE programs in which both of us, sooner or later, would be trying to
derive as much military benefit as possible. It would simply be impru-
dent for either of us not to do so if the other side was conducting PNEs.
Others would recognize what was taking place. Much of the value of a
CTB would be lost.4
—Permitting PNEs under a CTB would, overall, have a negative
impact on our current non-proliferation efforts. It would perpetuate the
4 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this paragraph.

Comprehensive Test Ban
rationalization that there is a valid reason for others to develop their
own nuclear explosive devices. Incidentally, an encouraging report has
recently come in from Joe Nye’s consultations in India:5 senior Indian
officials indicated their opinion that it would be helpful to the Prime
Minister if the U.S. and the USSR agreed to forego PNEs in a CTB.6
To make our presentation as effective as possible, we are sug-
gesting that we include in the memorandum a significant new element
which can credibly be portrayed as responding to Soviet concerns. This
is the suggestion that the treaty, instead of banning PNEs outright and
forever, could reflect that the parties would keep under continuing re-
view whether the military benefits of PNEs can be eliminated. How-
ever, PNEs would not be allowed unless and until mutually acceptable
agreement were worked out. This approach could be a significant
face-saving device for the Soviets, particularly if the preamble reflected
that the treaty did not preclude forever such possible economic benefits
from PNEs as might be realized. This formulation would avoid making
the past Soviet investment in its PNE program look like a complete
waste. As a possible further inducement to the Soviets, we could offer
to discuss with them our experience in developing large-scale conven-
tional engineering techniques which have made PNE possibilities look
even less attractive than earlier.7
By suggesting deferral as a way out, we would also be meeting one
Soviet point which may have some validity; it is probably true, as the
Soviets argue, that a fair number of non-nuclear countries would take
some comfort in the idea that we were keeping open a possibility of
using PNE technology for everyone’s benefit, even if that were a distant
and uncertain prospect.
One final point—if we are looking for an acceleration of produc-
tive negotiations, it would not be promising to pursue the Soviet posi-
tion of permitting PNEs with inspection. Wholly aside from the fact
that such inspection would not eliminate military benefits, it would
precipitate an extremely difficult and time-consuming negotiation. The
inspection procedures would undoubtedly be highly contentious, re-
quiring agreement on technical definitions and detailed provisions re-
garding such factors as access, sampling, device design and emplace-
ment. This task, involving negotiation of inspection procedures to try
to minimize military benefits, would be far more demanding than was
Rajiv Gandhi “needed strong justification for giving up his freedom of action” on the
issue of PNEs “and said that an agreement between the US and the USSR to give up PNEs
under the CTB would help.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
6 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this paragraph.
7 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the negotiation of inspection provisions for the PNE Treaty of 1976
which involved only procedures to confirm that individual explosions
did not exceed the 150-kiloton threshold. Even so, negotiation of the in-
spection provisions for the PNE Treaty required most of two years.
For all these reasons, we believe we can best serve our interest in
moving rapidly toward negotiations and the prospect of sound results
by pressing the Soviets at the highest level to forego a PNE exception in
the CTB treaty, while offering them a significant face-saving ele-
ment—deferral rather than permanent prohibition of PNEs. One pos-
sible straw in the wind: a Soviet military official commented to one of
our Delegation officers in Geneva that the PNE issue might be like the
XVIII Amendment to the U.S. Constitution—drinking was banned but
later permitted by further amendment.8
Verification
The elements of a reasonable verification package might also now
be pressed on the Soviets. We could pick up their willingness to have
on-site inspections whenever there is mutual agreement to permit one.
But we could reasonably insist that there also be agreement on the
rights that inspectors would need to perform their mission effectively.
Similar agreement was elicited from the Soviets in the PNE Treaty.
In addition, we could ask for agreement on a relatively small
number of automatic and secure seismic stations in each of our coun-
tries. The Soviets may not ultimately accept this; but they have not yet
been firmly negative, and it seems worth a try. If we did succeed, it
would be a breakthrough, valuable in and of itself, and also helpful
domestically.9 You will have before you shortly an interagency study
on the value of different numbers of automatic seismic stations, and
this should permit you to decide more precisely on what we should ask
for. We would not, however, have to specify the exact number in the
memorandum for Dobrynin. That could be decided later.
With the Soviets, we could make the pitch that we are meeting
them halfway in not insisting on mandatory on-site inspections—an
historic shift for us. Actually, from our standpoint, it is arguable that
the difference between “mandatory” and cooperatively-arranged in-
spections is largely illusory.10 A provision for cooperatively-arranged
8 Brown lined through the sentence “One possible straw in the wind: a Soviet mili-
tary official commented to one of our Delegation officers in Geneva that the PNE issue
might be like the XVIII Amendment to the U.S. Constitution—drinking was banned but
later permitted by further amendment.” In the right margin he wrote an arrow and said
“I agree fully with the position proposed by US, but not with the Sov officer’s analogy.”
In the left margin he wrote “take out.”
9 Brown wrote “I agree” to the right of this sentence.
10 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this sentence.

Comprehensive Test Ban
on-sites is likely to accomplish about all that any on-site inspection pro-
vision is capable of. In fact, no on-site inspections, mandatory or other-
wise, will accomplish a whole lot if there is not cooperation of the host
government. For example, in remote mountainous terrains of the Soviet
Union, it is hard to imagine how any foreign team could operate effec-
tively over a large area and for a sustained period if the Soviets were
bent on throwing up harrassing obstacles.
Moreover, we are really not likely to ever request an on-site inspec-
tion, “mandatory” or voluntary, just for a fishing expedition—the risk
of coming up with an embarrassing absence of evidence would be too
great—but only when we are confident there has been a violation and
that we could find the evidence if we arrived at precisely the right
place. But, if such a situation were to occur, the Soviets would not be
likely to let us get there, whatever the wording of the treaty. So, in the
end, the right to ask for an inspection would mainly be useful as a fur-
ther inhibition against violations because it would strengthen our hand
in demonstrating—by their refusal to permit an inspection—that the
Soviets had something to hide. (This, of course, is very different from
consulting with the Soviets through private diplomatic channels to try
to resolve an ambiguous situation.)
Entry Into Force
The present Soviet position is that the treaty would come into force
only when all nuclear powers have ratified. The Soviets suggest, how-
ever, that there might be a US–UK–USSR moratorium for 18–24 months
once the negotiations have been completed—with the freedom to re-
sume testing thereafter if all nuclear powers have not accepted the
treaty. A high-level presentation would stress to the Soviets that their
position would inevitably boomerang. The Chinese (and the French)
would reject such crude pressure. There would, therefore, only be a
brief and temporary halt in our own testing; and there would be no op-
portunity for important non-nuclear-weapon states to accept formal
treaty constraints.
We can present our alternative as one which meets the objectives
we both share. If the treaty entered into force for a specified period,
parties could decide at the end of that period whether it was necessary
for them to withdraw. (Although we are prepared to agree to a period
as short as about three years, it would be advantageous at this stage to
speak in terms of roughly five years.)11 After the treaty was in force,
and with the accession of a number of other states, there would almost
certainly be increasing though subtle pressure, over time, on France
11 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of the sentence in parentheses.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
and China. As a result, even if they did not adhere in this period, their
rate of testing might sag even below its already quite slow pace.
Despite the obvious logic of our position, this issue is still worth a
high-level presentation because it is one of extreme sensitivity for the
Soviets and, unless we succeed in bringing the Soviets around, we may
have little to show for our efforts. We could not, of course, join with the
Soviets in their solution involving, as it does, only a testing pause and
creation of a propaganda stick which the Soviets would use against the
Chinese.
Conclusions and Recommendations
In conclusion, we recommend that you authorize us to provide the
attached draft memorandum to Dobrynin for transmission to Moscow
because we believe this could significantly increase the chances of
moving more rapidly toward concrete negotiations, and toward a bet-
ter agreement. We are, of course, quite conscious of the desirability of
not painting ourselves into a corner. We do not believe arguments
along the lines of those in the attached draft would do so.12 And it is
possible that our high-level presentation could open some important
doors for us.
12 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this sentence.

Comprehensive Test Ban
167.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Strategy for CTB Negotiations (U)
(U) The Department of Defense has reviewed the proposed
strategy paper concerning the U.S. position in the Comprehensive Test
Ban (CTB) negotiations.2 We support the general thrust of the paper but
believe that some clarification and modification are required to mini-
mize the potential impact on U.S. national security.
—(S) Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE). We must recognize that a
treaty which does not ban all nuclear explosions by all nuclear powers
is, by definition, not comprehensive. We do not view PNE to be accept-
able in the long or short run; they must be discontinued to preclude
military benefits from the testing of any nuclear explosive devices. We
would expect the Soviets to continue their research, development, and
engineering of nuclear explosive devices, and remain poised to resume
testing at an opportune time. From this, they would be able to acquire
military benefits the U.S. may deny itself. Because of this asymmetry,
we feel that the PNE deferral proposal should contain some form of re-
view after a specified period such as five years. Insistence on a formal
review would better demonstrate that this issue will remain a major
concern of the U.S.
(S) The tone of the memorandum to the President is more opti-
mistic than is warranted. In that respect, I do not agree with the rele-
vance or accuracy of the analogy attributed to a Soviet military official
(page 5, second paragraph).3
—(S) Verification. A related issue is the need, in our CTB strategy,
to address what concessions the Soviets may expect from us if they
agree to terminating PNE. Some aspect of our verification proposal
would be the likely target, since the Soviets would have little concern
about the U.S. resuming a PNE program. The proposed strategy should
specifically state that a technically adequate number of automatic and
secure seismic stations inside the U.S.S.R. are a sine-qua-non of the U.S.
2 See Document 166.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
state “. . . a necessary number of secure automatic seismic observato-
ries . . . ,” not “unmanned, unobtrusive seismic observatories.” The
words “unmanned” and “unobtrusive” could complicate the negotia-
tions. The proposed strategy should further state that on-site inspec-
tions, whether “mandatory” or “cooperatively arranged” remain an in-
tegral part of the U.S. position.
(S) While I fully appreciate the sense of urgency to take advantage
of perceived opportunities in timing, I want to emphasize that an ac-
ceptable long-term resolution has the higher priority. On-going tech-
nical study and development of verification measures are essential but
still incomplete; e.g., what nuclear experiments will be allowed, how
should PNE be defined, what is the value of seismic monitoring, and
what is the value of sub-kiloton testing? I also have reservations about
presenting this package now from the tactical point of view. For ex-
ample, by tabling this paper, we will be in a position of indicating some
“give”—no matter how limited—on the crucial PNE issue. We would
be compromising the on-site issue without assurance of Soviet accept-
ance of the requisite number of seismic stations. An alternative tactic
might be to seek resolution with the Soviets of the verification, duration
and participation issues, positioning the talks so that only Soviet insist-
ence on PNE blocked agreement. At that point, we might have a better
prospect of inducing Soviet acceptance by proposing the face-saving
PNE deferral proposal. In any case, this is the kind of question which
ought to be discussed at an SCC or an NSC meeting prior to presenta-
tion to the Soviets and not handled strictly on paper, since there are
both substantive technical and tactical issues that should be addressed.
(S) Finally, I presume that action will be taken to consult with our
British colleagues on this matter.
(U) My views on the above are shared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.5
Harold Brown
5 In a September 21 memorandum to George Brown outlining their views on the
CTB negotiations. Slocombe and Joint Staff Director Vice Admiral Patrick Hannifin dis-
cussed the proposed strategy for the CTB negotiations. A typed notation on the memo-
randum indicates that Smith initialed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s approval

Comprehensive Test Ban
168.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
SALT Procedures; MBFR; Rhodesia; Mutual Criticism; CTB
PARTICIPANTS
US
Secretary of State
Ambassador Paul C. Warnke
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Dr. Marshall Shulman
Mr. Leslie H. Gelb
Mr. William G. Hyland
Mr. Walter Slocombe, Dept. of Defense
LTG. Edward L. Rowny, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Mr. Mark Garrison, EUR/SOV
Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter
USSR
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. Sytenko
Mr. Chernyshev
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test ban.]
CTB
The Secretary wanted to touch briefly on one area of our various
joint working groups, i.e., the one that concerned the comprehensive
test ban. As the President had indicated this morning,2 this was an area
in which he was very much interested and was desirous of early
progress. The situation as the Secretary understood it now was that
there were three main points of difference between us which had to be
Box 8, Gromyko to US, Sept. 1977. Secret. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s Con-
ference Room. Drafted by Krimer; and approved by Twaddell. Vance describes the
meeting with Gromyko in Hard Choices, pp. 60–61.
2 Earlier that day, Carter told Gromkyo that “an area where we should demonstrate
to the world at large that we were capable of cooperating was the complete cessation of
ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
overcome: (1) The date on which the proposed treaty would come into
force, (2) Various verification problems, and (3) Peaceful nuclear explo-
sions. Regarding the date of entry into force of the treaty, the United
States had suggested a treaty of limited duration, which would become
effective upon signature. The reason was that once the treaty became
effective, even though it had only three signatories—the Soviet Union,
the United States and Great Britain—this would put more pressure on
the French and hopefully on the Chinese to join and become signatories
to the treaty. The Secretary thought that if we waited until other coun-
tries signed the treaty, we would be putting off a necessary and desir-
able action for too long. On the question of verification, the Secretary
had received an indication from Mr. Warnke that this was an issue that
could be resolved in the working group. He believed progress should
be made at the next meeting of the working group. And finally, on the
question of peaceful explosions, as the President had indicated, we
were prepared to provide to the Soviet Union information which we
had gathered in the course of our own investigations of peaceful explo-
sions, should that be considered desirable. Insofar as methods of
dealing with peaceful explosions were concerned, it was our view that
the best and the proper way to handle them was to include a provision
in the treaty banning peaceful explosions, and provide for reconsider-
ation of that issue after a certain date at the request of either party.
Mr. Warnke wanted to say a few words to supplement what the
Secretary had said. What we had in mind was to find some way to pre-
vent the dispute over peaceful explosions from holding up conclusion
of a treaty that would be of great benefit to both countries. The debate
on how to devise measures to prevent a side’s gaining military advan-
tages from peaceful explosions involved some very difficult technical
matters. Therefore, we would suggest that the parties agree to complete
cessation of all nuclear explosions, that a provision to that effect be in-
cluded in the treaty, in addition to a provision in the treaty stipulating
that we would continue to work together to find ways of distinguishing
between peaceful nuclear explosions and weapons-related explosions.
This would leave open the possibility of peaceful nuclear explosions for
the future, except that we would prevent delaying resolution of the
much more important matter in a general comprehensive treaty.
Gromyko said that the Soviet Union certainly attached great im-
portance to such a treaty, and will continue negotiations and do all in
its power to bring them to a successful conclusion. The Soviet Union
did indeed attach signal importance to the question of peaceful nuclear
explosions. In the conditions of the Soviet Union they had tested this
method to an adequate extent, and had come to certain conclusions
about its usefulness. Of course, if they received the information about
US experience that had been promised by the President, they would

Comprehensive Test Ban
study it carefully. The Soviet Delegation at the negotiations which re-
sume in Geneva on October 3 will have the necessary and proper in-
structions. He agreed that conclusion of a treaty would be of great po-
litical importance worldwide, but at this time he would not associate
himself with what the Secretary had said about a treaty without an ex-
ception for peaceful explosions. In any case, he would suggest that we
continue negotiating and seek agreement in this field.
Gromyko thanked the Secretary for the discussions they had held
during this current meeting, and also for the talk with President Carter.
He was not saying good-bye because he and the Secretary had agreed
to meet in New York City at least once next week, perhaps even twice,
The Secretary wanted to reciprocate to the Foreign Minister on be-
half of himself and his colleagues. It had been a great pleasure to have
Mr. Gromyko here in Washington.
169.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 1, 1977
SUBJECT
CTB Negotiations
It was reported in paragraph 31 of reporting cable SECTO 10014,
dated September 30,2 that Cy Vance discussed the CTB with Secretary
General Waldheim. My understanding is that Cy indicated US will-
ingness to entertain an exception for Soviet PNEs to the CTB. The cri-
teria had to do with a limited number/purpose of projects, and a lim-
ited number of explosions.
I want to express my grave concerns about such an approach. Such
explosions, even in limited numbers, and particularly if protracted over
reported that Vance told UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim that the United States
was “not totally inflexible” about the Soviet Union’s “demand” that PNEs be excluded

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
a period of years, would allow stockpile confidence testing of a sort
which I consider important and which the US would lack. Moreover, I
believe they could allow a small number of development tests of sub-
stantial yield. Such an exception would therefore make it very difficult
to justify a CTB, which I consider otherwise supportable from a De-
fense point of view. Also, I believe that the arms control community
will see this as a gaping loophole, not only for the Soviets but for coun-
tries which are lukewarm or hostile toward inhibitions on their own
nuclear weapons programs.
The formulation of a PNE arrangement that allows the subject to
be reopened after five years, but only through the amendment route,
which gives the US full control over whether PNEs are ever allowed,
has seemed to me to be an acceptable fallback from a complete PNE
ban. It appeals to me as a face saving arrangement for the Soviet PNE
project head who chairs the Soviet CTB Delegation. However, the ex-
istence of this suggestion to Waldheim (which, since he was accompa-
nied by a number of UN officials, will surely be known to the Soviets)
appears to me to make the PNE part of the CTB negotiations very diffi-
cult from the US point of view. I would expect support for the fallback
position of amendment at the end of five years to be harder to obtain
now from the JCS, who are likely to see the Vance suggestion to Wald-
heim as the likely end-point of such a fallback process.3
Harold Brown
3 Brzezinski later wrote to Harold Brown that “Cy Vance is aware of the problem
and has undertaken remedial action, including a phone call to Waldheim correcting his
original statement and reaffirming our position that PNEs should be banned under a
CTB. The Soviets may still learn of Vance’s original comment, but would have to weigh it
against the President’s strong representation that PNEs must be banned, in his meeting
with Gromyko and in his UN address.” (Memorandum From Brzezinski to Harold

Comprehensive Test Ban
170.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
239666. White House for Brzezinski and Schlesinger. Subject: In-
structions for CTB Delegation.
1. The following Presidential instructions for the trilateral CTB ne-
gotiations have been received from the White House.
2. Begin quote. “In the trilateral CTB negotiations that begin on Oc-
tober 3, I want you to continue presenting and seeking Soviet accept-
ance of our positions on the key substantive issues, and to maintain the
momentum towards a resolution of remaining differences among the
three participants. In doing so, you should be guided by the following
considerations.
3. You should hold firm on our basic position that PNEs should not
be permitted, and while hearing the Soviets out on any new ideas they
may have, be prepared to explain why the accommodation schemes
they have presented are not adequate for eliminating military benefits.
4. As you are aware, in my discussions with Gromyko,2 I offered to
give the Soviets the results of our testing experience which demon-
strates the limited technical and economic utility of PNEs. The SCC will
promptly develop an appropriate presentation and forward it for your
use in the negotiations.
5. If the Soviets propose a formula for including in a PNE ban a
provision for continuing review to determine whether PNEs might be
permitted in the future, you may indicate that we are prepared to give
this serious consideration.
6. You should continue to explore the possible contribution that a
network of automated seismic installations in US and Soviet territory
could make to CTB verification capabilities, describing relevant tech-
nical factors, such as types of instrumentation, site selection, installa-
tion and maintenance. However, you may, as appropriate, indicate that
we do not insist on a large number of such installations.
7. You should continue to press the Soviets to agree, in advance, to
detailed procedures for carrying out on-site inspections, including full
delineation of rights and functions of observers, and should outline our
bilateral and multilateral approach to on-site inspection arrangements.
Drafted by Keeny (ACDA/D); cleared by Eric Fleischer (S/S–O); and approved by
Keeny. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent Immediate to the White House.
2 See Document 168.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
You are also authorized to indicate to the Soviets that we are prepared
to consider ways in which differences might be narrowed between
mandatory and voluntary on-site inspection provisions.
8. We should maintain the position that the treaty should provide
for entry-into-force without the adherence of all nuclear powers, and
that parties should have the right subject to suitable notice provisions,
to withdraw if, after five years, all nuclear powers have not joined. You
may indicate to the Soviets that we are prepared to reduce the duration
provision to three years if in your judgment this will elicit commensu-
rate Soviet moves on other outstanding differences.” End quote.
Christopher
171.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
8586. Limdis USCTB. Subject: CTB Negotiations—Assessment of
NSC For Dr. Brzezinski.
Summary: Principal development of opening week—during
which there were no apparent changes in substantive positions of the
three participants—was distinct shift in Soviet perception of US posi-
tion on PNEs. In the wake of recent high-level meetings with Gro-
myko,2 President’s UNGA statement,3 and hard line taken by US CTB
cret; Limdis; Immediate. Sent for information to London and Moscow.
2 See Document 168.
3 On October 4, Carter told the UN General Assembly that negotiations for a CTB
“are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet
Union. As in other areas where vital national security interests are engaged, agreements
must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all parties as serving a longer-term in-
terest that justifies the restraint of the moment. The longer-term interest in this interest is
to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the
world that the major nuclear weapon Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the
threat of nuclear catastrophe. My country believes that the time has come to end all ex-
plosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—–peaceful or mili-
tary—–and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.” (Public

Comprehensive Test Ban
Del this week, Soviet Delegation now clearly seems to appreciate that
our position on PNEs is firm. Although not necessarily related to this
development, Morokhov’s remarks on PNEs and other issues have
been subdued and defensive. US Delegation plans next week to keep
up the pressure on the Soviet PNE position, while outlining our views
on verification. End summary.
1. In terms of the positions taken by the three Delegations in the
plenary meetings and restricted sessions, first week of talks was rela-
tively uneventful. There were no apparent departures in substantive
positions, and little evidence of Soviet flexibility on any of three major
issues. US and UK Delegations devoted week to elaboration of views
on peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), while Soviets delivered low-
key statements on “political” aspects of PNE questions and verification.
2. Despite routine character of week’s meetings, there seems, at
least for the moment, to have been a shift in the character and tone of
discussions on PNE question. During July round, Morokhov took an
aggressive posture from the start, predicting confidently that “new”
Soviet proposals for eliminating military benefits would solve PNE
issue. There were several indications that Soviets did not believe that
negative position taken by US Del in July reflected a firm consensus in
Washington. Now, however, Soviets seem clearly to recognize that US
position is firm.
3. Chief contributing factor has, of course, been strong line on
PNEs taken by the President both in his meeting with Gromyko and his
UNGA speech. (Both were cited to us by Soviet Deloff as evidence of
firm US position). When US Deloff showed text of President’s state-
ment [to] Soviet Deputy Chairman Timberbaev, latter remarked, “I see
that President Carter has changed his position.” When asked what he
meant, Timberbaev said that President’s early press conference re-
marks indicated that PNEs could be accommodated. Half-jokingly, he
said ACDA must have gotten to him. Deloff replied that there is no dis-
agreement within USG on PNE questions, and that clear position stated
by the President at UNGA reflects strong and unanimous recommen-
dation of all US agencies interested in problem.
4. Aside from President’s position, Soviets seem to have been im-
pressed by hard line taken by Amb Warnke in plenary statements and
private conversations.4 Warnke has emphasized in plenary that, in
view of inevitability of acquisition of military benefits and serious set-
back to non-proliferation efforts that would result from PNE exception,
PNE ban is indispensable component of effective CTB. Warnke has also
expressed the view that it is hard to see how us could possibly be party
4 Warnke’s statement at the opening plenary is in telegram 8405 from Geneva, Oc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to a CTB that allowed PNE. Strong UK statements have effectively rein-
forced US views. By end of week, Soviet Deloff Malev (Septel)5 said So-
viets were struck by firmness of US position on PNEs.
5. In what may or may not be significant, Marokhov’s tone in dis-
cussing PNEs during first week was markedly less assertive than
during previous round. During July talks, Soviet Chairman often used
strong formulations in describing Soviet position on PNEs (e.g., Soviet
government does not conceive of a solution that does not allow PNEs).
At least during this week, he has been noticeably subdued (e.g., Soviet
government sees no reason that PNEs should be banned under a CTB).
6. It is impossible at this stage to tell whether Morokhov’s behavior
can be attributed in any way to PNE positions taken by US in recent
weeks, or whether it reflects any shift in Soviet attitudes. It is conceiv-
able, given high level US-Soviet meetings on eve of present round and
possibility that Soviet leadership has taken time to consider results of
those meetings, that Soviet DTB Delegation has simply not yet received
instructions. Moreover, Marokhov has indicated that he plans to make
further statements on PNE question on Oct 11 and 12 plenaries, and he
may well return to his earlier, assertive posture. Nonetheless, contrast
seems noteworthy, and has particularly intrigued British Delegation.
7. While Delegation will begin next week to outline our thinking
on verification (starting on Tuesday6 plenary with on-site inspections),
we plan, on the PNE question, to continue, in coordination with the
British, to bear down on the Soviet position and to impress on them the
firmness and soundness of our view that a PNE ban is an essential re-
quirement of an effective CTB. We will continue to watch for any evi-
dence (such as possible indication contained in conversation reported
Septel) that Soviets may be interested in exploring solutions that would
involve banning PNEs from outset while keeping open possibility of
permitting them sometime in future. Unless otherwise instructed, we
would not, however, advance any such ideas ourselves.
Warnke
6 October 11.

Comprehensive Test Ban
172.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Keeny) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 11, 1977
SUBJECT
ACDA Comments on FY 1978 Underground Test Program
In response to the NSC memorandum of September 29,2 we have
reviewed the proposed FY 1978 underground test program (CRESSET)
forwarded by ERDA’s September 16 letter to the President.3
The ERDA letter and attachments adequately describe the pro-
posed tests and their relationship to particular weapon systems or
other objectives. There is a need, however, to clarify the number of tests
that the President is being asked to authorize. The proposed program
provide for executing only about 25 tests.
ACDA can concur in an FY 1978 program of 25 tests, which is
roughly the number conducted in FY 1976 and FY 1977. In view of the
TTBT obligation to limit the number of underground tests “to a min-
imum”, ACDA would not favor an expansion beyond 25 tests unless
there were compelling reasons to do so. I recommend, therefore, that
the President’s authorization of CRESSET state explicitly that separate
approval would be required if it is proposed that more than 25 tests ac-
tually be conducted during FY 1978.
In considering which of the 33 devices should be given priority,
ACDA believes that in CRESSET emphasis should be given to com-
pleting development of warheads which are at an advanced stage of
development and which fill a priority requirement. Lower priority
should be given to embarking at this time on new lines of development
which would require two or three years of testing to complete develop-
ment. In a few months we should be in a much better position to judge
the prospects of concluding a CTBT during FY 1978, and the new lines
of development could be examined at that time. This point, inciden-
Brown, and Turner.
2 Not found.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tally, illustrates the value of continuing to review the test program at
six-month intervals as ACDA has recommended.
Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr.
Acting
173.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown
and Secretary of Energy Schlesinger1
Washington, October 20, 1977
SUBJECT
FY 1978 Underground Nuclear Test Program (CRESSET)
The President has approved the underground nuclear test pro-
gram for the first half of FY 1978 (CRESSET I), consistent with the FY
1978 DOD and DOE budget levels, and subject to the following
limitations:
—Approval of the BACKSTAY and KNIGHTHEAD tests is held in
abeyance pending DOD submission and interagency review of a study
of the military utility and arms control implications of insertable nu-
clear components.
—Implementation must be in accordance with existing policy re-
garding testing near the 150 kt limit of the TTBT.
The above approval is conditional upon the outcome of the CTB
negotiations; the United States must be prepared to cease testing if
agreement on a CTB Treaty is reached.
Specific approval of the test program for the second half of FY 1978
(CRESSET II) should be requested by March 1978. The total number of
tests to be conducted during FY 1978 is not to exceed 25.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
and Turner. Harold Brown wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum,

Comprehensive Test Ban
174.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
9319. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Rec-
ommended Strategy.
CTB Message No. 46.
For the President and Secretary of State from Paul Warnke.
1. Summary: I believe strongly that most effective and expeditious
way of promoting concrete CTB negotiations on terms favorable to US
is to (a) recess current round late next week (Nov. 3 or 4); (b) approach
Soviets at high political level as soon as possible after recess to present
package proposal designed to maximize pressure for Soviet acceptance
of PNE ban; (c) begin a relatively brief round (about two weeks) at end
of November or beginning of December to table US package formally
and provide further explanation of it; and (d) resume more detailed ne-
gotiations in latter half of January. This message outlines reasons for
this recommended approach. End summary.
2. After merely repeating previous positions in first weeks of
present round, Soviets have recently made substantial effort to create
impression that they are willing to compromise on some key CTB
issues, particularly on questions of procedures for carrying out on-site
inspections and of seismic stations on US and Soviet territory designed
and operated to provide authenticated seismic data. They have also
said they expect to present new position on question of nuclear weapon
state adherence requirement for treaty entry into force. On central issue
of Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE), however, they have continued
to insist that exception be made for such explosions. On an informal
basis, they have mentioned various schemes which they assert should
meet our concerns about the military benefits of PNE, such as (a) US
access to Soviet PNE designs and devices; (b) joint US-Soviet program
for device development and production; and (c) US supply of devices
for projects on Soviet territory. (It is not clear whether this last idea in-
cludes Soviet supply of devices for US and third countries.) Morokhov,
head of Soviet Delegation, recently returned from consultations in
cret; Exdis; Immediate. Sent for information to London and Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Moscow to say he hoped to get positive new instructions on several
3. In my view, recent Soviet flexibility on such questions as verifi-
cation and entry into force can be attributed, at least in part, to tactical
judgment that their reasonableness on those matters may help per-
suade US to accommodate them on PNEs. They may reason that, by
prolonging round and making progress on verification and entry into
force, they can isolate question of PNEs and maximize pressure on our
position. The three ideas they have floated informally for accommo-
dating PNEs (para two, above) seem designed to entice US into a de-
tailed technical exploration of means to exempt PNEs. While superfi-
cially attractive in terms of the level of intrusiveness involved, all are
seriously deficient on non-proliferation grounds, all are of questionable
practicability, and, as far as military benefits are concerned, they are at
best capable of dividing those benefits between the USSR and US (ideas
two and three) and at worst unable to eliminate unilateral Soviet ben-
efits (first idea).
4. In my judgment, our immediate objective should be to get the
Soviet leadership to come to grips with the reality that we are not pre-
pared to pursue PNE accommodation schemes, that reaching agree-
ment with us on a CTB will require a basic change of Soviet thinking on
PNEs, and that, once the central issue of PNEs is resolved, it will be
possible to find mutually acceptable solutions to remaining problems.
In order to promote that objective, I believe we should (a) recess
present round at end of next week, (b) soon thereafter (i.e. 7–10 days),
make a high level approach to the Soviets, preferably at the Presidential
level, to present US proposals on key CTB issues; (c) resume Geneva
talks for about two weeks to give us an opportunity to table our sub-
stantive package formally and explain it; and (d) resume more detailed
negotiations in latter half of January.
5. Substantive elements of an integrated package would be as
follows: (a) provided the treaty bans all nuclear explosions, we could
accept an obligation to keep under consideration whether PNEs should
be carried out in future. The treaty would specify that PNEs could only
be carried out pursuant to a treaty amendment, which would require
approval by some percentage of treaty parties, including all nuclear
weapon state parties. (b) We would call for an agreed number of auto-
mated seismic installations, or their functional equivalent, on US and
Delegation that “he had just returned from Moscow and that he expected to receive new
instructions about November 1 ‘give or take a day.’ Morokhov said he was certain that
his instructions would be of great interest and value to US and UK Delegations and that
they would enable him to make important statements on PNE as well as entry into force.”

Comprehensive Test Ban
Soviet territory, but without specifying a number at this stage. (c) We
could then accept concept of “challenge” on-site inspections under
which decision to carry out inspections would be made by mutual con-
sent of requesting party and host party, provided procedures for car-
rying out such inspections are agreed in advance in legally binding
form. (d) We would reiterate our position that the treaty should pro-
vide for entry into force without adherence by all nuclear powers.
(e) We would also reiterate our position that, after five years have
elapsed since entry into force and if all nuclear powers have not joined
the treaty, parties would be able to withdraw without invoking the Su-
preme National Interests withdrawal clause.
6. Following are the principal reasons why I recommend the tac-
tical and substantive approach outlined in paras four and five.
(a) The recommended date for recess will give US five full weeks
of negotiations. We have been able to present our case fully, and contin-
uing until the end of next week will enable US to receive and clarify any
new positions the Soviets may take as a result of Morokhov’s recent
consultations in Moscow. Prolonging the round to permit further de-
tailed work on questions such as verification would, in my view, only
put off the date when the Soviets will have to face the central PNE issue
squarely. Moreover, announcing that parties plan to resume in about a
month will ensure that no momentum will be lost and that the public
perception of an impasse will not develop.
(b) We believe strongly that the best means of having an impact on
the Soviet bureaucracy is to present our proposals in a formal, written
way and to do so at a high secret political level. While the Soviets have
already tabled a draft treaty, we have not given them any document
that can serve as a focus for decision-making. Morokhov has formally
requested that we provide such a document. Timerbaev (Soviet Dep-
uty) has stressed to US privately that the best way of getting Soviet
leadership to review its position is for US to make a formal proposal,
and I believe he is right. As far as making our initial presentation at a
high political level, this not only has the obvious advantage of under-
lining the seriousness of the proposal, but it also guards against any
message presented in Geneva being distorted on its way to the Soviet
leadership.
(c) We believe the modifications of our position on PNEs and
on-site inspection will not damage our negotiating posture, but will in
fact strengthen it in certain respects. On PNEs, there is now a degree of
vulnerability in our present posture which could be misinterpreted as
overly rigid and arbitrary—banning forever a conceivable application
of science for peaceful purposes, a technology which the US viewed fa-
vorably a decade ago. A US proposal to include, together with an im-
mediate ban, some reference to the possibility of future reconsider-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ation, would therefore seem entirely reasonable and prudent and,
given the treaty amendment procedure, the possibility for reconsid-
ering the PNE question would exist whether or not explicitly recog-
nized in the treaty. Moreover, the treaty amendment procedure would
give US an effective veto over any future proposal for exempting PNEs.
In reality, acceptance of our modified proposal would amount to ac-
ceptance of a PNE ban. Far from being a US concession, it would reaf-
firm and formalize our position and put US on the strongest ground, in
case we have to stand and fight on that ground for a sustained period.
However, the sooner we can set forth this position, and present it in a
formal and concrete way, the easier it should be for Soviet officials to
pursue a serious reconsideration of the issue. Although we would not
be making a concession from our standpoint, our new proposal could
still be portrayed to the Soviets as a good-faith effort to meet their
longer-range concerns.
(d) On the question of on-site inspections, it was concluded at the
SCC meeting in September3 that “mandatory” inspections have little
utility as a verification measure and, in any event, would create some
serious practical difficulties if applied on US territory. Therefore, ac-
cepting the concept of “challenge” inspection is something we would
wish to do on our own sooner or later. By playing that card now, we
would undercut the argument by the Soviet Delegation (to US and to
the Soviet leaders) that they have been reasonable on all other issues
and now the US must be reasonable on PNEs. It would also show the
Soviet leadership that, if they accept our PNE proposal, we are pre-
pared to show flexibility in areas where they have in the past staked out
strong positions of principle.
(e) By resuming detailed negotiations in mid-January, it would
give US time to develop some of the detailed aspects of our verification
position. At present, Delegation’s guidance on verification is mostly of
a general character and would have to be fleshed out considerably in
preparation for detailed negotiations.
7. We have discussed this approach with the British Delegation,
and they strongly support both the tactical and substantive aspects, as
well as the timing. British feel particularly strongly about recessing by
end of next week and plan to make formal proposal to that effect on Oct
28. They anticipate no significant change in the Soviet PNE position
and believe that prolonging the talks now would convey a signal of
weakness in our PNE stand and would play Morokhov’s game by his
rules.
Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 89, SCC 032, CTB, Negotiating Issues and
Options.

Comprehensive Test Ban
8. As indicated above, Morokhov will probably unveil modified
Soviet positions on a number of issues next week. We would, of course,
want to take his statement into account as we formulate and implement
our approach. Nevertheless, I feel the basic course of action outlined
here would be valid for dealing with most eventualities short of the an-
nouncement of a Soviet decision to accept a PNE ban. Such an unex-
pected development could permit prompt initiation of detailed negoti-
ations. The exact nature of the less desirable but more likely new Soviet
positions could, however, also affect timing. If, for example, the pro-
posals amounted to substantial movement toward US positions, in-
cluding that on PNEs, we might wish to demonstrate our interest by re-
suming soon after Thanksgiving (Nov 28) with only a little more than
three weeks break, and begin detailed negotiations as soon as we have
a detailed position to present. However, if their ideas are less signifi-
cant, we could hold off until about December 5 and then meet for only
one or two weeks for the limited purpose of tabling our proposal.
9. In order to facilitate the development of a package proposal,
should this recommended strategy be approved, the US CTB Delega-
tion will send to Washington separately a draft paper for possible
formal presentation in December.
10. At present time, it appears that, subject to unexpected develop-
ments, we will recess at end of next week (Nov 3 or 4) and agree to re-
sume in about one month. Decision on whether to agree to early (week
of Nov 28) or later (week of December 5) resumption date, or whether
to leave indefinite (“in about one month”) would be taken after Mo-
rokhov statement next week.
11. All US CTB Delegation members concur in this message.
Warnke

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
175.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Soviet Move on CTB
As you know, Dobrynin called Cy Vance today2 to tell him that
Brezhnev will tomorrow announce that the Soviets are prepared to ac-
cept a testing moratorium that would include PNEs in the context of a
CTB treaty. The question is what public stance we should take on the
Soviet move. Depending on when Brezhnev makes his statement,
Cy might address the question at his 11:00 A.M. press conference
tomorrow.
It is clear that Brezhnev will be talking about a moratorium on
PNEs, which is in itself significant. It is less clear from the little Do-
brynin had to say to Cy how this fits with the Soviet position now on
the table. The Soviets could still insist that the treaty permit PNEs and
say that the inclusion of PNEs in the 18–24 month moratorium (during
which all nuclear powers must accede to the treaty for it to go into ef-
fect) would be simply to allow further consideration of agreed modal-
ities for PNEs. Or they could say that the question of PNEs would be
left open in the treaty with the 18–24 month moratorium used to decide
their ultimate disposition. The second of these possibilities obviously
goes further toward our own position than the first.
Your last CTB instruction to Paul3 already includes the possibility
of a treaty which would ban all explosions including PNEs, but provide
for continuing review of PNEs with the notion that if (someday,
somehow) all the problems could be settled, they might then be per-
mitted. You instructed Paul to see if he could elicit a Soviet proposal
along those lines. The Soviets were aware of the idea. Brezhnev’s state-
ment tomorrow looks like their response.
In any event, as I said earlier, Soviet acceptance of extending a test
moratorium to include PNEs, however it might relate to their proposed
treaty, would be a significant move on their part. In our public re-
sponse, we would not want to hail it as a “breakthrough” or greet it
with a shout of joy: we have to have time to see how they will play it
memorandum.
2 No record of this telephone conversation was found.
3 See Document 170.

Comprehensive Test Ban
and what strings might be attached; and steadiness in any event is the
best stance both in dealing with the Soviets and in terms of domestic re-
actions. But—this said—we should certainly greet it as a significant
step and avoid any suggestion that we are downplaying it. Thus, I
think the best line might be to say:
—We regard it as a positive step toward a fully comprehensive test
ban;
—It is a helpful evolution in the Soviet position on a key issue in
the CTB negotiations;
—We will want to give the Soviet statement full consideration in
the context of the proposals and positions that both sides have ad-
vanced in the Geneva negotiations.
176.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Keeny) and the Director of the
Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs (Gelb) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, November 3, 1977
CTB Developments
Summary
Following up on Brezhnev’s 60th Anniversary speech,2 the Soviet
CTB Delegation has presented to our Delegation important proposals
which could provide a way out of the CTB impasse. The essence is that
the Soviets are now willing to accept a three-year halt in conducting
PNEs and are willing to have a three-year treaty banning weapon tests
which would enter into force without Chinese and French accession.
There are still a number of critical points for us which are unclear or not
cret. Drafted by Alan Niedle (ACDA/MA); and cleared by Edward Ifft (PM/DCA),
Cowey, Avis Bohlen (EUR/SOV), Wreathem Gathright (S/P), Shulman, and Louis
Kahan (PM). A stamped notation on the bottom of the first page of the memorandum
reads “CV.”
2 On November 2, Brezhnev announced that he wanted a treaty that banned “nu-
clear weapons tests, so that no such tests will be conducted underground, as well as in the
atmosphere, in outer space and under water,” including a “moratorium on nuclear explo-
sions for peaceful purposes, along with a ban on all tests of nuclear weapons for a definite period.”
(“Address by President Brezhnev Before the Central Committee of the CPSU: Halting the
Production and Testing of Nuclear Weapons [Extract],” November 2, 1977, Documents on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
satisfactory but our initial impression is that we might be able to use
Brezhnev’s proposed framework—a treaty and a protocol on PNEs—as
the basis for future negotiations.
The Soviet Proposal
The Soviet CTB Delegation said in Geneva that the Soviets could
accept a three-year treaty banning nuclear weapon tests which would
enter into force without France and China. A PNE moratorium in the
form of a treaty protocol would take effect simultaneously and for the
same length of time. The treaty (but presumably not the moratorium)
would become of unlimited duration if France and China acceded
within three years. There could be provision for review before expira-
tion or every five years if the treaty became of unlimited duration. The
Soviet proposal stipulated that, after entry into force of the treaty, nego-
tiations would continue for the purpose of reaching a mutually accept-
able solution on PNEs and procedures for their conduct.
On verification, the Soviets rejected US proposals for automated
seismic installations but agreed to consider increasing the number of
national stations to be included in a global seismic network and ex-
pressed willingness to consider measures to guarantee the authenticity
of the data from such a network. They repeated their proposal for
on-site inspections on a voluntary basis, but added that rights and func-
tions of inspecting personnel could be agreed in advance.
Significance of the Soviet Move
The Soviet move is a major step towards our position. Seen in the
context of other recent steps, such as the substantial progress on SALT
during Gromyko’s visit3 and certain other gestures outside the arms
control field, it suggests that the Soviets may want to achieve trilateral
agreement on a CTB in time for a Summit.
—In agreeing to give up PNEs for three years, the Soviets are in ef-
fect conceding that PNEs are not all that vital to them for that period.
(Perhaps this means that they have no major PNE projects slated for the
next three or four years.) This provides an opening for seeking a satis-
factory long-term solution of the problem.
—Dropping the requirement for French and Chinese adherence
was an essential step in order to bring any treaty into sight.
—While Soviet verification ideas are not surprising, the willing-
ness to work out agreed inspection procedures in advance is a step in
the right direction. We will give urgent study to the Soviet suggestion

Comprehensive Test Ban
that authenticated data from national seismic stations be used in lieu of
automated seismic installations.
Initial Reactions
It seems to us that we should be able to accept the basic framework
of the Soviet proposal, that is, a treaty and a protocol. But we would
want to press for certain important elements which either now look un-
clear or unsatisfactory in the initial Soviet presentation.
—Treaty duration and withdrawal now seem the central problems
separating us. The treaty should not automatically collapse if France
and China do not accede in three years since no one can realistically ex-
pect them to do so. Nor should the moratorium on PNEs automatically
terminate if the problem of preventing military benefits from PNEs is
not solved since it probably won’t be. We will therefore want to try to
find some way, consistent with our present position, to have both the
treaty and the protocol continue past the initial period unless a party
takes some special step of withdrawal. Unfortunately, on this point, the
Soviet Delegation seemed to envision just a straight termination of the
treaty and the protocol if the various conditions haven’t been met.
The Delegation did not have the impression that the Soviets had fully
thought through all the ramifications.
—Tying the treaty and the protocol together. Obviously it would
not be acceptable for countries to be able to sign the treaty banning
weapon tests but not accept the protocol banning explosions for alleged
peaceful purposes. The protocol would therefore have to be regarded
as an essential and integral part of the treaty. This would also mean that
the protocol banning PNEs should be amendable only in the same way
the treaty could be amended—with the consent of all the participating
nuclear powers. The Delegation immediately raised these questions in-
formally with the Soviets and the initial response indicated possible
flexibility.
Future Work
There will be a break in the talks beginning this Friday,4 and a re-
sumption on December 5. This should give us ample time to figure out
the best strategy and to prepare ourselves for detailed negotiations in
December. The Delegation will shortly be sending its analysis and
recommendations.
One thing seems fairly certain. It will be very much in our interest
to have concrete proposals and texts to provide the Soviets for the next
round. If we can accept Brezhnev’s proposed framework of a treaty and
protocol on PNEs, we should be in a strong position to press the Soviets
4 November 4.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to modify some aspects of their approach—especially on duration of
the treaty and the PNE moratorium—to bring them more closely into
line with our objectives.
177.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, November 8, 1977
On Friday, November 4th, we held our last trilateral meeting on
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty until December 5.2 Before leaving
Geneva that day, I also had an opportunity to meet with Minister Sem-
enov to discuss the status of our SALT talks.
In both negotiations, the Soviet Delegations have made significant
moves to accommodate our views. Most dramatic, of course, was the
presentation of a substantially revised Soviet position on the banning of
nuclear tests. But on SALT, also, new provisions tabled by the Soviet
Delegation come closer to our ideas on the definition of heavy bombers,
including those which could be equipped with long-range cruise mis-
siles, and on the testing of cruise missiles.
The breakthrough in the Comprehensive Test Ban talks began with
the announcement by Dr. Morokhov, head of the Soviet Delegation,
that he was returning to Moscow over the week-end of October 21 to
24. He had previously suggested some movement on the issue of entry
into force of the treaty without adherence of France and China. On his
return, on October 26, he said he had new positions to present on all
subjects, including that of peaceful nuclear explosions. He explained,
however, that this would have to await a speech by Mr. Brezhnev.
corner, Carter wrote “Good. J.” On November 9, Ambassador Toon informed Vance of a
meeting that he had had that day with Brezhnev, who “wanted to call special attention to
his Nov. 2 statement of readiness to reach agreement on CTB including a moratorium on
PNE’s. Speaking directly, Brezhnev said “it was not easy for us to take such a decision, as
it directly affects our national economic plan, and we expect that the U.S. and the U.K. as
participants in the talks which are underway will in the end respond with appropriate
reciprocity’ so as to achieve agreement on this major issue.” (Telegram 16276 from
Moscow, November 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
2 Warnke’s detailed analysis of this session is contained in telegram 9792 from the
Mission in Geneva, November 4; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Comprehensive Test Ban
On the morning of the Brezhnev speech, November 2, the Soviets
presented a statement at our plenary meeting in which they offered a
PNE moratorium as a Protocol to the treaty.3 The Soviet statement also
agreed to entry of the treaty into force prior to the adherence of the
other nuclear weapons states. On verification, though continuing to op-
pose the automated seismic installations and any mandatory on-site in-
spections, they agreed in principle to pre-arranged procedures for
on-site inspections and to some additional national seismic installa-
tions with provisions which would assure the validity of the data.
The major remaining problem on CTB is the Soviet insistence that
the parties to the treaty “should be relieved of their obligations” if all
nuclear weapons states have not agreed to the treaty by the end of three
years. This is unsatisfactory both from the standpoint of the stability of
a test ban and because of the likely reactions of the French and Chinese
to what they would regard as undue pressure.
I hope that we can put together an American package responsive
to the Soviet proposals, but remedying the defects, to be tabled when
our meetings resume on December 5.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
178.
Memorandum from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Brown) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, November 30, 1977
Subject
Comprehensive Test Ban (U)
1. (S/RD) In view of the importance of comprehensive test ban
(CTB) issues to all aspects of the nation’s nuclear weapons posture, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that greater attention should be given to key
CTB issues within the Department of Defense. Development of a sound
US CTB position will depend to a large extent upon the DOD’s pre-
senting, in the intragovernmental arena, well-conceived positions on
national security and related technical issues. A number of important
questions remain to be resolved before a coherent DOD position can be
presented. Some of these are:
a. What is the national intent with regard to maintenance of the nu-
clear weapons stockpile under a CTB?
b. What low-yield experiments are advisable under a CTB in order
to assure confidence in the stockpile and maintain design expertise in
the laboratories?
c. How should this “permitted experiment” issue be addressed at
intragovernmental and international levels?
d. How is long-term stockpile reliability achieved under a CTB?
(For example, should a small number of standardized warhead designs
be settled upon? Should these designs be modernized? What re-
building rate is necessary? What are the cost and technological pen-
alties of standardizing materials and processes so as to avoid future
change?)
e. Would an extended transition period (several years) at a re-
duced underground test threshold be valuable for redesigning the US
stockpile for maintenance under a CTB?
f. To what degree can new delivery systems and conceptual
weapon systems be adapted to existing nuclear warhead designs
without weapons testing?
g. What measures constitute adequate verification?
h. What are the required CTB safeguards, and what added costs
should be budgeted for them and programmed now?
TS C.T.B. Secret; Restricted Data. A stamped notation in the upper right-hand corner
reads “30 NOV 1977 SEC DEF HAS SEEN.” Underneath the stamp, Harold Brown wrote
“11/30 David McG Walt S,—we should take appropriate action to the extent possible
during the next few days. I agree with the overall ideas, differ on the details. HB.” The
annexes are not attached.

Comprehensive Test Ban
i. What urgent efforts are necessary (while testing is still per-
mitted) for an effective transition into a CTB?
2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that three specific ac-
tions be taken now to accelerate development of a comprehensive DOD
position on these and other important CTB issues, to achieve better
DOD-Department of Energy (DOE) cooperation, and to promote dis-
cussion of these matters at intragovernmental levels:
a. First, and most urgently, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe the
issue of “permitted experiments under a CTB” must be raised at the na-
tional level prior to the departure of the US Negotiating Team for the 5
December plenary session in Geneva. Their concern here is to assure
that US negotiators understand—prior to presenting papers or dis-
cussing the issues with the Soviets—that a CTB should provide for
some low-yield nuclear experiments which, among other factors, can
assist in assuring confidence in the stockpile. This is likely to be a con-
troversial issue within the US Government, but it is believed that it is
critical to national security. Full addressal is already late, but the
United States should not compound the problem by opening new and
more detailed discussions with the Soviets until a generalized national
position on this matter has been given [to] the negotiators. Annex A
contains a proposed memorandum to the Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs raising this issue.
b. Second, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that you establish a
temporary CTB Task Force within the DOD. In their judgment, the
issues are of such breadth and complexity that they cannot be handled
adequately without a dedicated organizational structure. Since the
issues are largely technical and the work focuses on R&D and acquisi-
tion—not just of nuclear weapons, but of delivery systems as well—
they suggest that a representative of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering chair this effort. Other key members of the
Task Force should be from OASD(ISA), OATSD(AE), OJCS, DIA, DNA,
and the Military Departments. Since the DOE is directly involved in
many of the issues, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that DOE be in-
vited to participate in Task Force work. Annex B contains a proposed
memorandum establishing this CTB Task Force.
c. Third, a fully effective working relationship with DOE should be
achieved for continuing, in-depth communication on the issues sum-
marized in paragraph 1 above. DOE has principal responsibility for
many of these issues, and close DOD–DOE cooperation is essential to
effective solution of CTB problems already identified and likely to arise
in the future. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that you take the ini-
tiative by sending the proposed memorandum in Annex C to the Secre-
tary of Energy raising the issue. The memorandum also invites his par-
ticipation in the DOD CTB Task Force.
3. (U) In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the national
security and technical aspects of a CTB are of such importance as to re-
quire significantly increased attention within the DOD and closer
DOD–DOE cooperation. Moreover, they should be addressed as an ur-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gent matter in the Special Coordination Committee prior to resumption
of substantive negotiations.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
George S. Brown
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
179.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, December 3, 1977
SUBJECT
CTB On-Site Inspection
I have read Paul Warnke’s memorandum2 concerning on-site in-
spection which he cabled in from abroad today in response to the con-
clusions reached at the SCC meeting on Friday.3 After further reflection
I have come to the conclusion that Paul’s position is correct. As I under-
stand the technical aspects of the problem as explained by the experts,
on-site verification is essentially cosmetic and, as Paul says, “without
significant practical value”. Further, his point that if we introduce a
mandatory on-site inspection proposal and subsequently fall off that
proposal it would be characterized as a major retreat on our part is well
taken. In addition, the British are taking the same position as that rec-
ommended by Paul, and our taking a mandatory on-site verification
position would require us to split with our British colleagues. In light of
what I have said above I believe we should stick with our British
colleagues.
the memorandum, Carter wrote “Cy—I agree. J.” To the right of the subject line, Brzezin-
ski wrote “resolved Dec. 5th. ZB.”
2 Not found.
3 An undated memorandum attached to the List of Participants for the December 2
SCC Meeting on CTB reads “No summary of conclusions were made for this meeting. But
new instructions were sent to P. Warnke for the conduct of the negotiations.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 90, SCC 043, CTB Negotiating
structions for Warnke are in Document 181.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Attachment:
Memorandum from Paul Warnke.4
4 Not attached.
180.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Instructions for CTB Negotiations
The CTB negotiations will resume on Monday, December 5, in Ge-
neva for about two weeks, followed by a holiday recess until mid-
January. The SCC has completed an analysis of Brezhnev’s recent pro-
posal along with a Working Paper2 on the key elements of a CTB Treaty
which we would plan to hand to the Soviets during the December
session.
The SCC met3 on Friday4 to discuss the key issues in these negotia-
tions. Agreement was reached on a recommended position on dura-
tion, PNEs, and internal seismic stations, but ACDA reserved its posi-
tion on on-site inspection (OSI). To attempt to bridge the gap between
our mandatory and the Soviet voluntary OSI positions, the Working
Group had recommended that we propose a “challenge” OSI formula-
tion that would require some justification for any decision to refuse an
OSI request. I pointed out that in my view there would be little value in
such a provision (it is really not a “challenge inspection” but just a right
to receive an explanation) and suggested that we insist that in addition
hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig I agree with Paul/Cy—Keep black boxes & ‘right to
challenge’ strong. J.”
the Working Paper. (National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disar-
mament Agency, Office of the Director, Standing Consultative Commission and Compre-
mitted Experiments Under Test Ban, December 1977)
4 December 2.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to justification for any refusal of OSI requests each party would be enti-
tled to a small annual quota of mandatory inspections if it found such
justification unsatisfactory.
ACDA (Spurgeon Keeny) opposed this approach, arguing that the
Soviets would reject it and consider it a very negative step in the negoti-
ations; however Harold Brown, Cy Vance, Frank Press, Jim Schles-
inger, Stan Turner, and the JCS (Dave Jones) all endorsed this approach
as a useful means of enhancing confidence in the treaty. Subsequently,
Paul Warnke has sent you a strongly worded dissent by cable from Ge-
neva, which Cy Vance has endorsed (Tab B).5 Paul argues that a man-
datory quota of OSIs would be of little practical value; that the Soviets
would strongly oppose it and harden their position on other negotia-
ting issues, and that it could be a “political booby trap” in that it could
increase the domestic costs of eventually moving to challenge inspec-
tion in order to achieve a CTB agreement with the Soviets.
While I do not rule out challenge inspection as an eventual accept-
able outcome, I do not agree with Paul’s arguments. If a mandatory in-
spection quota really made no sense, then what would be the sense of
“the right to challenge” or “producing a carefully constructed on-site
inspection provision” . . . but one which the Soviets can completely
refuse us the right to conduct? On the contrary, I believe there would be
considerable value in a small annual quota of mandatory inspections;
certainly fewer than might be needed, but enough to build confidence
in the treaty and reassure likely Senate critics. Coupled to an obligation
to provide adequate explanation, such a quota would help resolve un-
certainties and give us higher verifiability.
As Paul notes, the Soviet negotiators will probably strongly resist a
mandatory quota; however, its negotiability may be enhanced by our
two track approach—e.g., the bilateral agreement would have the man-
datory quota but the multilateral treaty would only require challenge
OSI. Further, President Kennedy got Krushchev at one point to agree to
a quota of two or three mandatory OSIs (and black boxes) per year,6
and it is by no means certain that you could not achieve a similar out-
come. With regard to Paul’s argument that this could increase the do-
mestic cost of eventually settling for challenge inspection, the Senate is
well aware that we have insisted on mandatory OSI as a prerequisite
for a CTB for over two decades and to abandon it at this stage without
having made a determined effort at the political level could have even
greater costs.
5 Not attached.
6 Kennedy and Khrushchev discussed the issue of inspections at the 1961 Vienna
Summit. See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. VII, Arms Control and Disarmament, Doc-
ument 31.

Comprehensive Test Ban
As a final point, Cy Vance has noted that the UK might insist on
going with challenge inspection; however, in our consultations with
them, the British have indicated that they do not have a firm position
on verification and will follow our lead on these issues. Consequently, I
recommend that you authorize us to propose a small annual quota of
mandatory inspections in addition to the obligation for explanation of
any refusals. I have in mind that the quota might be perhaps two or
three per year, but we will have the Working Group take a quick look at
this to ensure that it is consistent with our needs.
As you know, Defense was anxious that tabling the Working Paper
might prejudice our position on the sorts of experiments that could be
conducted under a CTB, or the detailed nature of verification provi-
sions we would need on on-site inspection and internal seismic sta-
tions. These issues are currently undergoing intensive interagency
study and we will not be ready to discuss them in detail until January.
However, the Working Paper was carefully drafted to avoid preju-
dicing these issues, and in the SCC discussion we agreed to some modi-
fications which will further protect us on these issues, including an ex-
plicit caveat to this effect in your instructions to Paul Warnke. Harold
would still prefer on balance to withhold the portions of the paper
dealing with prohibitions on weapons tests or PNEs, pending further
SCC review, but can accept tabling of the entire document subject to the
agreed modifications and caveat in your instructions.
Following is a brief discussion of the other key issues, together
with the SCC agreed recommendations:
PNEs. The Soviets have proposed that their three-year moratorium
on PNEs be incorporated in a Protocol to the CTB treaty which would
call for continuing negotiations on how to permit PNEs in the future.
We would agree to having a Protocol on PNEs, providing that it is in-
tegrally linked to the treaty and would remain in force concurrently
with the treaty. Rather than agree to continue negotiations on how to
permit PNEs, we would simply offer to keep them under consideration
and would insist that any subsequent agreement on PNEs would re-
quire an amendment of the treaty with our agreement.
Duration. Consistent with previous instructions, Paul Warnke
would be authorized to indicate, while maintaining our position that
the treaty should continue in force indefinitely without French or Chi-
nese adherence, that each party should have the right to withdraw
from the treaty with one year’s advance notice if it determined that con-
tinued testing by a non-party affected its security.
Internal Seismic Stations. The Soviets continue to object to our con-
cept of “black boxes,” but have indicated that they would be willing to
consider joint design of “national stations” in order to assure adequate
authentication of seismic data. From a verification standpoint, it is un-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
important to us whether these stations are automated, manned by So-
viet nationals, or jointly manned, provided that our requirement for
timely transmission of authenticated seismic data can be met. Conse-
quently, we would indicate flexibility of labeling of the stations, which
could result in Soviet willingness to agree to use of our equipment and
consideration of a larger number of stations for this purpose than
would otherwise be the case.
We have prepared a cable to Paul (Tab A)7 for your approval
which is consistent with the above recommendations and would in-
struct the Delegation to table the modified Working Paper at Tab C.8 In
my view, the tabling of this document with our movement towards the
Soviet position on the PNE protocol, seismic stations and duration,
even with the tough OSI position, constitutes a forthcoming response to
the Soviet proposal, which maintains our essential requirements on du-
ration and verification, and should facilitate the process of beginning
negotiation of treaty language in January.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the position taken by NSC, OSTP, Defense, Energy
and CIA by authorizing the cable to Paul Warnke at Tab A.
No, revise in the light of the State/ACDA position.
7 Not attached.
8 Not attached.
9 Carter did not indicate a preference with respect to the recommendation.
181.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva1
structions for CTB Negotiation.
1. The following White House CTB instructions have been received
from Dr. Brzezinski for Amb. Warnke.
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Bern. Drafted by Keeny;
cleared by Sydney Goldsmith (S/S–O); and approved by Keeny.

Comprehensive Test Ban
2. Begin quote. “When the trilateral CTB negotiations resume on
December 5, the President wants you to respond to the recent Soviet
initiative in a way that is responsive to the positive aspects of the Soviet
proposals while maintaining the essential elements of our position
on key issues. In doing so, you should be guided by the following
considerations.
3. You should maintain our existing position in favor of a stable
and durable treaty that could continue indefinitely without French and
Chinese adherence. You should propose that each party should have
the right, however, after a period of three years, to withdraw from the
treaty, giving one year’s advance notice, if it determined that continued
testing by a nonparty affected its security.
4. You are authorized to accept the Soviet suggestion of a protocol
banning PNEs provided that the protocol would be an integral part of
the treaty and would therefore remain in force for all parties concur-
rently with the treaty banning nuclear weapon test explosions. You
may also indicate that we could accept a commitment in the protocol to
keep under consideration whether arrangements should be made in
the future for carrying out PNEs, provided that an amendment to
the treaty with our consent would be required for establishing such
arrangements.
5. In continuing discussion of on-site inspections, you should
maintain the previous position. You are also authorized to indicate to
the Soviets that we are prepared to consider ways in which differences
might be narrowed between mandatory and voluntary on-site inspec-
tion provisions, while maintaining on the table our present position.
You might encourage the Soviets to propose as a compromise the small
annual quota idea by referring at some point to Khrushchev’s 1962–
1963 proposal.2
6. You should outline our approach to obtaining authenticated
seismic data from internal seismic stations with agreed characteristics
and indicate that we would be prepared to accept various modes of op-
eration—manned or unmanned, joint or national—provided that our
technical requirements are met for obtaining timely, useful, and au-
thenticated seismic data.
7. Consistent with these considerations, you should table the mod-
ified working paper which will be sent to you by separate cable to
present US views on the key substantive elements of a CTB treaty and
protocol.3 In discussion of the working paper, you should indicate that
the terminology used to describe the substantive elements dealing with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and nuclear explosions intended
for peaceful purposes may require mutually acceptable understanding
regarding distinctions between prohibited explosions and permitted
nuclear experiments.” End quote.
Vance
182.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, December 29, 1977
Subject
December Round of Trilateral Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) Negotiations
During the recent round of trilateral talks, held in Geneva from De-
cember 5 to 20, the principal development was our formal tabling of a
U.S. Working Paper2 outlining our views on the key substantive ele-
ments of a multilateral treaty banning nuclear weapons tests and of an
integrally related protocol dealing with peaceful nuclear explosions.
Much of the session was devoted to answering detailed Soviet ques-
tions regarding our Working Paper and, in the process, we got a fairly
good picture of Soviet thinking on the main issues. Highlights are sum-
marized below.
On-Site Inspections (OSI). As instructed,3 our Delegation did not
put forth a specific proposal on OSI. Instead, we continued to express
our interest in narrowing the differences between the traditional posi-
tions of the participants and extensively explored Soviet receptivity to
the idea, discussed during the 1958–1962 CTB negotiations, of an an-
nual quota of mandatory inspections.
The Soviets stated categorically and repeatedly that they were not
prepared to consider any form of mandatory OSI, including a quota.
They said that a U.S. proposal for mandatory OSI would be rejected
and would be regarded as an attempt to complicate the negotiations at
a time when the USSR had made several important concessions in
corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “good report. J.”
3 See Document 181.

Comprehensive Test Ban
order to make agreement possible. They maintained that the Soviet side
had already demonstrated its willingness to find compromises that
bridged traditional positions on OSI, citing their acceptance of the
Swedish-developed concept of “challenge” inspections and their recent
willingness to work out in advance the detailed rights and functions of
inspection teams, rather than leave them to ad hoc decisions by the host
party.
However, while rejecting the concept of mandatory OSI, the So-
viets agreed with the principle that requests for OSIs should not be
dealt with in an arbitrary manner and they unquestionably understood
our emphatic assertion that the treaty would be placed in jeopardy if
this principle were not observed. The Soviets have indicated that, if we
do not find their prior proposals adequate, it is up to us to give them a
specific alternative when the negotiations resume in January.
Duration. We stressed our opposition to the Soviet proposal for a
treaty that would terminate automatically if China and France have not
joined within three years, and proposed instead the right of any party
to withdraw on one year’s notice if, after three years, continued testing
by a non-party affected its security.
The Soviets admitted to us informally that they recognize that their
idea of a “guillotine clause” will have to be abandoned, and they indi-
cated they would be considering alternatives enabling the treaty to be
extended even without participation by all nuclear powers. However,
they expressed serious concern with our “right of withdrawal” for-
mula. They argued that, of the three nuclear powers that would join
from the start, the USSR would feel the greatest pressure to withdraw
because of Chinese and French testing, but that, if they actually decided
to invoke their right to do so, they would be subject to heavy criticism
for contributing to the breakdown of the treaty regime. Because of this
concern, they favored the concept that all the nuclear powers should be
released from their obligations simultaneously. I believe it will eventu-
ally be possible to work out an acceptable compromise that promotes
our basic objectives (e.g., a formulation providing that, after a specified
period, treaty parties would determine, perhaps at a Review Confer-
ence, whether the treaty would continue for another specified period).
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions. While accepting the Soviet idea of a
protocol on PNEs and agreeing that the possibility of carrying out
PNEs in the future should be kept “under consideration”, we took a
strong position that the ban on PNEs must remain in force as long as
the weapons test ban remains in force, unless of course the PNE ban is
replaced earlier by arrangements for conducting PNEs that the U.S. can
support.
The Soviets asserted that they continue to have a strong interest in
carrying out PNEs in the future and that means can be found for elimi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nating any military benefits. They maintained that our proposal on du-
ration of the PNE ban is unsatisfactory, since it would provide no in-
centive to reach agreement on arrangements for conducting PNEs.
Instead, they called for a definite time limit (three years) for negotiating
such arrangements, after which the moratorium on PNEs would ex-
pire—presumably whether or not those arrangements had been con-
cluded and whether or not the treaty on weapon tests continued.
We, of course, emphasized that it would be unthinkable for us to
leave PNEs unconstrained while the weapons test ban continued. So-
viet Delegation members appreciate why their proposal would not be
acceptable to us, but have not hinted at any means of solving this
problem and have instead pointed out that the PNE issue continues to
involve substantial bureaucratic stakes in Moscow, thus making it diffi-
cult for them to alter their position very soon.
Internal Seismic Stations. Although our detailed proposals will not
be ready until January, we outlined our general thinking on the design
of the stations and indicated that, as long as agreement can be reached
on the technical requirements for ensuring the receipt of timely and au-
thenticated seismic data, we would not object to Soviet manning of sta-
tions in the USSR.
The Soviet response was somewhat ambiguous. The technical
members of their Delegation seemed receptive to our concept and par-
ticularly interested in receiving sophisticated U.S. equipment for the
stations. At the higher, political level, however, a more cautious posi-
tion was taken. They seemed particularly sensitive to any appearance
of the internal stations making inroads on Soviet sovereignty, and ex-
pressed concern about whether the U.S. concept permits sufficient
Soviet national responsibility and control over the stations on their
territory.
We cannot expect a definitive Soviet reaction until we have pre-
sented our ideas in detail next round. However, in light of the impor-
tant political and ideological implications of “authenticated” inter-
nal stations for the Soviet leadership, I would be very surprised if
achieving Soviet acceptance of an effective arrangement did not require
a prolonged and difficult negotiation.
General Comments. Although the Soviet negotiators repeatedly ex-
pressed appreciation of our Working Paper and the detailed explana-
tions given them, there was no new movement on their part on the
issues of PNEs, treaty duration, and internal seismic stations. Indeed,
some slight hardening of position could be discerned. It should be re-
membered that, in putting forth on November 2 the revised Soviet po-
sitions on a PNE moratorium and entry into force, Morokhov stressed
that the Soviet leadership expected some reciprocal movement on our

Comprehensive Test Ban
part to accommodate their position on verification. This expectation
was emphasized often during the recently completed round.
I believe, therefore, that the Soviet Delegation was disappointed
and a bit put off by our failure to propose a specific provision bridging
the gap between our past insistence on mandatory on-site inspections
and their concept of voluntary on-site inspections. I think we can ex-
pect little further progress on the other issues until we deal construc-
tively with this issue.
Consequently, if we are to maintain the current momentum
toward agreement, the most urgent requirement in our preparations
for the round scheduled to begin on January 18 is to adopt a position on
how on-site inspections will be initiated. I will shortly be sending you a
memorandum recommending an approach to the OSI issue. In addi-
tion, I believe it is important that we be prepared when the talks re-
sume to present detailed proposals on the contents of the separate veri-
fication agreement we would conclude with the Soviets to supplement
the multilateral CTB treaty.
Paul C. Warnke
183.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 13, 1978
SUBJECT
Report for the Soviets on U.S. PNE Experience
As you know, when Gromyko came here in September, the Presi-
dent told him that we would provide the Soviet Government with an
account of U.S. experience regarding the economic utility of peaceful
nuclear explosions (PNEs).2
Immediately thereafter, we began in Washington to prepare such a
report. In Geneva, Gerry Johnson, who ran our PNE program for sev-
2 See Document 168.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eral years and is now my deputy on the CTB Delegation, gave Mo-
rokhov an oral rundown of our PNE experience.
With the Brezhnev initiative of November 2,3 we decided to hold
off on delivery of our paper while waiting for a clearer picture of the
implications of the new Soviet PNE moratorium proposal. Subse-
quently, Morokhov has taken the view that the Soviet Government con-
tinues to see great importance in PNEs. I therefore believe we should
now send a copy of our report to Gromyko. In addition to getting our
views on the very limited economic value of PNEs to the Soviet leader-
ship, it would demonstrate our willingness to engage them in a contin-
uing and serious dialogue on the PNE issue.
With your concurrence, I will give Dobrynin a copy of the attached
package, which contains our PNE report and a cover note from Cy
Vance to Gromyko.4 DOE, DOD, JCS, and State concur in forwarding
the report. The cover note has been worked out with State.
Paul C. Warnke
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency5
Washington, undated
Summary: US Perspectives on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions
The US opposition to permitting PNEs under a CTB reflects our
conclusion that the potential economic benefits of PNEs are not suffi-
cient to override serious verification and non-proliferation problems
that would be associated with their use. Our PNE verification and
non-proliferation concerns have been made clear in the CTB negotia-
tions; this paper presents a review of the economic utility of PNEs
based on experience gained in the US PNE program.
PNE applications were studied by the US over a period of twenty
years, and in selected areas field tests were conducted using nuclear ex-
plosives. US industry was directly involved, and was relied upon to
identify promising applications of PNEs. The ultimate determination of
the economic value of PNEs was made largely by industry. PNEs were
4 The cover note from Vance is not attached.
Comprehensive Test Ban
investigated for use in excavation, natural gas stimulation, shale oil re-
covery, copper mining, and underground storage cavities. Field testing
using nuclear explosives was conducted for the excavation and natural
gas stimulation applications.
Each of these potential areas of application involved its own diffi-
cult technical problems as well as the general problems associated with
any PNEs (such as safety, environmental impact, treaty obligations,
and public acceptance). One of the most publicized PNE applications,
earth excavation, was found to present the most serious difficulties. A
sea-level canal to supplement the Panama Canal was long regarded as
a promising application for PNEs, but a massive study of alternative
approaches concluded for technical, economic, and political reasons
that a route using conventional explosives was preferable. In addition,
PNE excavation would be difficult or impossible to carry out in compli-
ance with the LTBT.
Even for deep underground applications where radioactivity can
in general be contained, technical and societal problems remain. More-
over, the anticipated costs would largely eliminate any economic ad-
vantage of PNEs. Continuing development of alternative methods gen-
erally do not involve the great uncertainties or potential legal problems
of PNEs.
The scale of the efforts in some projected PNE applications would
have presented unique security problems. Natural gas stimulation, for
example, could have involved an effort of perhaps 1,000 PNEs annually
to achieve a 5 per cent increase in US natural gas production. Signifi-
cant problems could arise in handling and security of PNE devices in
such numbers in the US. These problems would be compounded—and
there would be cause for serious concern about terrorist actions—if
other countries sought PNE services on even a fraction of this scale.
The US PNE program was undertaken to assess technical feasi-
bility and economic utility of eventual commercial use of nuclear ex-
plosives by US industry. As costs and problems associated with the
experimental program increased, industry reassessed the total costs in-
volved in projected commercial applications. Ultimately, it became evi-
dent that even if PNE technology promised some possible economic
advantages over competing technologies, these advantages could well
be lost when the costs of other factors were taken into account. In these
circumstances, there was little incentive for participating contractors to
continue to pursue PNE technology, and their decision to withdraw
from the PNE program was, ultimately, an economic decision—in the
broad sense of the term.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
184.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, January 13, 1978
SUBJECT
On-Site Inspections (OSIs) Under a Comprehensive Test Ban
I believe that our exploration of the OSI issue with the Soviets has
already gone as far as it productively can and that, if we are to avoid an
impasse in the CTB negotiations, we must make a formal proposal on
OSIs when the talks resume later this month. Specifically, I recommend
that we now propose a compromise approach that is responsive to the
Soviet principle of “voluntariness” and, at the same time, meets basic
U.S. requirements for an effective inspection provision. The principal
reasons for this recommendation are that:
—a U.S. proposal for mandatory OSIs would almost certainly
deadlock the negotiations, raise doubts in the minds of the Soviets and
others about the sincerity of our commitment to conclude a CTB in the
near future, and jeopardize our efforts to obtain further Soviet conces-
sions on other CTB issues of greater importance to us;
—the actual technical contribution to our CTB verification capa-
bility of any form of on-site inspection, whether mandatory or volun-
tary, is quite limited;
—difficult practical and legal problems would arise for the U.S.
under a mandatory OSI system because of the need to deny access to
sensitive U.S. national security facilities and to respect constitutional
rights regarding private property;
—we would encounter serious domestic problems if we formally
proposed mandatory OSIs and then, as must be expected, had to fall
back in order to reach an agreement; and
—the overall verification package that now seems achievable
should put us in a good position to explain to the Congress and to the
American people that effective and reasonable measures have been
worked out for verifying the treaty. This package is likely to include
improved national technical means, authenticated data from seismic
stations in the USSR, and a new challenge OSI approach (described
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Paul C. Warnke Files, December 1974–July 1979, Ac-
siles, CTB, NPT, and Indian Ocean Arms Control, January–October 1978. Secret. A copy
was sent to Keeny. Drafted by Robert Einhorn (ACDA/MA).

Comprehensive Test Ban
below) that eliminates the key defects of the Soviet proposal while pre-
serving the basic deterrent quality of the mandatory approach.
These reasons, as well as my suggestions for a specific solution, are
discussed below.
Discussion of OSI during the December Round. Although we tabled a
U.S. Working Paper in December outlining the key elements of a CTB
treaty and protocol, the paper did not contain a proposal on OSIs.2 In-
stead, as instructed, the U.S. Delegation expressed a desire to narrow
the differences between traditional U.S. and Soviet positions and ex-
plored at considerable length Soviet receptivity to an annual quota of
mandatory inspections.
Soviet reactions to our probes on mandatory OSIs, which were
made on a number of occasions and at several levels, were uniformly
and categorically negative. Morokhov, head of the Soviet Delegation,
said that we should have no illusions: his government would reject any
U.S. proposal for mandatory OSIs and would regard it as a backward
step intended to complicate the task of negotiating a treaty at a time
when the USSR had made several important concessions in order to
make agreement possible. He maintained that the 1962 Khrushchev
offer of 2–3 annual inspections had been discredited and formally with-
drawn by the Soviet Government and that all segments of their bureau-
cracy were opposed to it.3
In response to our calls for narrowing the differences between our
traditional positions, the Soviets asserted that they had already demon-
strated their willingness to compromise. Morokhov pointed out that,
despite the USSR’s long-standing opposition to any form of OSI, they
had accepted the Swedish-developed concept of voluntary, or “chal-
lenge”, inspections. He also cited Soviet readiness, announced during
the recent October round, to work out in advance the detailed rights
and functions of inspection teams.
Limited Technical Value of OSIs. The Interagency Working Group’s
study of September 19774 demonstrated that the actual verification
value of on-site inspection must be considered quite limited, given the
small probability of discovering evidence of a nuclear explosion with
current OSI techniques if the evader has taken certain precautions (e.g.,
sufficient depth of burial, careful stemming and emplacement hole con-
struction). Because of uncertainties in fixing the precise location of sus-
picious events, OSI visits would, in most cases, be like looking for a
needle in a haystack. As the study points out, success would not be as-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sured even if the location of a covert test were known within ten
meters.
For these reasons, the interagency study concluded that the value
of an OSI provision in a CTB was largely political. Any state rejecting a
demonstrably reasonable OSI request would create the impression in-
ternationally that it had something to hide and would give another
state grounds for withdrawal. This would be the case whether the rejec-
tion was prohibited under the terms of the treaty (i.e., mandatory ap-
proach) or legally permitted (i.e., voluntary approach).
Practical/Legal Problems of Mandatory OSIs. Even under a nominally
“mandatory” system, neither we nor the Soviets could tolerate OSIs at
sensitive locations, such as missile sites. The attempt to work out cri-
teria for exempted locations would be very difficult, and any criteria
that the Soviets could support—given their broad definition of sensi-
tive facilities—might well be so general as to raise domestic concerns
about OSI “sanctuaries” in the USSR. In addition to the question of
national security exemptions, serious legal problems would arise in
seeking to grant the USSR mandatory inspection rights on privately-
held territory in the U.S. Given constitutional and statutory protections
of U.S. citizens and their property, the U.S. Government’s ability to ac-
cede to a Soviet OSI request could well depend, in a number of circum-
stances, on judicial determinations.
Both of these legal dilemmas would be minimized under a volun-
tary OSI system. In the case of a sensitive area, an OSI request could ei-
ther be turned down for valid national security reasons or the area to be
inspected could be altered through negotiations to exclude the sensi-
tive facility. In the case of a privately-held area, the U.S. Government ei-
ther could turn down the request on the basis of the landowner’s and
judge’s objections or could negotiate with the Soviets and the land-
owner to restrict the scope of the OSI visit to a mutually acceptable
level.
Domestic Considerations. If we were to propose mandatory OSIs, it
is only realistic to assume we would have to fall back at a later stage in
order to reach an agreement. When our “concession” became public, as
it certainly would, it would be characterized by critics as a major U.S.
retreat and could even affect prospects for ratification. It seems far pref-
erable, in my view, to make a determination now, based on the limited
technical utility of OSIs, that a mandatory OSI provision would con-
tribute little, if anything, to adequate verification of a CTB and that
therefore there is no good reason to seek such a provision.
Critics of a CTB will no doubt try to make an issue of verifiability.
However, I believe that the verification measures that are likely to be
achievable—including authenticated data from seismic stations in the
Soviet Union, challenge OSIs, as well as enhanced national technical

Comprehensive Test Ban
means—will strike the American people and Congress as an impres-
sive package. Moreover, such a package would represent a consider-
able advance beyond where we were just a few years ago, when the So-
viets were insisting on national technical means alone.
Negotiating Considerations. There is little doubt that a U.S. proposal
for mandatory OSIs would be unacceptable to the Soviets and would
lead to a stalemate in the CTB negotiations. But the cost of making such
a proposal is not just that resolution of the OSI issue would be delayed
until we decided to abandon the idea of mandatory inspections. U.S. in-
sistence on mandatory OSI has long been regarded worldwide as a re-
flection of U.S. unwillingness to stop nuclear testing, and a formal U.S.
proposal would be seen by the Soviet leadership—and by the rest of the
world when it became generally known—as a throwback to earlier U.S.
attitudes toward a CTB.
In addition to stalemating the OSI issue and casting doubt on our
desire to conclude a CTB in the near future, a proposal for mandatory
OSIs would work against our efforts to obtain further Soviet conces-
sions in areas of much greater actual importance to us, especially in-
ternal seismic stations and PNE-related issues, and would thus be get-
ting our priorities wrong. The Soviet representatives have stressed that
they expected reciprocal movement by us for their November 2 initia-
tive on PNEs and entry into force, which they regard as having made
agreement possible, and that they were disturbed by our failure in De-
cember to take any tangible steps toward them on the OSI issue. In-
deed, by the end of the December round, we could discern some stif-
fening of Soviet positions, particularly on internal stations. I believe we
have to face up to the prospect that, until we meet the Soviets half way
on OSIs, they will not be inclined to meet our concerns on other issues.
The British have recently informed us via diplomatic note (at-
tached)5 that they do not believe further progress can be made toward a
CTB without Western willingness to abandon mandatory OSIs and that
they hope we will be prepared to do so when the negotiations resume
later this month.
Seeking an Acceptable Compromise. The present Soviet OSI proposal
contains a number of serious deficiencies. Specifically, OSI requests are
to be based on seismic evidence that meets certain technical criteria,
thus making it impossible even to request an inspection if the available
evidence is either non-seismic (e.g., overhead photography) or is
seismic but does not meet the criteria. Then, once a request is made, the
party on whose territory the questionable event has taken place can
simply reject it out of hand, without even providing an explanation.
entitled “Comprehensive Test Ban.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
I recommend that we make a counterproposal designed to shift the
burden of proof from the requesting party (where it is placed under the
Soviet proposal) to the suspected party as well as to raise the political
costs that the suspected party would incur if it refused a reasonable OSI
request without giving justifiable grounds for doing so. The formula-
tion I recommend, which would be incorporated in the separate verifi-
cation agreement that will be concluded with the Soviets to supplement
the multilateral CTB treaty, would contain the following elements:
—Each party would have the right to request an OSI at any time
(i.e., there would not be a ceiling on the number of requests that could
be made).
—Any type of evidence, seismic or otherwise, could justify an OSI
request. There would be no technical criteria for screening out events as
not eligible to invoke an OSI request.
—As in the Soviet proposal, the party on whose territory the event
took place would have the right to turn down the request. However, if
it decided to do so, it would be obligated to provide a detailed justifica-
tion for its decision, including any seismic, photographic, or other
evidence that it believed demonstrated that no violation had been
committed.
—If the requesting side were not satisfied by the explanation, it
could call for further information. If it remained unsatisfied by such ad-
ditional information, it would be entitled to bring the matter to the U.N.
Security Council.
—The parties would issue an agreed interpretative statement to
the effect that arbitrary refusals to grant OSI requests could undermine
confidence in the treaty and could create a situation in which a party
whose requests had been arbitrarily denied might consider that its su-
preme national interests were being jeopardized. The clear implication
would be that a party could legitimately withdraw from the treaty if it
felt that its requests for OSI were being turned down on insufficient
grounds.
The principal distinction between a mandatory OSI system and a
purely voluntary one is that a refusal to grant an inspection under the
former type would constitute a treaty violation and would thus justify
withdrawal from the treaty by a party whose interests are threatened.
The agreed interpretative statement described above would provide
the functional equivalent of that advantage, and would serve as a sig-
nificant disincentive against arbitrary rejections of OSI requests. The
recommended approach, by requiring suitable justification for any OSI
refusal and by eliminating Soviet-proposed barriers to making an OSI
request, would tend to create the presumption that the state which is
asked to accept an inspection visit will either grant that request or pro-
vide a convincing explanation why the visit is unnecessary.

Comprehensive Test Ban
By providing explicitly for bringing the matter to the Security
Council, the Soviet Union would be put on notice that it can turn down
a reasonable U.S. OSI request only at considerable political cost. Given
the Soviet Union’s veto, we would not, of course, ask the Security
Council to take corrective action. However, the threat that its arbitrary
behavior could be exposed publicly in a forum that commands wide in-
ternational attention would strengthen the overall value of the provi-
sion as a deterrent against arbitrary rejection of an OSI request.
Recommendation. Although I believe that OSIs, in general, have
very limited utility as a CTB verification measure, I am confident that
the approach outlined above for initiating OSIs, together with prear-
ranged rights and functions of inspection teams that would be trig-
gered when an OSI request is accepted, would give us as much value as
could be derived from any OSI provision, including the idea of a man-
datory quota. I therefore recommend that you authorize us to propose
that approach when the CTB negotiations resume.
I have already sent copies of this memorandum to State, Defense,
JCS, Energy and CIA, and they all agree with the basic approach re-
garding challenge OSIs that I have outlined. OSD, JCS, and Energy
have commented to me that we should use our move on OSI in a
manner that enables us to obtain Soviet concessions on matters of im-
portance to us, especially on duration of the PNE ban and internal
seismic stations. JCS suggests the approach be explored, but not tabled
at this time. If you approve my recommendation, I will present our new
position in the way I believe will best maximize our pressure on the So-
viets to move our way on the critical remaining issues. I would make
clear that our willingness to accept the challenge OSI approach is con-
tingent on reaching a satisfactory solution on the entire treaty.
Paul C. Warnke6
6 Printed from a copy that indicates Warnke signed the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
185.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at
Geneva1
Subject: Instructions for CTB Negotiations.
1. Following CTB instructions for Amb. Warnke received today
from Dr. Brzezinski.
2. Begin quote. “When the trilateral CTB negotiations resume on
January 20, the President wants you to move ahead with the negotia-
tion of the key elements of a multilateral CTB treaty and protocol, and
to explain and seek Soviet acceptance of our positions on the contents
of a supplementary U.S.-Soviet agreement on verification. In doing so,
you should be guided by the following considerations.
3. You should propose the concept of challenge on-site inspections,
which would include the following elements: (a) there would not be a
limit on the number of OSI requests, nor conditions as to the type or
technical adequacy of evidence that must be presented before a ques-
tionable event would be eligible for an OSI request; (b) a party not ac-
cepting an OSI request would be obligated to provide a detailed justifi-
cation; (c) a requesting party not satisfied with the explanation would
be entitled to bring the matter to the U.N. security council; and (d) there
would be an agreed understanding that arbitrary refusals to grant OSI
requests could undermine confidence in the treaty and could create a
situation in which a party whose requests had been arbitrarily denied
would consider that its supreme national interests were jeopardized
(thus providing a basis for withdrawal from the treaty).
4. You should present our new position in a manner that encour-
ages maximum Soviet movement toward us on issues of importance.
You should stress that our new position on inspection is part of an in-
tegrally related and essential verification package—which includes our
position on internal seismic stations and OSI procedures. Furthermore,
you should state that the offer of this verification package represents
movement on our side on an important and sensitive issue, and is con-
tingent on Soviet movement to satisfactory solutions on the duration
and PNE protocol issues along the lines we have proposed.
5. You should draw on the working group guidance paper in con-
tinuing to promote our approach to obtaining timely, useful, and au-
mation Immediate to the White House. Printed from a copy that indicates the original
was received in the White House Situation Room.

Comprehensive Test Ban
thenticated data from internal seismic stations. If it appears helpful in
advancing our objectives, you may indicate to the Soviets that, while
we are not prepared to propose a specific number of stations, we are ex-
amining networks ranging up to around twenty installations. You may
indicate that the precise number will depend on such factors as noise
levels, locations, and the extent to which arrays of seismometers may
be included.
6. You should draw from the working group guidance papers in
presenting our views on the rights and functions of on-site inspection
teams that would be explicitly provided for in the separate, U.S.-Soviet
verification agreement and on procedures for international seismic
data exchange.
7. If the issue of permitted nuclear experiments is raised, you
should repeat our position that the terminology used to describe the
basic CTB prohibitions may require mutually acceptable understand-
ings regarding distinctions between prohibited explosions and per-
mitted nuclear experiments. The Delegation should indicate, however,
that we are not prepared to pursue this issue further at this time.
8. You should continue discussion of issues concerning the treaty
duration and PNE protocol on the basis of my December 4th instruc-
tions.” End quote.
Vance
186.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Report for the Soviets on US PNE Experience
In your Fall meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko,2 you offered
to provide the Soviet Government with an account of our PNE experi-
ence. Shortly thereafter, we briefed the Soviet CTB Delegation in Ge-
Carter initialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 168.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
neva on our experience and the SCC Working Group prepared a de-
tailed PNE paper for transmittal to Gromyko. As a result of Brezhnev’s
offer of a PNE moratorium on November 2,3 we deferred transmittal of
our PNE paper to Gromyko pending Soviet elaboration of their new
PNE position in the December round of the CTB negotiations.
Although the main PNE issue is settled, it is clear from those dis-
cussions that considerable work remains on the issue of duration of the
PNE Protocol and its linkage to the CTB treaty. The Soviets have infor-
mally indicated in Geneva that, due to the size of their PNE program,
any provision for extension of the PNE moratorium poses difficult bu-
reaucratic problems for them. As a result, it would be useful to forward
our PNE report at this time to demonstrate good faith in continuing
PNE discussions and keep the Gromyko channel open in the event it is
needed for resolution of the remaining PNE issues.
In an earlier comment on a Weekly Report item,4 you indicated
that you wanted to read the PNE paper, and a brief summary is at-
tached for your review at Tab A.5
RECOMMENDATION
That you authorize transmittal of the PNE report to Gromyko.6
4 Not found.
5 Attached but not printed is a paper entitled “U.S. Perspectives on Peaceful Nu-
clear Explosions.”
6 Carter wrote a check mark authorizing the transmittal of the PNE report to Gro-
myko. Underneath this sentence, Carter wrote “use ‘private industry’ vs ‘industry’,” re-
ferring to page one of the PNE report that noted that “Experimental programs (including
nuclear experiments) have been conducted jointly with U.S. industry on the most inter-
esting ideas and there have been careful evaluations of both technical feasibility and cost
effectiveness.” Despite twenty years of such programs, “no application has been identi-
fied by the United States where PNEs offer important, clearcut advantages over alterna-
tive approaches, and the United States no longer funds any PNE activities.” Vance sent
the PNE Report under cover of a February 14 letter to Gromyko. (National Archives, RG
Box 1, US Perspectives on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, February 1978.

Comprehensive Test Ban
187.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
1993. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations:
US–UK Bilateral Meeting, February 8.
CTB Message No. 123.
1. Summary. US and UK Delegations met on February 8 to discuss
issue of UK role in US–USSR separate agreement on verification. US Alt
Rep (Neidle) reviewed principal reasons why, in US view, verification
agreement should be bilateral in nature with UK association. He out-
lined US proposals for specific features of UK role as per instructions.
UK Delegation was generally receptive to US approach which acting
UK Rep (Edmonds) said was consistent with formulation used in UK
December 16 plenary statement (agreement between US and USSR
with UK association)2 and with general guidance issued by UK min-
isters. On specific features of UK role, UK Deloff (Fakley) said that,
from standpoint of technical requirements for giving UK confidence
that Western security interests are protected, US proposals corre-
sponded to what UK Delegation had in mind. End summary.
2. US Rep outlined reasons why, in US view, agreement should be
bilateral in nature, particularly because straightforward, bilateral ar-
rangement that did not appear to be subjecting Soviets to unequal veri-
fication burden would serve overriding Western interest of getting the
USSR to accept detailed and effective verification provisions. At the
same time, he said US welcomed association of UK in such a way as to
permit benefits of UK expertise and participation, and to give UK a
higher level of assurance regarding Soviet compliance than would be
available to the non-nuclear parties to the treaty (see full text of talking
notes, para 8). Drawing on Del’s instructions,3 he outlined proposed
nature of UK association, as envisaged by US, i.e., inclusion of UK per-
sonnel on US on-site inspection teams operating in the USSR; possibil-
ities for US–UK consultations in event of UK concerns about Soviet be-
havior; UK right to receive all data from internal stations in USSR; UK
participation in US seismic station installation teams on Soviet terri-
tory. On legal form, he said US had in mind an exchange of notes be-
tween US and UK which would specify US intentions with regard to in-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
clusion of UK personnel in carrying out certain functions. He said US
envisaged frequent bilateral consultations with UK, as well as possi-
bility of ad hoc trilateral consultation when this seemed appropriate
and noted that UK would have option of requesting OSI on Soviet terri-
tory independently of US under multilateral treaty.
3. UK Rep noted that HMG had made political decision that UK
should be associated with bilateral US-Soviet verification agreement,
consistent with formulation in UK plenary statement of December 16,
but had not thought out details of association. He indicated UK Delega-
tion’s views on best form of association would influence London’s
thinking. He said US approach seemed consistent with UK December
16 formulation and acknowledged the importance of proposing an ar-
rangement that was capable of achieving Soviet support for effective
verification provisions.
4. UK Deloff, in supplementary comments, stressed UK require-
ments that a separate agreement provide assurance of treaty compli-
ance and ensure US–UK cooperation. He said, from technical point of
view, US proposals were what his Delegation had in mind. Stating that
there was no justification for independent British OSI capability, he
said UK would favor integration of UK personnel in US OSI inspection
teams. On ISIs, access to regional seismic data from stations in USSR
satisfied UK requirement. On installation of ISIs, he said UK envisaged
involvement in three phases: (1) site selection; (2) installation and sta-
tion checkout; and (3) maintenance. He said this was extent of UK tech-
nical involvement envisaged.
5. US Rep responded that US concept of site installation did not ex-
clude site selection. We had not suggested UK involvement in site
maintenance, since this might be conducted infrequently with very lim-
ited number of personnel, and would probably be more of a chore than
anything. But he said we would be prepared to discuss this. Fakley said
basis for UK desire to be included in maintenance phase was that it
would be only available basis for continuing UK involvement after ini-
tial installation of stations. US Rep noted that explicit references to UK
association in body of bilateral agreement would establish basis for
working out extent and details of UK role. UK Rep expressed agree-
ment with this concept and stressed that UK wanted UK participation
to be a positive, not a complicating factor.
6. UK Rep raised issue of procedure for consultations. US Rep
noted, as practical matter, that in many cases, US and UK would pre-
sumably want to consult promptly in the event of a suspected Soviet vi-
olation. Tripartite consultations might on occasion be deemed desirable
as well, but in view of wide range of possible scenarios, it would not
seem appropriate to make them obligatory.

Comprehensive Test Ban
7. UK Rep said he would report discussions back to London and
would receive instructions in the near future.
8. Text of US Rep’s talking notes follows: Begin text:
—The overall Western objective for the separate agreement should
be to ensure effective verification of the USSR without undercutting
our goal of obtaining broad non-nuclear weapon state adherence to the
treaty.
—We thus have an interest in making effective verification proce-
dures as palatable and negotiable as possible to the Soviets. Our judg-
ment is that we are more likely to achieve Soviet acceptance of such
procedures if we make the arrangements as simple as possible and do
not in any way appear to be subjecting them to double jeopardy.
—We also have an interest in avoiding the perception of discrimi-
natory verification arrangements. In our view, the separate agreement
will be more palatable to the non-nuclear states if it is perceived to be
based on such factors as special mutual security concerns (such as those
between the two super-powers) and geographical considerations (large
land masses with locations suitable for evasive testing).
—We both also have certain domestic considerations to take into
account. We understand that the form of British association could be of
some importance to you, and that there will be other questions, in-
cluding, for example, the costs that may be involved. For us, it is impor-
tant that the separate agreement be seen as capable of operating in a
streamlined and prompt manner.
—For these reasons, we believe that emphasis should be given to
the bilateral, as opposed to the trilateral (or nuclear weapon state), as-
pects of the agreement.
—At the same time, we recognize and welcome the UK’s interest
in being associated. We believe it is important for the measures con-
tained in the agreement to benefit from UK expertise and participation.
And as a leading nuclear weapon power, and the only other nuclear
power to join the treaty from the start, the UK should be able, through a
practical form of association, to obtain a higher level of assurance re-
garding Soviet compliance than would be available to the non-nuclear
parties.
—Taking these factors into consideration, we have devised an ap-
proach to UK association that we believe would meet overall Western
objectives. The agreement we have in mind would be bilateral, with the
US and USSR as its parties. At the same time, the agreement would be
developed on a trilateral basis, with the UK playing an active role in the
negotiations.
—The agreement, under our suggested approach, would apply to
activities on US and Soviet territory. As far as OSIs are concerned, it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
would cover US requests for OSIs on Soviet territory and Soviet re-
quests for OSIs on US territory. In the event that a US request was ac-
cepted, the agreement should permit US to include UK personnel on
US inspection teams. Moreover, if the UK had concerns about Soviet
behavior, the two of us could discuss the matter and, on the basis of
those discussions, the US might make an OSI request under the agree-
ment. On the other hand, the UK might wish to raise the matter with
the Soviets independently and to make a UK OSI request, as it would
be entitled to do under the multilateral treaty. Either option would be
available.
—As far as the possibility of Soviet inspections on UK territory is
concerned, we believe this could be handled under the multilateral
treaty. We doubt that the Soviets would insist on dealing with this con-
tingency under the separate agreement, and we see no reason to antici-
pate their concerns.
—As far as internal stations are concerned, we also doubt that the
USSR would desire such stations on UK territory and therefore see no
reason why this possibility should be offered to them.
—With respect to internal stations, we believe the UK should have
the right to receive all of the data from internal stations in the USSR. In
addition, the UK might want the right to participate in US installation
teams on Soviet territory. These rights could be provided for explicitly
in the bilateral agreement.
—With respect to consultations, we would naturally plan to con-
sult bilaterally with you frequently and on all aspects of the separate
agreement. There may also be circumstances when ad hoc trilateral
consultations would be desirable.
—As far as the legal form of UK association is concerned, we have
in mind an exchange of notes between the US and the UK. The US note
would express how we intended to exercise our rights under the agree-
ment to include the UK in carrying out certain functions and our inten-
tion to share all internal seismic data. The UK note would express your
readiness to cooperate and participate in implementing the agreement.
The signing of the notes could take place simultaneously with the
signing of the bilateral agreement. End text.
Warnke

Comprehensive Test Ban
188.
Memorandum from Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Nuclear Weapons Stockpile Reliability Under a CTB (U)
(S) Almost two months ago, I raised the issue of what nuclear ex-
periments would be permitted under a CTB. Since then we have ana-
lyzed this issue in some detail.
(S) The purpose of this paper is to discuss the issue of maintaining
confidence in the nuclear stockpile under a CTB. Specifically, this paper
will address: the ways we have ensured stockpile reliability in the past;
the potential problems we will face under a CTB; the alternatives avail-
able to maintain high confidence in stockpile reliability in the future;
and the implications of these alternatives in terms of verification, our
non-proliferation objectives, U.S.–U.S.S.R. asymmetries, and achieving
Congressional ratification of the treaty.
(S) I begin with the assumption that without question it will be
U.S. national policy under a CTB to maintain high confidence in our
nuclear deterrent forces. An essential element of this will be confidence
in the reliability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
(S/RD/N) Maintenance of Stockpile Reliability in the Past. In the past,
we have ensured reliability of the nuclear weapons in our stockpile by a
comprehensive program in which nuclear testing played a key role at
several points.2 First, during development, each device was extensively
tested in a program that typically started at low yields for development
of the primary, and progressed up to full yield detonations and nuclear
effects tests of the weaponized version. Second, during the stockpile
life of the weapon, reliability problems uncovered in the stockpile sur-
veillance program were resolved by expert design teams who were fa-
miliar with the results of all past testing of the weapon and whose com-
petence was maintained by participation in a continuing nuclear test
2 The U.S. stockpile consists primarily of high-technology warheads, each uniquely
optimized for its intended delivery system and its military mission. Each type warhead is
custom-designed according to the required yield, output, weight, size, and shape. Usu-
ally, old designs are not rebuilt for new applications. Maximum emphasis is placed on re-
duced size and weight, economical use of special nuclear materials (oralloy, plutonium,
and tritium), maximum yield-to-weight ratio, inherent one-point safety, security, and
survivability. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
program. When necessary, individual reliability problems were inves-
tigated and resolved by specific nuclear tests. The adequacy of fixes or
design modifications occasionally had to be verified by nuclear testing.
Finally, the weapon was replaced in the inventory well before the end
of its nominal service life by a new design which was perfected through
its own development test series.
(S/RD/N) The yield levels of the above test programs varied, of
course, from a few pounds to full weapon yield. [5 lines not declassified]
(S/FRD) Potential Problems Under a CTB. Under a CTB—whatever
its terms—we will not be able to continue maintaining the stockpile as
before. The outlook for stockpile reliability depends upon the type of
CTB we aim for and achieve.
(S/FRD) If a CTB allowed no weapons testing having any nuclear
yield, our confidence in the reliability of the stockpile would remain
high initially, and would then decline at an accelerating rate, possibly
reaching quite low values. Methods to quantify this degradation are
not now known. The reasons for its occurrence are complex. In the
worst cases, a specific problem could require retirement of entire major
systems. As warheads reach the end of their service life—and some in
the stockpile will reach that point relatively soon—we are not certain
that we can replace them with exact copies in which we have high con-
fidence. There are a number of reasons for this, including our inability
to reproduce materials or duplicate manufacturing processes exactly;
some of these may be prohibited because of present day environmental
and safety regulations. Finally, as delivery systems are necessarily
changed with advancing technology or new missions and threats, we
are not certain we can adapt existing warheads with high confidence.
The possibility of such situations arising under a CTB prompts consid-
eration of alternative CTB concepts.
(S) The central question to be asked with regard to all alternatives
to an ideal “zero-yield” treaty is: Which alternatives would maintain
the highest stockpile reliability over the long term without jeopardizing
the potential benefits, particularly the non-proliferation benefits, of a
CTB?
(S/FRD) Alternative Approaches. Three alternative approaches ap-
pear worthy of consideration, either singly or in combination. We
would argue that each could be made compatible with the concept of a
CTB because of the special requirements of nuclear weapon states
(NWS) to ensure the reliability of their stockpiles. In brief form, these
alternatives are:
—(S/FRD) Permitted Experiments. Allow low-yield (kiloton or sub-
kiloton) experiments below some designated threshold with the pur-
pose of contributing to stockpile maintenance.

Comprehensive Test Ban
—(S/FRD) Quota. Permit some low number of nuclear tests (e.g.,
2–5) annually for the purpose of stockpile maintenance.
—(S/FRD) Phase-out. Provide a transition period (e.g., 10 years)
during which testing, within some limits to be determined, would be
allowed for the purpose of adapting existing stockpiles to lower-yield
test conditions.
(S/RD/N) Permitted Experiments (U).
(S/FRD) Provisions for “permitted experiments” would allow the
use of explosive release of nuclear energy for maintaining our confi-
dence in stockpile reliability. This alternative would make a clear-cut
distinction between “nuclear testing” which would be prohibited and
“nuclear experiments” which would be permitted. Energy-related
work, such as inertial confinement fusion, would continue.
(S/FRD) The value of low-yield nuclear experiments for mainte-
nance of confidence in the nuclear weapons stockpile would vary with
the yield allowed. Such experiments may range from the minimum
“observable” nuclear yield, about [numbers not declassified] kiloton, to
an upper limit of a few kilotons. They are different in a most essential
way from zero-yield hydrodynamic testing in which no fissile material
is involved. [4 lines not declassified]
[6 paragraphs (44 lines) not declassified]
(S/RD/N) [3 lines not declassified] However, testing above 1 KT,
except perhaps in connection with a quota or phase-out provision, may
not be considered compatible with the concept of a CTB.
(U) Another way to summarize the requirements for maintenance
of stockpile reliability and to show the yield dependencies of other re-
lated aspects of a CTB is shown in Table 1.3
(S) There are at least two ways that “permitted experiments” could
be incorporated in a CTB. One approach would be to ban “nuclear ex-
plosions” in the treaty, and then define the term in such a way as to ex-
clude the tests we wish to allow. A possible formulation might be: “For
the purposes of this treaty, a nuclear explosion is defined as an event
producing more than
calories yield from a super-critical as-
sembly in less than a few microseconds.” A second approach would be
to ban nuclear explosions (undefined) and then explicitly identify an
exclusion. There are a number of ways this exclusion could be worded;
for example: “The prohibition of Article
does not apply to fully
contained nuclear experiments conducted in reusable laboratory facil-
ities.” This second approach, however, would be applicable, because of
3 [Table 1 not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
technical limits on containment, only to nuclear experiments whose
yield limits would be about 100 tons.
(S) Quota and Phase-out Alternatives. Both the quota and phase-out
alternatives are variants on the permitted experiments theme. How-
ever, as presently conceptualized, both approaches would permit
testing at a much higher kiloton threshold than envisaged under the
permitted experiments option.
(S) The quota approach would apply a stringent limit on the num-
ber of tests allowed each year (e.g., 2–5). The purpose of the testing
would be stockpile maintenance, i.e., tests only for conversion to
“woodenized” warheads, recertifying rebuilt warheads, or fixing
problems. If no lower limit were imposed, the 150 KT threshold of the
TTBT could govern, but this approach could be coupled with a reduc-
tion of the 150 KT threshold.
(S) The phase-out approach would be constructed explicitly to at-
tempt transition to “wooden” warheads which might be designed to be
replaceable with only limited design guidance or testing. As in the al-
ternative above, the TTBT could govern yield unless otherwise speci-
fied. The duration could be specified by the number of years or tests or
both (e.g., 10 years or 25 tests, whichever comes first).
(S/RD) Combination of Alternatives. Possibly more attractive than
any of the individual alternatives—both for achieving the “tightest”
possible CTB for non-proliferation purposes and for achieving high
stockpile reliability—would be a combination. For example, a quota (5
tests per year) at a reduced yield threshold (15 KT) for a phase-out pe-
riod (5 years), followed by permitted experiments (sub-kiloton), and
with the purpose of all tests being rigorously limited by description to
stockpile maintenance. During the phase-out period, a periodic review
would be conducted to assess the progress in achieving the desired
goal. If success was not likely, it might not follow that the transition
would be made to the “permitted experiments” phase. If it made nego-
tiating strategy easier, this could be approached on a “Phase I, Phase II”
basis. In all alternatives nuclear effects testing could be “piggy-backed”
on weapons tests. (Note that this combination will not allow high-yield
testing to resolve problems that may occur with secondaries.)
(S/FRD) Implications of the Alternatives (U)
[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
(S) Non-Proliferation. The implications of the various alternatives to
maintain stockpile reliability under a CTB for our non-proliferation ob-
jectives are difficult to determine. By agreeing to a CTB, the U.S.,
U.S.S.R., and U.K. will have taken a major step toward achieving the
over-all objectives of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We will be severely
constrained in the development of new weapons even if nuclear experi-

Comprehensive Test Ban
ments, a quota on testing, or a phase-out of testing are permitted (for
nuclear weapons states only). At issue here in relation to our NPT ob-
jectives is how a CTB which allowed (or did not allow) one or more of
the various alternatives would affect the nuclear development deci-
sions of those states who have not signed the NPT.
(S) Any exceptions for nuclear weapons states will be character-
ized by some of the non-nuclear states as discriminatory. States which
want a rationale for continued non-participation in the NPT are likely
to exploit any exception from an ideal zero-yield treaty. On the other
hand, I see no reason to believe that a zero-level treaty (as opposed to
one allowing experiments, a quota, or a phase-out) will provide suffi-
cient reason for those same states to participate in the NPT. The motiva-
tions behind the decisions for nuclear weapons are far more complex,
and virtually impossible to characterize in advance. We should distin-
guish in our own thinking between those real motivations, on the one
hand, and excuses on the other.
(S/RD) U.S.–U.S.S.R. Asymmetries and Congressional Ratification. A
third consideration is how any of the various alternatives for main-
taining stockpile reliability under a CTB would affect asymmetries in
the reliability of U.S. and U.S.S.R. stockpiles. Although much is un-
known in this area, several factors appear to give the Soviets an advan-
tage in reliability of their stockpile. First and most important, they can
retain their weapon design lab personnel for many years simply by
control of personnel assignments. Second, their missiles have a larger
throw-weight by a significant amount, giving them more flexibility in
correcting problems without nuclear testing (i.e., by falling back to sim-
pler, heavier warhead designs).
[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
[8 lines not declassified] Higher yield primaries, while almost surely
weighing more, would be less subject to deleterious effects of small
changes in production processes, materials, etc., and thus could have
better long-term reliability.
(S) It would appear, therefore, that the Soviets would begin a CTB
with a “built-in” asymmetry in their favor. The quota and phase-out al-
ternatives are the ones that would contribute more directly to mini-
mizing the effects of this asymmetry.
(S) With respect to the permitted experiments alternative, the
question of potential asymmetries becomes intertwined with the verifi-
cation capabilities of both sides. [5 lines not declassified] A unilateral U.S.
failure to carry out experiments at that level could produce significant
technical asymmetries. It would almost certainly have a considerable
political impact if it were believed that we were not, but the Soviets
were, doing such experiments.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(S) Another consideration is that we should expect close Congres-
sional scrutiny of the stockpile reliability and verification problems as-
sociated with a CTB. A treaty which constrains experiments to the
kiloton and sub-kiloton range—let alone a still lower level—is likely to
be attacked by some as a “give away” that concedes a permanent reli-
ability advantage to Soviet nuclear forces. On the other hand, a CTB
treaty that has a higher yield quota or phase-out provision will prob-
ably be attacked by others as a significant departure from the ideal of a
“comprehensive” test ban.
(S/FRD) Options (U)
(S) At issue is whether some form of limited nuclear testing—lim-
ited in yield, numbers of tests, or duration—should be allowed under a
CTB in order to maintain, over the long term, high confidence in the re-
liability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
(S) At this time, there is no known method of ensuring high stock-
pile reliability that does not include some nuclear testing. Yet any pro-
posal for modifying a “zero-yield” CTB would conflict with the basic
purposes of an ideal CTB, the degree dependent upon the type of modi-
fication desired. Weighing together these two policy requirements is
the tough problem.
(S) The options which appear to offer the best approach toward
satisfactorily gaining both objectives of stockpile reliability and
non-proliferation are listed below:
1. (S/FRD) Phase-out, i.e., some form of quota testing, restricted
solely to nuclear weapon states, at a limit of 15 KT or less, over a speci-
fied period of time. [2 lines not declassified] As to the length of the transi-
tional period, it is again noted that methods to quantify confidence
levels in the reliability of our stockpile, in a condition of non-testing,
are not known. Sufficient time to determine the feasibility of a “wood-
enized” stockpile and to permit an orderly transition to a posture that
would provide adequate assurance of high confidence in stockpile reli-
ability under a CTB would be essential criteria. For a short transition
period, e.g., 5 years or less, a review provision following it would be
desirable.
2. (S/FRD) Small quota of tests per year. A quota of perhaps two tests
per year at some fixed yield limit, perhaps as low as 5 KT or even as
high as the 150 KT TTBT limit, might provide sufficient opportunity for
assuring stockpile confidence. This rate would be so much lower than
the current testing rates of both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. that it should
allay most concerns about the development of new weapons. However,
this approach would be a major deviation from a pure CTB. To mini-
mize its impact on our non-proliferation goals, it would require full
clarification to the non-nuclear weapon states of the need of nuclear

Comprehensive Test Ban
weapons states to maintain a reliable nuclear weapon stockpile. The
advantage of this approach is that throughout the yield range it con-
tinues testing in the mode where our past experience lies, and also [less
than 1 line not declassified]
(S/FRD) Under both Options 1 and 2, sub-kiloton nuclear experi-
ments, e.g., 100 tons, would be allowed indefinitely. They would assist
in maintaining high levels of scientific expertise at the laboratories. This
would also allow energy-related work to go on, and would accept the
fact that military benefits, e.g., nuclear weapons effects testing, cannot
be excluded from such work.
3. (S/RD) Permitted Experiments [less than 1 line not declassified].
Stockpile confidence would be lower than under options 1 and 2 above.
While testing at levels less than about [less than 1 line not declassified]
would not contribute directly to stockpile reliability, the positive ben-
efit of such testing would be in encouraging the retention of laboratory
expertise which would help indirectly to assure stockpile confidence.
Full support by the government in retaining the high scientific quality
of the laboratories would be essential. [2 lines not declassified]
(S) There are other variations which could also contribute to stock-
pile reliability but would probably contribute less toward non-
proliferation objectives than the above options.
1. (S/FRD) [2 lines not declassified] Such tests would contribute di-
rectly to stockpile reliability but may not solve all stockpile mainte-
nance questions requiring testing. [1 line not declassified]
2. (S) Formal Review. Under this variant, there would be no provi-
sion for nuclear tests for stockpile reliability during the period of the
agreement; however nuclear experiments under 1 kiloton would be
permitted. The agreement would include a provision for a formal re-
view at the end of the 3 to 5 year initial duration period. At that time,
each party would have the right to conduct those nuclear tests at a spec-
ified yield which are certified by each government to be required to
maintain stockpile reliability.
(S/FRD) Recommendation. The issues identified in this paper con-
cerning some form of limited testing under a CTB for maintaining high
confidence in the reliability of our nuclear stockpile are of sufficient na-
tional importance to warrant an SCC meeting to obtain a conclusive
decision.
Harold Brown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
189.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
4351. USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Assessment
CTB Message No. 187
1. Summary: With trilateral negotiations entering brief recess,
most significant development in recent weeks has been emergence of
verification, rather than peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), as chief
Soviet preoccupation and as the key issue on which prospects for early
achievement of a CTB treaty depend. It has become clear that our pro-
posals on internal seismic installations (ISIs) and on-site inspections
(OSIs) have struck sensitive nerves in the Soviet government and have
encountered strong resistance within certain quarters on the basis of
traditional Russian concerns about sovereignty and security. While the
Soviets continue to state agreement in principle to the idea of authenti-
cated ISIs and preagreed OSI rights and functions, and have accepted a
number of specific elements of our approach, their overall response to
our proposals—as reflected in the draft separate agreement they tabled
on March 152—has been minimal and inadequate. They have, in partic-
ular, proposed leaving decisions on key verification requirements to a
joint consultative commission after the treaty enters into force.
2. However, the Soviets have stressed informally that, if verifica-
tion difficulties can be resolved, duration and PNE linkage would no
longer be problems. Soviet Rep (Morokhov) has privately told both us
and the British that he would recommend Soviet government accept-
ance of idea that weapons test ban treaty should be permitted to extend
without French and Chinese adherence and that, in the absence of mu-
tually acceptable means of carrying out PNEs, the PNE moratorium
should continue as long as the treaty. And, despite objections con-
cerning U.S. verification proposals, leaders of Soviet Delegation have
given every indication that Soviet government wants to conclude a
CTB treaty at an early date. End summary.
3. Much of the work of the round beginning on January 23 con-
sisted of detailed U.S. presentations on verification. Including the intro-
duction of illustrative language for the separate verification agreement,
the presentation of technical justifications for our proposals, and re-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.

Comprehensive Test Ban
sponses to Soviet questions. The Soviet reaction to our verification
package evolved gradually. At first, our proposals evoked considerable
interest and even a few positive signals. As the round progressed, how-
ever, reactions became more negative, culminating in the Soviet ple-
nary statements of March 3 and 10,3 where Morokhov labeled U.S. pro-
posals on ISIs and OSIs unacceptable.
4. The basis for this hardening Soviet attitude on verification is
what appears to be an acute concern, at least within certain parts of the
Soviet Delegation, that our verification proposals would involve un-
warranted intrusion on Soviet sovereignty and would jeopardize So-
viet security by making available intelligence information unrelated to
the CTB treaty. The more they have studied the details of our pro-
posals, the more they have expressed opposition. They have claimed,
for example, that the high quality seismometers we propose would de-
tect missile launches and tank movements within the USSR, that U.S.
ISI site selection, installation, and maintenance teams would have un-
warranted opportunities to roam around vast areas and engage in un-
authorized activities, and that U.S. procedures for exempting certain
sites from on-site inspection areas would enable us to conduct an intel-
ligence mapping operation of the Soviet Union.
5. It is apparent that verification has become a controversial and di-
visive issue within the Soviet Delegation, presumably reflecting sharp
bureaucratic differences in Moscow. At more than one plenary meet-
ing, Morokhov has staked out extreme positions on matters of Soviet
sovereignty and security, only to contradict himself a few minutes later
at the restricted heads of Delegation meeting. He has acknowledged
that he is under certain constraints when his whole Delegation is
present, and has encouraged us to take him more seriously when he
speaks in the private sessions. At working group meetings, we have
seen representatives of different Soviet agencies openly contradict one
another.
6. Of course, Soviet concerns about the effects of our verification
proposals on Soviet sovereignty and security are either highly exagger-
ated or without any technical foundation. But these issues are probably
being considered by the Soviet government only partially on their
merits. Our proposals clearly cut against the doctrinal grain, and we
would expect that they have stimulated the attention and the hostility
of the Soviet security apparatus, if not other influential segments of the
Soviet bureaucracy as well. With such high stakes, we can anticipate
3 The Soviet plenary statements are in telegram 3421 from the Mission in Geneva,
eign Policy File, D780109–0775.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
great difficulty in getting the Soviets to go along with our proposals on
verification.
7. Internal seismic installations. Among the verification issues, the
most sensitive to the Soviets, and the most important to us, is ISIs. The
Soviets have, at least in principle, accepted important elements of our
approach, especially the need for agreed technical characteristics of the
equipment, agreed authentication measures, agreed procedures to en-
sure the integrity of the authentication device, agreed station locations,
and agreed communications channels. But critical problems remain.
The most generalized defect of the Soviet approach to ISIs, as presented
in their March 15 draft, is that practically all agreed requirements for
the seismic installations would be determined by the joint consultative
commission after entry into force of the treaty, rather than provided for
in the separate agreement. Privately, Morokhov has argued that it
would be easier to work out characteristics satisfactory to us in the JCC
than in the separate agreement itself, since these issues will have
greater political visibility and sensitivity during the treaty negotiations.
We have taken the position that controversial issues can best be re-
solved in these negotiations. A possible basic difference of principle
may also exist on the nature and volume of the data to be exchanged.
The Soviets have discussed, but not yet formally proposed, an ap-
proach under which data from the ISIs would be provided only upon
request for the purpose of clarifying the character of events that had
been detected by national technical means. In addition, pointing out
that the equipment proposed by us will probably not be ready for de-
ployment when the treaty enters into force, the Soviets have called for
the use of existing equipment and have not been clear on whether they
envisage upgrading later.
8. The present Soviet position on ISIs is clearly inadequate, and we
have told them so. We have stressed that we could not enter into a CTB
without first having nailed down our essential verification require-
ments in the separate agreement, including the requirement for re-
ceiving all data recorded at the ISIs, not just specially requested data. It
is currently difficult to predict how much detail, in terms of ISI charac-
teristics, the Soviets will be prepared to accept in the separate agree-
ment. While claiming that he has already gone beyond his instructions
in the March 15 draft, Morokhov has hinted that the Soviets would be
prepared to consider more detailed formulations. He talked of finding
the “golden mean” between the Soviet draft and the “excessive detail”
of the U.S. proposal. However, Morokhov has also said that he is not in
a position to put forward modifications of the Soviet draft and has
urged us to propose additions and modifications of our own.
9. On-site inspections. Relative to ISIs, remaining difficulties on
OSIs seem less acute and more easily resolvable. On the question of

Comprehensive Test Ban
procedures for initiating OSIs, the stated Soviet objective has been to
ensure that OSIs would not be used for harassment or for purposes
unrelated to CTB compliance. They have accordingly tried to delineate
clearly the limited type of event that could trigger an OSI request and
also to limit the type of evidence that could be used in making such a
request. Throughout the round, Soviet Delegation members have given
us confusing and most often troublesome signals on this question.
However, from recent remarks by Morokhov and his deputy, Timer-
baev, it seems that there may now be a reasonably good possibility of
finding language that meets the Soviet need for specificity in describing
the type of event that could trigger an OSI, without establishing criteria
(e.g., requirement for seismic evidence) that could serve as a barrier to
U.S. OSI requests. In addition, we have continued to stress that our pro-
posed agreed understanding on the consequences of arbitrary behavior
in rejecting OSIs is an essential element of our voluntary approach to
OSI. While the Soviets have not formally responded to our proposal,
Timerbaev has indicated that they may be prepared to work with us on
such an understanding.
10. On OSI rights and functions, the Soviets have continued to
agree in principle that these should be agreed in advance and specified
in the separate agreement. In practice, however, their draft deals only
with rights, in general terms, contains nothing on functions and defers
certain key elements (e.g., types of equipment, number of personnel,
duration of OSI) to ad hoc determination by the joint consultative com-
mission. U.S. Delegation believes that Soviets will eventually agree to a
more complete and explicit treatment of the rights and functions in the
separate agreement, along the lines we have proposed. However, this
may well prove difficult and time-consuming, and we would still have
the job of getting the Soviets to accept the details of our proposal.
11. International seismic data exchange (ISDE). The verification
issue on which the most progress was made in terms of working out
agreement language was ISDE. In the course of several sub-group ses-
sions, a bracketed composite text was developed of the treaty annex
containing the guidelines for the ISDE. The present text includes only a
few bracketed formulations, reflecting disagreements on relatively
minor issues. The only factor preventing elimination of virtually all of
the brackets (with the exception of those containing alternate formula-
tions on the nature of the implementation body) was the inability of the
Soviet Delegation, even on this relatively simple and uncontroversial
issue, to coordinate its position effectively. Soviet sub-group repre-
sentatives came to several meetings without instructions, and were
simply unprepared to negotiate.
12. Duration and peaceful nuclear explosions. Throughout the
round, the U.S. and UK Delegations kept the pressure on the Soviets to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
abandon their existing positions on duration of the weapons test ban
treaty and linkage between the duration of the treaty and that of the
PNE moratorium. While Soviet Delegation members indicated infor-
mally, almost from the start of the round, that they were prepared to
consider alternatives to their present position on treaty duration, they
were unwilling, and remain unwilling, to make a formal proposal until
there is a greater measure of agreement on verification. Until recently,
we had speculated that the Soviet tactic might be to wait until verifica-
tion is resolved, and then offer to permit the weapons test ban to con-
tinue without French and Chinese adherence in exchange for our ac-
ceptance of a deadline for the PNE moratorium. However, Morokhov
on March 9 told us that he was convinced that the duration and PNE
issues would pose no difficulty once verification was solved. He said
that he would recommend Soviet acceptance of the idea that the treaty
should be permitted to continue and that, in the absence of trilateral
agreement on procedures for carrying out PNEs, the PNE moratorium
should remain in force as long as the weapons test ban.
13. U.S. Delegation considers it unlikely, in light of the importance
of the issues involved, that Morokhov would talk that way if the Soviet
Delegation did not already have authority to move along those lines or
if Morokhov was not confident that he could get that authority. If this is
correct, the Soviets are prepared to move much more decisively and
much more quickly from their Nov 2 position (i.e., fixed deadline for
PNE moratorium)4 than we had expected. Indeed, such a move would
constitute total acceptance of our position on PNE linkage.
14. Of course, even if Morokhov’s remarks can be depended upon
fully, we would not expect it to be easy to find mutually acceptable for-
mulations on duration and PNE questions. The Soviets may well back
away from their November 2 positions gradually, in small and initially
inadequate steps. In any event, it is very doubtful that they would
accept our December 7 proposal concerning a special right of with-
drawal,5 since that formulation, in their view, places too heavy a re-
sponsibility on the individual state deciding to exercise its right. In-
stead, they will probably insist on some formula that incorporates the
principle of “unity of action” among the three nuclear powers which, to
the Soviets, probably means trilateral consultations prior to a decision
on extending the treaty and either simultaneous release from their CTB
of the December proposal, which specified that “after three years have elapsed since the
entry force of the treaty, any party could give one year notice and, at the end of that year,
withdraw from the treaty if it determined that conditions arising from the conduct of nu-
clear explosions by any non-party required its withdrawal for reasons of national secu-

Comprehensive Test Ban
obligations or a joint determination to extend the treaty. The duration
formula recently proposed by the UK includes that principle, while
meeting our key objective of permitting the treaty regime to continue
without French and Chinese adherence. Moreover, as the UK Delega-
tion suggested, it could provide an opportunity to terminate CTB obli-
gations and resume testing if serious stockpile reliability problems de-
veloped. U.S. Delegation believes that UK proposal could well be
desirable option to pursue and feels that it should be given careful con-
sideration during the recess.
15. Conclusion. Despite their cautious and inadequate position on
verification, we have no reason to think that the Soviets are interested
in relaxing the pace of the negotiations. In fact, by providing us a pre-
view of their position on duration and PNE linkage and by giving us
their draft separate agreement immediately before the recess, Mo-
rokhov has conveyed the impression that at least the leadership of the
Soviet Delegation is determined to move ahead and even accelerate the
pace.
16. Morokhov has told us privately several times that, if verifica-
tion can be solved, the other issues will fall into place easily and
quickly. We question how easily and quickly that might be. But at the
present time, we can agree with his assessment that verification, espe-
cially the question of internal seismic installations, holds the key to
prospects for achieving a treaty at an early date.
17. A caveat is necessary, however, on the permitted nuclear ex-
periments issue. In accordance with instructions, we have not raised
the issue with the Soviets. Early in the round, the Soviet deputy men-
tioned to U.S. Alt Rep that the issue could cause difficulties for our two
countries. In the course of an informal conversation March 9 on the de-
tection capabilities of ISIs, Morokhov said that the USSR “would not do
nuclear experiments” under what he believed to be the current detec-
tion threshold using NTM (one-half of a kiloton). Recently, Timerbaev
asked UK Dep Rep Edmonds when we would get to the issue raised in
the first paragraph of the U.S. December 7 working paper (i.e., defini-
tions). He said that the three Delegations should be able to handle that
matter the way we did at the NPT Review Conference (when a certain
type of laser fusion research was interpreted as not falling within the
scope of the NPT).6
18. It is quite possible that the Soviets have simply not figured that
the permitted experiments might not be confined to activities like laser
fusion research. In fact, we have no idea of how the Soviets would react
to the range of options that we have considered in the course of the re-
6 No further information was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
view. Therefore, when we say that verification is the principal re-
maining stumbling block, this necessarily leaves out of account the per-
mitted experiments question. We currently have no way to predict
whether this question, depending on the option chosen, will become a
serious complicating and delaying factor in the negotiations.
Warnke
190.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee and Presidential Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, March 23, 1978
SUBJECT
CTB: Stockpile Reliability and Permitted Experiments
PARTICIPANTS
State
CIA
Cyrus Vance
Sayer Stevens Dep Dir, National
Leslie Gelb Director, Bureau of
Foreign Assessment Center
Politico-Military Affairs
[name not declassified] Chief,
Nuclear Energy Division, OSI
Defense
Harold Brown
White House
David McGiffert Asst Sec for
Zbigniew Brzezinski
International Security Affairs
NSC
Gerald Johnson
Reginald Bartholomew
Energy
Benjamin Huberman
Secretary James Schlesinger
OSTP
Donald Kerr Acting Asst Sec for
Frank Press
Defense Programs
John Marcum
JCS
Admiral James Holloway Acting
Chairman, JCS
Maj Gen Edward Giller JCS Rep
CTB
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the issue of stockpile re-
liability and whether some continued testing should be permitted
under a CTB. At the opening of the meeting Dr. Brzezinski explained
the White House Situation Room.

Comprehensive Test Ban
that due to activities connected with the meeting between President
Carter and Prime Minister Begin,2 this meeting needed to be termi-
nated at about 6:15 p.m. Consequently, he stated that this meeting
would be used to vent the issues and get some sense of the position of
the participants, without trying to resolve the issue.
At Dr. Brzezinski’s request, Frank Press reviewed the findings of a
distinguished panel of outside experts he had convened to consider
this issue. He explained that although they had concurred in the
Panel’s report,3 along with the other members, the directors of our nu-
clear weapons design laboratories had subsequently written him to re-
inforce their concerns that some testing would be needed eventually to
maintain confidence in the reliability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
On verification, he explained that the Panel felt that verification ca-
pabilities using internal seismic stations may be considerably better
than originally expected, but he cautioned that these results seem al-
most “too good to be true” and proposed that they be thoroughly re-
viewed by an appropriate OSTP panel before being adopted.
Secretary Brown commented that in any event, it was just a matter
of time before our capability is that good. Dr. Press agreed, and noted
that seismic arrays would be particularly helpful in improving our
capability.
Dr. Press then discussed the problem of stockpile reliability. He
noted that all Panel members agreed that we could maintain the
present level of confidence for five years without testing and that there
would be some decline in reliability in the long term, with divergent
views as to how rapid the decline would be. He reviewed the Panel’s
comments on the three options under consideration by the SCC
Working Group4 and noted that it saw considerable value in a more
than routine review conference at the end of five years which could
consider stockpile reliability along with other problems such as PNEs
and 234.
3 Not found.
4 Marcum, Huberman, and Bartholomew summarized the three options in a March
21 memorandum to Brzezinski. Option one “would ban all testing and rely on
self-regulation to determine whether some testing at very low levels such as one point
safety tests might be permitted.” Option two “would augment this approach with a re-
view conference at the end of a specified period to consider stockpile reliability along
with other problems such as testing by France and China, and provide for withdrawal if
necessary at a lower cost than invoking the supreme national interest clause.” The third
option “would explicitly permit testing under one of a number of sub-options such as
delay of entry into force, annual quotas, or a yield ceiling ranging from a few tons to a few
kilotons.” (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 92, SCC 066,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
and testing by other states which affect the future of a CTB. Secretary
Vance wondered whether we would know how much degradation had
occurred after five years. Secretary Brown responded that this was a
new challenge since in the past there had never been a time when new
weapons were not under constant development; he felt that the issue
was one of confidence and not real decline. Dr. Brzezinski observed
that we would not know how rapid the decline would be; Dr. Press
agreed, noting there would be some decline but that the rate would be
uncertain.
Dr. Press discussed the Panel’s finding that to maintain the present
level of confidence in stockpile reliability in the long term, testing at 3
KT would be needed. It was recognized that this would be viewed as a
threshold ban rather than a CTB and could undermine our political ob-
jectives. The Panel did not think the marginal reduction in political
price in reducing the testing threshold from 3 KT to 300 tons would be
worth the loss in technical utility of the threshold.
Secretary Brown stated that he differed somewhat from this con-
clusion noting that we might in time learn how to more effectively uti-
lize testing at a level as low as 100 tons. Secretary Vance inquired
whether a 3 KT threshold would permit development of new weapons.
Dr. Press responded that a 3 KT threshold would eliminate develop-
ment of strategic warheads, that some tactical warheads might be de-
veloped although this would be of uncertain importance, and that 3 KT
might permit development of weapons by current non-nuclear
weapons states. In response to a question from Secretary Schlesinger,
Dr. Press discussed the difference between our seismic detection and
identification thresholds, noting that they occasionally differ by up to a
factor of two.
Secretary Brown commented that stockpile reliability would obvi-
ously be a key issue in Senate ratification and that possible disparities
would also receive a lot of play since there was clearly a verification
threshold of the order of a [less than 1 line not declassified] He argued that
we should think further about the non-proliferation impact of a less
than comprehensive treaty and be prepared in the context of ratifica-
tion to address how much various kinds of treaties would help our
non-proliferation efforts.
Secretary Brown then commented on the three options noting that
option A (CTB with self-regulation) would be most helpful for
non-proliferation and probably is negotiable, but it could be said that
the disparity is greatest in this option. In thinking about option B (re-
view conference), he wondered whether the Soviets had originally ex-
pected they could use PNEs to solve the stockpile reliability problem.
He noted that PNEs would be a possible way out for us as well, but that
the Indians might be able to take advantage of this option. He agreed

Comprehensive Test Ban
that there were a number of issues which favored the five year/review
conference approach but he was concerned that the political threshold
against resuming testing would be high. With regard to option C (pro-
vision for continued testing) Secretary Brown noted that it included a
possible phase out approach. He again mentioned that testing at 100
tons might be interesting and also suggested also that we might con-
sider contained experiments in laboratory facilities, but expressed con-
cern that this could lead to a containment race. Dr. Press commented
that the Panel was very skeptical of the utility of a threshold as low as
100 tons and Secretary Brown agreed that there was considerable un-
certainty as to its effectiveness.
Dr. Brzezinski, noting that time was short, asked Paul Warnke for
his views. Warnke declined to comment on the technical issues but
noted there were strong international as well as Soviet expectations
that we were seeking a genuine CTB. He agreed that if we could not af-
ford the risks, we should move to option B. He argued that option C
would be perceived internationally as a threshold ban rather than a
CTB and would have very little value. Consequently, he believed that
we should abandon the negotiations rather than adopt option C. Dr.
Brzezinski observed that the President’s commitment to a CTB was
very clear and that an absolutely compelling national security argu-
ment would be required for him to adopt option C.
Secretary Schlesinger noted that while we were on record as sup-
porting verifiable arms control agreements, the Panel had stated we
would be able [less than 1 line not declassified] He was concerned that the
lack of verification below this level might be unacceptable to Congress.
Secretary Brown and others noted that we had never insisted on abso-
lute verification but have always been careful to speak in terms of its
adequacy and of the significance of any possible evasion.
Secretary Schlesinger’s second concern was whether the weapons
laboratories would be able to continue certification of performance of
our stockpiled weapons; he noted that without testing [less than 1 line
not declassified] they might not be able to do so. He commented that this
might not be in our security interest and that the reaction could be very
severe if we tell Congress that we cannot verify and certify. He argued
that the non-proliferation issue could cut both ways—some countries
might develop nuclear weapons if they lost confidence in our deterrent.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that stockpile degradation would be trouble-
some if the Soviets could maintain their confidence by cheating while
ours declined; however, if the decline in stockpile reliability was about
the same on both sides, there would not be any political problem.
Therefore he thought that enhanced verification could be important
in this regard and wondered whether we should review possible en-
hancement measures. After some discussion, Secretary Brown noted

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
that while some improvements were under consideration, it was un-
likely that we could push the verification threshold [less than 1 line not
declassified]
Secretary Vance then commented briefly on the options, noting
that he could support the review conference approach but that he
agreed with Paul Warnke that we should get out of the negotiations
rather than adopt any provision for continued testing. After some dis-
cussion on the degree of redundancy in warheads for our current stra-
tegic systems, the meeting adjourned at about 6:20 p.m.
191.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation between the President and Prime Minister
Callaghan
The following is a paraphrase of the conversation:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Callaghan: May I raise the Comprehensive Test Ban for just a mo-
ment. Your experts and ours as well, I understand, are now saying that
we will need a few controlled explosions once the treaty has gone into
effect, in order to verify existing stockpiles. I hope you will look into
that. I would need a lot of convincing that it made sense.
The President: There had been discussion here that perhaps after
two, three, or four years, after the expiration of the treaty, then there
might be a need for some explosions. But to have them during the
treaty would short-circuit the basic thrust of the treaty.
Callaghan: Yes, I feel that way very strongly. But the experts are
convinced that some explosions are necessary. What will be necessary
is a political decision, and we will have to assess the risks.
The President: This question has not been brought to me. I know
that Jim Schlesinger, who heads the Energy Department and is respon-
phone from the Oval Office. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in full in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Comprehensive Test Ban
sible for these matters, has been concerned, from his time as Secretary
of Defense. But Harold Brown has been willing to forego explosive tests
during the time of the agreement. We have discussed the possibility of
mutual monitoring after the agreement for a few tests.
Callaghan: That would be after the treaty expired.
The President: Yes. If I find something more on the technical issues,
I’ll tell you.
Callaghan: Thank you. I mentioned the issue to Harold Brown. If
we did have to include some explosions in an agreement, no one would
think we were very serious about a test ban.
The President: I’ll follow the issue. It’s always good to hear from
you, Jim. Please give my best to Audrey.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
192.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Additional Information Items
CTB and Stockpile Reliability
As I alerted you last week,2 there is growing opposition within De-
fense and Energy to a CTB and for the first time Harold Brown, whose
active support would be essential in ratification efforts, is seriously
waivering in his support for this objective.
As you will recall, the Chiefs pointed out in previous discussions
with you3 their concern that we may be unable to maintain confidence
in our nuclear weapons stockpile under a CTB and that the Soviets
could maintain confidence in their weapons through clandestine
Above Carter’s initial, an unknown hand wrote “Cy sent to Marcum 4/19.”
2 Not found.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
testing. Harold also sent me a signed memorandum4 which concludes
that without testing, stockpile reliability can be maintained adequately
for awhile, but there would eventually be accelerating erosion possibly
down to a very low level. Harold’s study presented several options to
mitigate this problem ranging from threshold treaties to gradual
phaseouts of testing; all would involve continued testing at least at one
KT or higher for several years.
In addition to a special study by Frank Press5 of this issue which
included the directors of our weapons labs, and a special meeting of the
SCC,6 Cy and I met with Harold privately.7 We urged him to tentatively
accept the idea of guarding against long-term stockpile problems by
having a review conference after five years to determine whether the
treaty should continue. This would probably be negotiable since Soviet
concerns about PNEs and testing by France and China could be met in
the same manner. The British raised this same thought with me during
the Callaghan visit, and we have now received a formal paper from
their government proposing this approach.8
However, Harold is concerned that at the time of the review con-
ference there would be a high political threshold against resuming
testing, and he would not agree to have the Working Group examine
the modalities of this approach unless it also considered his options for
continued testing. As a result, we agreed that Harold would think fur-
ther about the issue and that we would continue the discussion after his
trip. Cy and I will follow-up on this as soon as we all are in town, but
Harold may not yield.
Thus, at some point it may be necessary for you to meet privately
with Harold to remind him that he supported a CTB as being in our na-
tional interest in discussions with you prior to your inauguration, and
last Spring, during the PRM–16 review. Harold’s position is clearly cen-
tral—with his support we can use the SCC process to get Jim Schle-
singer and the Chiefs to reluctantly go along.
4 See Document 188.
5 Not found.
6 See Document 190.
7 No minutes for this discussion were found.
8 The UK Government delivered a paper to the Department of State on April 11 that
formally proposed “a treaty of limited duration, preferably of 5 years, without accepting
any commitment about the future of the test ban thereafter.” The text of the paper is in
File, P840163–0161) At the bottom of the page, Carter wrote “Callaghan & I discussed
this. Will resist moves to test during agreement period.” See Document 191.

Comprehensive Test Ban
I have prepared a background paper on the technical aspects of
this issue which I will provide separately if you want it.9
9 Under this paragraph, Carter wrote “hold for later.”
193.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
JCSM–119–78
Washington, April 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban (U)
views regarding a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) and possible negoti-
ations with the Soviet Union.3 These views have not changed. In light of
the initiation of formal trilateral negotiations last October and the on-
going interagency studies, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe it appro-
priate to address a matter of principal concern—maintenance of, and
confidence in, the US nuclear deterrent posture under a CTB.
2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff continue to believe that a complete
ban on all nuclear testing is not in the best interest of the United States.
They believe any test ban must specifically provide for adequate nu-
clear testing in order to:
a. Maintain high confidence in the reliability of US nuclear weap-
ons and hence confidence in the US nuclear deterrent.
b. Avoid undesirable asymmetries which are otherwise likely to
result due to the inability of the United States to verify compliance with
the test ban.
randum to Carter under cover of an April 22 memorandum. (Ibid.) To the right of the
date, Brown wrote “4/20 Walt Slocombe—I think a formal transmission of these views
and explicit drawing of attention to expectation JCS will not support options A or B ver-
sion of CTB in ratification is needed. HB.”
[Footnote is in the original.]
3 See Document 148.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. (S) To assure high confidence in the nuclear deterrent, certain
minimum nuclear testing requirements must be fulfilled. These re-
quirements include:
a. Identifying and correcting reliability and potential safety prob-
lems in existing nuclear weapons.
b. Replacing nuclear weapons reaching the end of their stockpile
life.
c. Adapting existing warhead designs to new delivery systems
with high confidence.
d. Incorporating into existing warheads systems to enhance safety,
security, and command and control.
e. [2½ lines not declassified]
These minimum requirements should be able to be fulfilled at the
level of testing necessary to assure confidence in nuclear stockpile
reliability.
4. (S) At the Special Coordination Committee meeting of 22 March
1978, three options were discussed which might be applied under a
CTB regime.4
a. Option A—Self-Regulation. This option would ban testing with-
out defining what activities were permitted or precluded.
b. Option B—Periodic Treaty Review. This option would also ban
testing but would include explicit provision for periodic review with
the understanding that serious problems with the US stockpile could
prompt action to seek treaty amendments to allow limited testing.
c. Option C—Provision for Continued Testing. This option would
allow some nuclear tests limited by yield, number of tests, agreed
phaseout period, or date of entry into force.
The Self-Regulation and Periodic Treaty Review options, which
would preclude necessary weapons testing, would contribute to long-
term strategic instability because the United States would be unable to
meet the criteria stated in paragraph 2 above. Further, the Periodic
Treaty Review option, by deferring the question of testing, might place
the United States in an unacceptable position should the need arise to
seek treaty amendment. The political consequences of seeking treaty
amendment, or failing that, unilateral abrogation of the treaty, are such
that the United States might find itself in the position of having to ac-
cept a high military risk. The Appendix provides additional discussion
of the Periodic Treaty Review option.
5. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that continued testing is es-
sential to maintain the US nuclear deterrent posture. Therefore, they
cannot support a test ban which:

Comprehensive Test Ban
a. Does not specifically provide for the degree of testing necessary
to maintain confidence in stockpile reliability.
b. Could lead to asymmetries because of the inability of the United
States to verify compliance.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff reserve judgment on the numbers of tests
and yields required pending further technical review and consider-
ation of a Department of Energy position on these questions.
6. (U) The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you support their views
and that you also convey these views to the President prior to his deci-
sion on the negotiating position for the next round. In this connection, a
decision should be reached as a matter of urgency since the level of
testing could impact significantly on the US approach to verification
and peaceful nuclear explosion issues.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David C. Jones
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
194.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 3, 1978
SUBJECT
The following is a summary of the conversation:
CTB
Jay wanted to know how we are going to handle the problem of
maintaining the reliability of nuclear stockpiles under a CTB. You indi-
cated that there is not much to say right now, and that we are looking at
three options: a 5-year review procedure, an exemption (i.e. a TTB), and
one other. We are still on the same course as before, even though it is
true that State and ACDA are for a CTB with a 5-year review. We will
be looking at this matter intensively, and the President has been in-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
formed of the issues. You also indicated that with some of the options,
there in effect is no treaty—i.e. a CTB; and that we first have to know
how severe the stockpile degrading problem is before determining
whether to go to an option that is less politically significant. In response
to Jay’s question about the value of a CTB on vertical and horizontal
proliferation, you indicated that there is a subjective judgment; but that
you see the importance of a CTB as being more in terms of U.S.-Soviet
relations than proliferation. Jay indicated the Prime Minister’s concern
about a CTB in terms of the Indian nuclear problem. You said that we
are not approaching this issue as an excuse to back out of a CTB—al-
though there are some people in the government who would use the
issue in this way—but rather because there is a serious problem for re-
view. We will move quickly, and within two weeks will be giving it
close attention. Because of the May 4 resumption of the CTB talks, we
should have a meeting here next week on the issue. There is a large
number of unknowns—including on our own needs. Jay said that we
understand the UK position on this.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
195.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, April 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Likely Timing on the Comprehensive Test Ban
The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty negotiations with the U.S.S.R.
and the U.K. will resume on May 4. Although progress was made at the
last round—nine weeks ending on March 21—it is probable that the tri-
lateral negotiations will continue through the summer. Because it is ex-
pected that the product of these negotiations will then be sent to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva for its consid-
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Paul C. Warnke Files, December 1974–July 1979, Ac-
siles, CTB, NPT, and Indian Ocean Arms Control, January–October 1978. Secret. In the
upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “I would like to expedite—
Let Soviets know this. J.”

Comprehensive Test Ban
eration, it is unlikely that a treaty could be completed before the end of
this year.2
This prognosis is based largely on the fact that, although accepting
the principle of internal seismic installations to be located on Soviet and
U.S. territory, the Soviet side is moving very slowly in negotiating the
specifications of the seismic equipment, the procedures to ensure au-
thentication of the data and the nature of involvement of non-Soviet
personnel in the installation and repair of the equipment.
Also drawing out the negotiations is the Soviet resistance to agree
in advance on the rights and functions of U.S. personnel who would
conduct on-site inspections in the Soviet Union.
These verification matters will be included in a separate agreement
between the United States and the Soviet Union with which the United
Kingdom would associate itself. Satisfactory provisions in this regard
are, in my opinion, essential to the verifiability of a Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty.
Somewhat unexpectedly, the other major problems—precluding
peaceful nuclear explosions unless the U.S. agrees to their conduct and
making treaty duration not depend on Chinese and French participa-
tion—seem susceptible of resolution without undue difficulty. While
voicing general agreement in principle with our positions on these
questions, however, the Soviet side is reluctant to address duration and
the PNE moratorium conclusively until the verification issues have
been settled.
The Soviet Delegation appears to have strong military and intelli-
gence components and there is considerable suspicion expressed about
the purpose and functioning of our proposed equipment and proce-
dures for the internal seismic installations. As I see it, therefore, the ne-
gotiations on these verification problems will be technical, detailed,
and protracted.
Paul C. Warnke3
2 In the right margin, Carter bracketed the portion of this sentence that reads “Be-
cause it is expected that the product of these negotiations will then be sent to the Confer-
ence of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva for its consideration” and wrote
“why?”
3 Warnke signed the memorandum “Paul.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
196.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 2, 1978
SUBJECT
COMPREHENSIVE TEST BAN CONCERNS
As we have discussed previously, I believe agreement must be
reached within the Executive Branch on a U.S. negotiating position for
a Comprehensive Test Ban that permits us to protect vital national se-
curity interests and that offers a realistic prospect of winning Senate
ratification.
Such a negotiating position must meet four central concerns:
1. Ensuring our ability to certify and maintain the U.S. nuclear
stockpile;
2. Ensuring verification provisions that give the U.S. high confi-
dence assurance of compliance by the Soviets;
3. Maintaining a linkage between permitted experiments, verifica-
tion, and Peaceful Nuclear Explosives; and
4. Ensuring that compliance provisions of the agreement on the
previous three issues improve, rather than complicate, U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions on arms control issues.
I am concerned that we have been unable to reach a consensus on
these issues, and that if we do not, the ability of the Administration to
win Senate ratification may be significantly lessened. In the present cli-
mate—with controversy growing regarding SALT, and in the wake of
the neutron warhead deferral and the B–1 cancellation—the Adminis-
tration must ensure that stockpile risks are minimized, and that verifi-
cation and compliance prospects are improved as a result of any such
treaty if we are to hope for ratification. Each of these major issues is dis-
cussed further below.
1. The nuclear weapons designers within the laboratories and the
Department of Energy believe that the DOE requires some level of
testing in order to identify stockpile problems and certify the adequacy
of fixes. Some level of testing would be required as well to implement
necessary changes in safety, security, and command/control, and to
adapt older designs to new delivery systems entering the inventory.
ject File, Box 2, Energy Department, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, General, 1978
May. Secret.

Comprehensive Test Ban
While we know little in detail of the Soviet weapons program, what we
do know suggests that the Soviet nuclear stockpile would not suffer to
the same degree nor degrade as rapidly as ours.
We maintain this view strongly and are disappointed that the in-
teragency process thus far has seemed unwilling to accommodate this
position.
2. The adequacy of seismic verification is one of the most difficult
subjects we must face in the CTB area—and one of the most important
for both acceptance of the Treaty and preventing the development of
major asymmetries.
DOE believes that even with the optimal level of Internal Seismic
Installations (ISIs), we will remain unable to both detect and identify
events below the few kiloton level in low coupling media. Without the
optimal level of ISIs, even this capability would be significantly de-
graded. DOE representatives have discussed my concerns with Dr.
Press about the OSTP/CTB Review Panel Report, and he has agreed to
look into this matter.2
3. In addition, I believe it is essential to our deliberations, as well as
being a sound negotiating strategy, that we maintain the linkage be-
tween permitted experiments, verification, and Peaceful Nuclear Ex-
plosives. It would be unwise to attempt to resolve the verification
issues relating to the number and type of ISIs and On-Site Inspections
(OSIs) without first addressing the issue of permitted experiments—
since these two categories of problems are related intimately to the
level that can be adequately verified. Further, to resolve these problems
by decoupling them from PNEs would seem to give away any leverage
we might have with the Soviets for our desired outcome on prohibiting
PNEs. I am aware, of course, that the Soviets have told us privately that
if these other issues are resolved, we can settle the PNE questions
without difficulty; but we must assume that this is a Soviet negotiating
tactic that may not well serve our interests.
Unfortunately, this essential linkage is not considered in the 17
April ACDA paper requested by the National Security Council on the
ISI strategy for the 4 May resumption of negotiations. This paper treats
ISIs independently of other key treaty issues, and recommends the ne-
gotiation of a questionable phased approach based upon resolving the
details of our verification capabilities in a Joint Consultative Commis-
sion after completion of the basic agreement and its entry into force.
4. A CTB agreement must not only meet objective tests of adequate
verifiability but, perhaps most importantly, must lower rather than
2 No record of these discussions were found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
raise the level of tensions inherent in public perceptions of the U.S./
Soviet competition.
In this regard, our experience in dealing with contentious compli-
ance issues arising from the ABM Treaty and with the Interim Agree-
ment must be kept in mind as we proceed with the CTB negotiations.
This experience should caution us against what seem to be easy ways of
resolving sticky negotiating problems at the expense of future serious
compliance problems. For example, as we attempt to drive down the
detection threshold, we will inevitably increase the number of detected
but unidentified, and therefore ambiguous, events that must be re-
solved with the Soviets. If our experience in SALT is any guide, the
sheer number of such ambiguous incidents could complicate both the
compliance process and the U.S. public perception of Soviet attitudes
toward serious arms control agreements.
Finally, in attempting to reach consensus on the substance of major
issues, I am concerned that the interagency process must be rational-
ized and strengthened to ensure objective consideration of sometimes
differing views. These difficult issues must be faced squarely now, and
an integrated U.S. position and strategy based on balanced inputs must
be developed. This may require more diligence on everyone’s part to
ensure that balance is reflected. I stand ready to cooperate in that
process, and would be pleased to discuss the issues raised in this memo
with you more fully.

Comprehensive Test Ban
197.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee and Presidential Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
CTB—Stockpile Reliability and Permitted Experiments
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Jerome Kahan Dep Dir, Bureau of
NSC
Politico-Military Affairs
Reginald Bartholomew
Defense
Benjamin Huberman
Harold Brown
OSTP
David McGiffert Asst Sec for
Frank Press
International Security Affairs
John Marcum
Energy
CIA
Donald Kerr Acting Asst Sec for
Stan Turner
Defense Programs
Sayer Stevens Dep Dir, National
JCS
Foreign Assessment Center
General David Jones Acting
Chairman, JCS
Maj Gen Edward Giller JCS Rep
CTB
The purpose of the meeting was to continue discussion of the issue
of stockpile reliability and permitted experiments under a CTB. The
discussions focused on a treaty of fixed duration as proposed by the
British, and whether this would strike a better balance between military
risks and foreign policy objectives than a treaty of indefinite duration.
In discussion of the fixed duration approach, there was general
agreement that it should include a strong safeguards program, a re-
quirement for Senate ratification of any extension, and a review confer-
ence in the fifth year to consider the future of the treaty. There was dis-
agreement, however, on whether the term of the treaty should be three
rather than five years, whether we should declare our intention to re-
sume testing after five years or just preserve the option to do so if nec-
essary, and the level of permitted experiments.
Defense and Energy generally argued in favor of a plan rather than
option to resume testing. Secretary Brown noted that this would reduce
problems in retaining laboratory personnel and would be more accept-
the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
able on the Hill. In effect it would shift the burden of proof to those fa-
voring extension of the treaty rather than those favoring resumption of
testing. Defense and Energy also preferred the shorter term, but in re-
sponse to Dr. Brzezinski’s query agreed that they could “live with” a
five year term under a plan to resume. State and ACDA were con-
cerned, however, that a declaration that we planned to resume testing
could seriously undermine the non-proliferation benefits of the treaty
although they acknowledged that this might be mitigated through
careful wording of the statement. They were also concerned that a du-
ration of three rather than five years would be viewed as an insufficient
commitment and that the Soviets might refuse to let us install internal
seismic stations during this period.
The permitted experiments issue was discussed at some length
and JCS and Energy reasserted their views that experiments at three to
five kilotons would be adequate for solving reliability problems. There
was agreement, however, that permitted experiments even at very low
levels (a few pounds or tons) would be useful for maintaining the labo-
ratories and help resolve stockpile problems.
In the course of the meeting all, except JCS, agreed that they could
support a fixed duration treaty with some concerns as noted above on
the term of the treaty and the wording of the assurance regarding re-
sumption of testing. General Jones indicated that in the JCS view a CTB
was not in the US interest at this time due to concern about the ade-
quacy of verification and the opinion of the weapons laboratory di-
rectors that they could not maintain adequate confidence in the reli-
ability of our stockpile without testing.
General Jones acknowledged that the laboratory director’s com-
ment was based on an indefinite duration treaty and it was agreed that
the NSC would ask for their views on a fixed duration treaty with as-
surances and variations as noted above. Dr. Brzezinski concluded the
meeting with the statement that we would summarize the issues for the
President either asking for a meeting or his preliminary guidance on
the issues (with a reclama session, if needed).

Comprehensive Test Ban
198.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 10, 1978
SUBJECT
CTB
In an SCC meeting last week all of your advisers, except for the
JCS, agreed to support a fixed, five-year duration treaty as proposed to
you by Jim Callaghan,2 subject to your support for a strong safeguards
plan, Senate ratification of any extension of the treaty, and your assur-
ance that any necessary testing would be carried out after five years.
(Summary of Conclusions is attached.)3 This memorandum includes a
brief discussion of the JCS views and of the substantive issues which
you may want to decide following your luncheon discussion with the
Chiefs today.
In explaining the Chiefs’ opposition, Dave Jones stated that in ad-
dition to concerns about verification, the Chiefs relied heavily on tech-
nical judgment of the laboratories that they could not adequately main-
tain the reliability of our weapons without testing at 3 to 5 KT. He
acknowledged that the laboratory directors had commented only on an
indefinite duration treaty, and it was agreed that we would ask for their
views on a fixed duration treaty before proceeding further.
We subsequently obtained their comments—Harold Agnew’s is
polemical in nature and negative towards your CTB objective; Roger
Batzel’s is more responsive and acknowledges that a fixed duration ap-
proach would help in meeting his concerns, but maintains that testing
at 3 to 5 KT would be needed eventually. Taken together, these com-
ments do not provide much flexibility for the Chiefs, and they are likely
to continue to oppose the fixed duration approach during your lun-
cheon discussion tomorrow.
As a result, we will need your guidance on several issues in the
near future. The most important issue is whether we should seek a 3 to
5 KT threshold treaty, as the Chiefs prefer, or a fixed duration CTB. If
you prefer the latter,4 you will also need to decide whether the duration
should be 3 or 5 years, the level of experiments that would be per-
ialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 191.
3 See Document 197.
4 Carter underlined the words “a fixed duration CTB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
mitted, and whether your assurance regarding resumption of testing
should constitute a plan to resume testing after five years, or just the op-
tion to do so. You may want to make these decisions following your
luncheon with the Chiefs. However, if you decide to overrule them, I
recommend that you defer decision until after an NSC meeting, to en-
sure for the record that they have had an opportunity to formally
present their views.
Schedule NSC Meeting.
Make decision after luncheon.5
Fixed Duration vs. 3 to 5 KT Threshold
A 3 to 5 KT threshold would be more consistent with verification
capabilities and stockpile reliability needs, but eliminating risks in
these areas would seriously erode potential benefits of a CTB to non-
proliferation and our relations with the Soviets, and would be viewed
as a significant departure from your public commitment to halting
testing. The threshold treaty would have smoother sailing during ratifi-
cation hearings, and the Chiefs’ views would carry a lot of weight, but
with Harold’s and Jim Schlesinger’s support, a fixed duration treaty
would probably be ratified after a difficult struggle. I believe that the
fixed duration approach is adequately protective of our security in-
terests and more consistent with your political objectives, and recom-
mend that you authorize us to propose it in the negotiations.6
3 vs. 5 Year Duration
Harold and Kerr (speaking for DOE) have specifically agreed that
they could live with a five-year duration, but both would prefer three
years, arguing that this would make it easier to keep the laboratories to-
gether. They recognize, however, that the shorter duration might be
criticized by non-nuclear weapons states as an insufficient commit-
ment, and could jeopardize prospects for installing an effective net-
work of internal seismic stations. In addition, the preponderant tech-
nical judgment is that we can maintain reliability without testing for at
least five years. We may have to consider a 3-year duration eventually
since the Soviets may see this as a means of exerting more pressure on
China; however, I recommend that you authorize the five-year dura-
tion as our initial position.7
5 Carter checked the “Make decision after luncheon” option.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
7 Carter underlined the words “five-year duration” and checked the “Approve”
option.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Permitted Experiments/Safeguards
An important issue in developing a safeguards plan under the
fixed duration approach is whether low-level experiments should be
permitted in addition to related work in laser fusion and other areas.
From a technical standpoint, tests at a few pounds or tons of yield are
unlikely to help much with reliability problems, but can be useful for
safety and weapons effect purposes, and would definitely assist in
maintaining the laboratory infrastructure. [4 lines not declassified] How-
ever, low-level testing (a few pounds to a few tons) can be defended on
safety and safeguards grounds, and I recommend that you authorize us
to include such experiments in the safeguards plan which we are devel-
oping for your review.8
Plan or Option to Resume Testing
Harold and Jim would prefer that you announce that you plan to
resume testing after five years for reliability purposes. This would
make the opportunity to resume more credible on the Hill and shift the
burden of proof to those favoring extension of the test ban from those
favoring resumption of testing. Cy and Paul prefer a weaker assurance
that you would carry out any test that might be necessary, but agree
that with careful wording the stronger form might be acceptable. For
example, you could state your intention to resume testing unless a vig-
orous safeguards program and studies in the interim indicated that this
was not necessary. I recognize that this could undercut potential
non-proliferation benefits, particularly in India, but a strong assurance
from you would reassure the Chiefs and make it considerably easier for
Harold and Jim to defend the treaty. Therefore, I recommend that you
authorize us to use the strong form of the assurance as worded above.9
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option, wrote “minimal,” and wrote “?” in the
right-hand margin.
9 Carter checked the “Approve” option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
199.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
7606. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations:
Warnke-Petrosyants Meeting, May 16.
CTB Message No. 211
1. Summary. On May 16 Warnke met for first time with Petro-
syants, new head of Soviet CTB Delegation. Warnke relayed to Petro-
syants President Carter’s personal view of importance of CTB and his
desire to expedite negotiations. Tone of discussion was encouraging.
Without seeking to diminish the difficulty of resolving remaining
issues, Petrosyants conveyed very positive outlook on prospects for the
negotiations. He laid the groundwork for one important step forward
by indicating willingness to begin detailed discussion of agreed under-
standing on OSIs. End summary.
2. Warnke, accompanied by Johnson, Neidle and Finch, met at So-
viet mission on May 16 with Petrosyants, accompanied by Timerbaev
and Tarasov. Petrosyants opened substantive discussion with brief re-
view of session to date, observing that US has submitted “quite a few
interesting proposals.” The Soviets are studying these and asking ques-
tions about them. They have received replies to some questions but not
others, but this is “only natural” in view of the amount of material in-
volved and its seriousness. Petrosyants observed that, in the process of
negotiation, each side thinks it is the other which must change its
positions.
3. Warnke began by reporting that President Carter had asked him
to state to Petrosyants personally that the President wants to expedite
the negotiations in whatever way he can, that he sees this as a most im-
portant matter, and is concerned that we can implement our nonpro-
liferation policy only if we can show the world that the US and USSR
can stop nuclear weapons testing.
4. Warnke then reviewed the highlights of the negotiations from
their beginning, characterizing the Soviet move last year on PNEs as
very constructive. He thought the Soviets would agree that US had
made some very constructive steps also, in accepting the Soviet posi-
tion that seismic stations on the territory of a country should be con-
trolled by that country, and in connection with initiation of on-site in-
spections. On latter point, Warnke recalled that longstanding US
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.

Comprehensive Test Ban
position had been to require mandatory on-site inspections. However,
as result of negotiations during 1977, US had decided that it could ac-
cept Soviet approach of voluntariness subject to certain conditions, in-
cluding agreement that OSI requests would not be refused on arbitrary
basis.
5. Petrosyants suggested that our problem was to find mutually ac-
ceptable formulations. In this regard, the Soviet side felt that the formu-
lation “arbitrary refusals” of on-site inspections—which the US had
proposed for the agreed understanding—was not appropriate for doc-
uments such as this. The Soviet side might prefer a formulation such as
“insufficiently substantiated refusals.” Warnke indicated that we were
prepared to consider alternative formulations and suggested that the
political working group examine the draft language for the agreed
understanding. Petrosyants agreed that this could be done—the first
time the Soviets have been willing to consider the text of the agreed
understanding.
6. Warnke commented that much progress had been made in the
negotiations, although difficult issues remained. In particular, the task
now with regard to national seismic stations is to work out specifics re-
garding equipment and procedures for their operation. Petrosyants
inquired regarding the state of development of US equipment for na-
tional seismic stations. The Soviets did not want to buy a “pig-in-a-
poke”; they needed to see detailed designs. Johnson indicated that
equipment is in an advanced stage of development. We would make
available design drawings but these would not be precise designs of the
production model since further changes could be expected. Perhaps
through their involvement before the designs were finalized, Soviet ex-
perts could offer useful suggestions. Petrosyants said that US proposal
to use seismic equipment which it was currently developing, but which
was not yet in production stage, was a cause of concern to the Soviets.
He thought therefore we could develop some specific stages in estab-
lishing national seismic stations. The first stage would be based on the
use of existing, operating seismic stations. The second stage would con-
sist of improving these stations. The third would involve creation of
seismic stations with outstanding characteristics as the US has pro-
posed. This last stage would require establishing a new communica-
tions system and other details. It would involve a complex set of
problems and would need considerable work which the joint consulta-
tive commission2 would carry out.
2 Reference to the SALT Standing Consultative Commission created by the United
States and the Soviet Union to consider issues of verification of arms limitation agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
7. Warnke responded by noting that, between our Delegations, we
have assembled in Geneva an impressive collection of technical ex-
perts. We should use this expertise to solve as many problems now as
we can rather than simply putting the hard problems off to the joint
consultative commission. Petrosyants said, “this proposal is absolutely
right. Let them solve the problems here as soon as they can, so they can
go home and get back to their regular work.”
Warnke
200.
Presidential Directive/NSC–381
Washington, May 20, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Arms Control & Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban (C)
The President has reviewed the recent deliberations of the SCC on
the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) issues, and has reached the fol-
lowing conclusions.
a. In view of the importance of maintaining confidence in safety
and reliability of our stockpiled nuclear weapons, the US should pro-
pose in the CTB negotiations that the treaty have a fixed, five year dura-
tion. The treaty would automatically terminate at the end of five years.
During the fifth year there would be a review conference to determine
whether to negotiate a replacement treaty.
the memorandum to the Mission in Geneva in telegram 134357, May 26; National Ar-

Comprehensive Test Ban
b. In forwarding the treaty to the Senate for ratification the Presi-
dent has decided to state his intention to resume testing at the end of
the five years limited only to weapons safety and reliability purposes
unless a vigorous safeguards program and studies in the interim indi-
cate that this is not necessary. He has also decided that any further
agreement on testing limitations after the five year treaty would be pre-
sented to the Senate for ratification.
c. The President has decided that nuclear weapons experiments at
minimal yield levels (a few pounds or somewhat higher) should be per-
mitted under the CTB in addition to experiments in laser fusion and
other related areas for civil energy purposes. He has also directed that
the precise nature and yields of such experiments be detailed in a CTB
Safeguards Plan by the SCC and forwarded for his review by June 30,
1978.
In connection with these decisions, the President has asked that the
Soviets be informed of his desire to expedite the CTB negotiations. In
this regard, the US Delegation should state that the fixed duration
treaty proposal, coupled with our earlier historic shift on on-site in-
spection, represents major movement on the part of the US on issues of
Soviet concern and that in return we expect Soviet movement in the di-
rection of our positions on the remaining CTB verification issues.
Zbigniew Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
201.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECTS
SALT, CTB, Africa, Human Rights
U.S. PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Paul C. Warnke
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
Mr. Jody Powell
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
USSR PARTICIPANTS
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko2
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador V. Makarov
Minister Counselor A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is a discussion about SALT.]
CTB
As for CTB, the President did not see any need for detailed discus-
sion here of verification and other matters. He believed that one pri-
mary issue he and Gromyko might discuss was the duration of the
agreement being negotiated. We would like to see it have a five-year
term, and then renegotiate the agreement if both sides considered it ad-
visable to enter into a new agreement. To be perfectly frank, we had
concerns with our own nuclear arsenal which required3 occasional
Room at the White House. Drafted by Krimer. Printed from a draft that bears numerous
handwritten edits. Bartholomew noted on the first page: “ZB: Krimer memcon with RB
fixes. Reg.” The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI,
Soviet Union, Document 115.
2 Bartholomew underlined “Gromyko.”
3 Bartholomew put brackets around “which required” and wrote “and” in the
margin above it.

Comprehensive Test Ban
testing in order to assure us that its capabilities were intact. We be-
lieved that five years was the maximum period of time we could go
without some testing. He hoped that this would be satisfactory to the
Soviet Union. As for the details4 they could be left up to the negotiating
teams.
Gromyko said that in the course of the negotiations encouraging
progress had been achieved on this issue. There were still some un-
agreed questions—not many—including the question the President
had just mentioned, i.e., the duration of a possible accord. He would
ask the President to take into consideration some of the other out-
standing matters involved in the CTB negotiations. Immediately prior
to his departure from Moscow Gromyko had looked into the status of
those negotiations and could say now that if the other issues can be re-
solved—and on some of them U.S. representatives had taken a very
hard position—he believed that a positive solution could be found to
the question of duration of the agreement.
The President asked Ambassador Warnke to touch on the other
issues involved.
Ambassador Warnke said there appeared to be agreement in prin-
ciple on the concepts of authenticated national seismic installations and
on on-site inspections. Considerable differences still existed on the ex-
tent to which specific equipment to be used would be agreed upon at
the present stage of the negotiations. There were also differences on the
question of how on-site inspection would be carried out and what
equipment would be permitted for that purpose.
The President said there was no need this morning to discuss the
technical questions involved. He believed that one political question
could be resolved, i. e., the length of the agreement. He thought that as
termination of the agreement approached, negotiations could be held
regarding extension of the agreement.5 His position was that five years
was a reasonable term. As termination approached, negotiations could
be resumed.
Gromyko repeated that if the other questions could be resolved in
a positive manner, if the President’s negotiators would manifest
greater flexibility, he did not think a five-year term would present any
difficulties.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
4 Bartholomew added “on compliance,” after “details.”
5 Bartholomew added “or a new agreement” after “extension of the agreement.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
202.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to
President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1978
SUBJECT
CONTINUED DISCUSSION OF A ZERO-YIELD CTB
Let me continue our discussion, started on the trip from Knox-
ville,2 regarding permitted experiments under the CTB by pursuing the
points developed below.
1. Over many years the underlying thrust in weapons design has
been to compensate for volumetric constraints and throw-weight limi-
tations in the U.S. strategic program by developing highly compact,
highly sophisticated weapons. Such high sophistication, as in other
cases, results in some degree of technical risk. [7 lines not declassified]
2. Why would previously tested and certified weapons need to be re-
tested? In the continued non-nuclear testing of weapons components, it
turns out with some regularity that individual components fail or de-
grade. Even acceptable components may become unavailable as manu-
facturers shift product lines or go out of business. Materials are altered
slightly or may (as with beryllium) be subject to more stringent regula-
tion. The consequence is that new components or different materials
have to be integrated into previously deployed weapons designs. De-
veloping weapons remains to a considerable extent an art rather than a
science. Weapons designs which seem appropriate, based on computer
models, fail to work as predicted when actually tested.
[1 paragraph (16 lines) not declassified]
3. Readiness of material and men is of paramount concern to the
military services. For this reason everything from radars to engines to
missiles are regularly exercised to demonstrate that they will remain
operationally ready. For there to be doubt about nuclear weapons reli-
ability is vastly distressing to the Services. The notion that nuclear
weapons might degrade over the years, and have attached to them
right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig—You & Jim set up a briefing
with a lab director & me. a) I don’t know how device works & b) what Soviet position is
on this issue. J.”
2 No record of this conversation has been found. According to the President’s Daily
Diary, Carter was in Tennessee on May 22 to speak to the Tennessee Valley Authority
and to address a group of scientists at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials)

Comprehensive Test Ban
lower confidence in reliability is disturbing both in military and polit-
ical terms.
4. Even though we can detect nuclear detonations in hard rock
down [less than 1 line not declassified] as a practical matter today [1 line
not declassified] This is true if the Soviets make no effort to muffle or de-
couple weapons tests. The reasons are, first, that the Soviets can test in
lower coupling media than hard rock. Second, for true verification we
must be able, not only to detect seismic disturbances, but to identify such
disturbances as nuclear detonations.
With an improved verification capability (a network of seismic
arrays or stations located within the Soviet Union), [1 line not declassi-
fied] Even improved verification capability, however, creates prob-
lems. As our ability to detect improves, the number of ambiguous
events will increase. Indeed, there will be several hundred such am-
biguous events each year causing both (possibly undue) military alarm,
but certainly political problems.
5. Aside from the technical and security aspect of a zero-yield test
ban, the interactions between the non-verifiability of the prospective
treaty and the potential non-certifiability of the stockpile will inevitably
stir deep Congressional concern—in an atmosphere already stirred by
other matters. The Administration has steadily pledged to sign no arms
control agreement that cannot be adequately verified, though it has not
in the case of the CTB yet stated what threshold is required for ade-
quate verification. Recently, the Senate requested Mr. Warnke to ad-
dress these concerns in assessing the verifiability of a CTB.3 Given basic
suspicion and the strained relations with the Soviet Union, it will be
difficult to persuade the Senate to trust the Soviets to comply with the
Treaty in [1 line not declassified]
One cannot, of course, decouple the verification issue from the per-
mitted experiments issue. Thus, the prospect that over time the DoE
would be unable to certify stockpile reliability will vastly reinforce that
concern. [2½ lines not declassified] We, by contrast, would most as-
suredly not test, and thereby be forced to absorb whatever degradation
in reliability occurs because of the unknowns. It will be pointed out that
there is an undoubted asymmetry between ourselves and the Soviets in
that they suffer less from throw-weight limitations, volumetric con-
straints, and the inherent sophistication that applies to our weapons.
When the partial test ban agreement was signed and approved in
1963, it could be stated that the burden of the agreement fell equally on
both sides and the U.S. security position was improved. Given the
problems of verification and certification—and the presumed asym-
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
metry between ourselves and the Soviets—that conclusion cannot be
readily drawn in the case of the zero-yield test ban. As a result Congres-
sional resistance will be formidable and the arguments sharp. The
Chiefs are already on record as opposing such a ban. The laboratories
and DoE personnel will be obliged to elucidate the consequences for
certification under such a ban. Leaving aside the military questions, the
political consequences could hardly be worse.
6. Since (a) some testing will be required to maintain confidence in
both weapons reliability and safety, and (b) very low or zero thresholds
[less than 1 line not declassified] even under optimistic assumptions about
Soviet agreement to on-site seismic detection, I urge you to consider the
following course of action.
This alternative approach serves the national security interests of
the United States and its allies, takes a reasonable step toward legiti-
mate arms control (no new weapons development), and avoids a pro-
tracted and uncertain Congressional debate. The alternative is to indi-
cate American willingness to accept drastic reduction in the presently
proposed threshold test ban from 150 KT [less than 1 line not declassified]
Such a level is consistent with our existing verification capabilities.
Moreover, we should also indicate that, if the Soviets are prepared to
allow a network of internal seismic stations or arrays, we could reduce
that threshold [less than 1 line not declassified]
Such an approach would be consistent with both certification re-
quirements and our present verification capabilities—and would also
put pressure on the Soviets to allow improvements in those verification
capabilities. A prudent approach of this sort on arms control would
better serve the interests of the nation and would also have a higher
chance of success.
203.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, June 1, 1978
I attach a copy of a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff on
(PD)/NSC–38, announcing your decisions as to the U.S. negotiating
right-hand corner of the memorandum indicates Carter saw the document.

Comprehensive Test Ban
position on CTB. They have asked that I forward it to you, as an expres-
sion of their strongly held views. I believe that the JCS memorandum
accurately identifies the technical and military factors involved. I agree
with some, but not every one, of their evaluations.
A CTB involves some level of military risk. However, I believe that
the probability that a CTB would adversely affect the reliability of the
warheads for our important strategic systems is low enough during a
three-year (or, less clearly, even a five-year) period so that for such a
period the military risk in itself is acceptable. Of some weight also is the
fact that we would become aware by continued stockpile inspection if a
question of such reliability arises and, in principle, could invoke the
supreme-national-interest withdrawal clause.
I emphasize that there would be a serious question of continued
stockpile reliability on the U.S. side if there were an indefinite CTB.2
The greatest risk, therefore, follows from the tendency of a limited-term
agreement to be extended. The statement of intention to resume tests at
the end of a limited-term in order to assure stockpile reliability can
somewhat ameliorate that problem. But the pressure at the time of ex-
piration to renew (and also pressure not to do so) will probably be very
great despite anything we say now. Such a concern about extension is
likely to be expressed by opponents during the ratification process.
This aspect, in my judgment, makes the prospects for approval of a
CTB substantially less favorable than those for SALT, and also less fa-
vorable the earlier a CTB is concluded.
[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
I believe that the JCS paper understates the potential advantages
from a CTB for non-proliferation (which many of us see as its main ben-
efit). However, those advantages have yet to be articulated sufficiently.
In my view it would be useful for the State Department and ACDA to
set forth the criteria by which they believe we would be able to judge
after a five-year period whether proliferation had indeed been inhib-
ited by the CTB, and therefore whether there would be reasons sup-
porting renewal to counter the military and technical needs for reli-
ability tests.3
A great concern of mine is the possible irretrievable dissipation of
our nuclear scientific and technological talent if a CTB is perceived by
them as being of long or indefinite duration. To be able to test for stock-
pile reliability after a previously set time period of some years, and to
correct deficiencies, the capabilities of the nuclear design laboratories
2 In the right margin, Carter drew an arrow pointing to this and wrote “I agree.”
3 In the left margin, Carter bracketed the portion of this paragraph that begins with
“and ACDA set forth” and ends with “reliability tests.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
have to be maintained. From this point of view there are two matters
that particularly trouble me. (1) The decision to limit experiments to a
few pounds4 of high explosive equivalent—rather than, for example, a
few hundred tons5—limits sharply the degree of interest of such ex-
periments to the scientists and technologists on whose continued skills
and continued professional dedication to nuclear weapons design we
would depend when tests are resumed. (2) Second, the five-year period
of the treaty instead of a three-year period that had alternatively been
proposed also reduces the chances of keeping viable nuclear labora-
tories together. The laboratory directors have told the JCS that, given a
commitment to resume testing, they can maintain relevant laboratory
effectiveness for three years, but probably not for five. I therefore urge
that these two issues be reexamined as part of the development of the
safeguards program you requested by June 30.6
Harold Brown
Attachment
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown7
JCSM–188–78
Washington, June 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Presidential Decision on Comprehensive Test Ban (U)
1. (S) Presidential Decision (PD)/NSC 388 announced that in view
of the importance of maintaining confidence in safety and reliability of
US stockpiled nuclear weapons, the President has decided that the
United States should propose a fixed-duration Comprehensive Test
Ban (CTB) treaty of 5 years, with provision for nuclear weapon experi-
ments of a few pounds yield. In forwarding the treaty to the Senate for
ratification, the President would state that the United States intends to
resume testing at the expiration of the treaty, for safety and reliability
purposes only, unless testing is shown not to be necessary. Any further
4 Carter underlined the phrase “a few pounds.”
5 Carter underlined the phrase “a few hundred tons.”
don’t feel strongly about this,” drawing an arrow pointing at the sentence for point (1),
and “might help with this (2),” drawing an arrow pointing at the sentence for point (2).
8 See Document 200.

Comprehensive Test Ban
agreement on testing limitations after the 5-year treaty would be pre-
sented to the Senate for ratification.
2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the test ban, as out-
lined, would involve significant military risks. In a memorandum9
which you forwarded to the President on 22 April 1978,10 the Joint
Chiefs of Staff stated they believe that a test ban must allow continued
testing at a level sufficient to:
a. Maintain high confidence in the reliability of US nuclear weap-
ons and hence confidence in the US nuclear deterrent.
b. Avoid undesirable asymmetries which are otherwise likely to
result due to the inability of the United States to verify compliance with
the test ban.
3. (S) Recent discussions which the Joint Chiefs of Staff have held
with Department of Energy officials and their laboratory directors,
upon whom the United States must rely for technical judgments con-
cerning the reliability of US nuclear weapons, have further under-
scored the requirement for continued testing to maintain stockpile reli-
ability. These experts have stated that, under a CTB with zero testing
over an extended period, stockpile reliability will be degraded. They
have taken the position that the most current nuclear warheads and
bombs in the US stockpile cannot be maintained without nuclear
testing. Their current best estimate is that the required nuclear yield for
that purpose is at [less than 1 line not declassified] With nuclear testing
permitted at [less than 1 line not declassified] it is likely that the current
nuclear weapon stockpile could be maintained in a safe and reliable
condition. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have found these assessments
persuasive.
4. (S) Based on available information, Soviet reliability problems
may not be as severe, since the Soviets’ typically heavier weapons and
larger payloads have allowed them to use coarser design criteria which
are not as susceptible to problems as the high-technology US designs.
This is likely to cause an asymmetric degradation of the stockpiles. As-
suming that the Soviets recognize this, they may eventually perceive a
strategic advantage, and the asymmetry therefore would become
destabilizing.
5. (S) The announced intention to restrict resumption of testing to
that necessary for weapons safety and reliability appears to preempt
decisions concerning weapons development which are better made in
the context of other arms control agreements. The United States may be
is in the original.]
10 See Document 193.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
unilaterally restricting development of new strategic weapons, without
any similar restraint upon the Soviets if a SAL agreement or other
agreements reached do not restrict new strategic weapons develop-
ment. Moreover, such an unfavorable asymmetry may also be imposed
on the development of new theater/tactical nuclear weapons, at least
until an arms control agreement with reciprocal restraints might be
achieved.
6. (S) [10 lines not declassified] Thus, the United States will face a sit-
uation wherein the Soviets could test without detection and the United
States will not test—a situation that could lead to asymmetries detri-
mental to the credibility of the US deterrent.
7. (S) Experience with the nuclear stockpile has demonstrated that
serious problems can arise during a 5-year ban on nuclear testing. The
decision in PD/NSC 38 does not provide for testing to address stock-
pile reliability problems which may arise during the period of the
treaty. In the event that a serious problem arises, the United States
would either have to exercise the “supreme national interest” with-
drawal clause or depend on a less reliable deterrent force. The Joint
Chiefs of Staff believe that, rather than accept the prospect of placing
the United States in this undesirable situation, the United States should
initially seek to negotiate a treaty which lowers the testing threshold to
the level of verification capability. Such a lowered threshold could pro-
vide an opportunity to learn how to deal more confidently with stock-
pile reliability problems in an environment of restricted testing, while
at the same time observing Soviet performance under the treaty and
upgrading US monitoring capabilities.
8. (S) JCS discussions with the nuclear laboratory directors also
have confirmed the belief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that retention of
skilled scientists and engineers at the US nuclear weapons laboratories
is essential to maintain the stockpile and retain a nuclear weapons de-
sign capability. The Joint Chiefs of Staff concur with the judgment of
the laboratory directors that it is unlikely that the necessary number of
skilled scientists and engineers can be retained throughout a 5-year test
suspension, even under the incentives of a strong safeguards program.
9. (S) In addition to the military and technical considerations ex-
pressed above, there are also politico-military implications which
should be given consideration. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that it
is in the US national interest to stop nuclear proliferation. However,
they are not at all certain the balance of considerations with respect to a
test ban, as outlined, would contribute substantially to nonprolifera-
tion. Further, if US allies were to lose confidence in the ability of the
United States to maintain a credible and reliable stockpile and, hence,
in the deterrent quality of US nuclear guarantees, they could be dis-
posed to develop or increase nuclear stocks.

Comprehensive Test Ban
10. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff judge the military risks to national
security to be serious. The issue is considered to be the adequacy of the
US nuclear deterrent forces—both perceived and actual—and the
equivalence of those forces to those of the Soviet Union. The magnitude
of the risks and the potential consequences compel the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to conclude that the negotiating position could result in a treaty
which would adversely affect the national security interests of the
United States.
11. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you forward this mem-
orandum to the President.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David C. Jones
General, USAF
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
204.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, June 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Role of the CCD in a Comprehensive Test Ban
In the margin of my April 28 memorandum2 to you regarding the
likely timing of a comprehensive test ban treaty, you asked why the
product of the trilateral negotiations would be sent to the 30-nation Ge-
neva Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD) for its
consideration.
One of the most important benefits of a CTB, in terms of our
non-proliferation objectives, is the opportunity it provides to get
non-nuclear weapon states, especially those that have not joined the
NPT, to undertake a commitment not to carry out nuclear tests. While
some states are unlikely to sign the CTB at this time no matter how it is
negotiated, we believe that in a number of important cases prospects
2 See Document 195.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
for adherence would be significantly improved if the non-nuclear
states have some sense of participation in the process of achieving an
agreement.
In India, for example, where Desai could face strong internal pres-
sures not to join and where considerations of pride and prestige are
often controlling, the government could be disinclined to adhere to a
CTB that it had no role at all in negotiating. The same could be said for
several other borderline cases. The willingness of a number of key
non-nuclear states to join the treaty could strengthen prospects for rati-
fication, since it would demonstrate the treaty’s value as a non-
proliferation measure and the importance of bringing it into force.
With these non-nuclear weapon state sentiments in mind, we have
provided public assurances that we support a role for the CCD in
achieving a CTB. In your message to the CCD in July 1977, you stated
that the CCD “has set its priorities for future action and is now ready to
prepare the way for negotiations on a comprehensive test ban and a
chemical weapons prohibition. The U.S. shares these priorities and
fully recognizes the essential role to be played by the CCD.”3
Sending the treaty to the CCD would of course involve some in-
crease in the length of the negotiating process. And, since the text
would become public when it went to the CCD, it would be available
for public and Congressional scrutiny for a period of time while the ne-
gotiations were nominally still going on. However, the CCD countries
are anxious to have a CTB in force, and would probably be receptive to
expediting their multilateral consideration of it (perhaps 6–8 weeks or
less). And although the text sent to the CCD will be a public document,
this public exposure is not apt to evoke any greater Congressional in-
terest in affecting the negotiations than is now the case. In addition,
while some CCD members may suggest changes in the trilaterally ne-
gotiated text, they must recognize that the basic substantive elements
worked out by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. will not be subject to alteration.
It should be emphasized that what we would be submitting to the
CCD is the multilateral treaty text only, not the separate verification
agreement. The latter, which would contain the detailed verification
provisions that we would rely on and which we expect would be the
primary focus of public and Congressional attention, would be com-
pleted by the U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R., and would not be negotiated at
the CCD at all.
noted that Fisher read the statement to the CCD. Carter’s statement concluded “with the
following words: ‘I have pledged my administration’s dedicated efforts to halting the nu-
clear arms race and achieving practical limitations on the world’s conventional arma-
ments. I assure that the United States will work tirelessly to contribute to the success of

Comprehensive Test Ban
An alternative to sending the treaty to the CCD would be to com-
plete and sign the treaty trilaterally, and then call on other countries to
join. This was the procedure followed for the 1963 Limited Test Ban
Treaty (but not for the NPT and the four other multilateral arms control
treaties negotiated since then).4 It would permit completion of the
process a little earlier and would avoid the possibility of having the
CCD discussions engender public and Congressional reactions that
might influence the multilateral negotiations. However, as indicated
above, the CCD phase would probably be quite brief and, in any event,
the only item left for CCD consideration—the multilateral treaty—is
not expected to stimulate as much domestic interest as the separate ver-
ification agreement, which would have been completed.
Of more importance is the likelihood that the alternate approach
would provoke considerable resentment among the non-nuclear states
at their having been excluded from the process altogether. This could
have a decisive impact on adherence decisions in a number of critical
cases.
I therefore recommend that we maintain our existing position in
support of sending the results of the trilateral talks to the CCD for final
action on the text of the multilateral treaty. If trilateral agreement were
to be reached at the time of a possible U.S.-Soviet summit meeting, an-
nouncement of the completion of the trilateral phase of the negotiations
would be considered a major accomplishment of such a meeting.
4 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “This seems better to
me—No final decision.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
205.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
David Aaron
Les Gelb Director, Bureau of
NSC
Politico-Military Affairs
Reginald Bartholomew
Defense
Benjamin Huberman
Secretary Harold Brown
OSTP
David McGiffert Asst Secretary
Frank Press
for International Security
John Marcum
Affairs
CIA
Energy
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Secretary James Schlesinger
[name not declassified] Chief,
Dr. Donald Kerr Acting Asst
Nuclear Energy Division
Secretary for Defense
Programs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Y. Smith JCS
CTB Representative
The purpose of the meeting was to continue discussion of the issue
of low level testing under a CTB, to consider the characteristics of the
network of national seismic stations (NSS) which we should propose in
the Geneva negotiations, and to consider whether entry into force of
the treaty should be delayed until after installation of the NSS network
is completed.
In beginning the discussion of low level testing, David Aaron
pointed out that the President had ruled out kiloton level testing in
PD/NSC–382 and that we should focus our attention on the range from
a few pounds to a few hundred tons. After extensive discussion, it was
agreed that the Safeguards Plan3 should include several discrete op-
tions detailing the utility of testing in this range.
in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 200.
3 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Jim Schlesinger argued that if kiloton-level testing was not per-
mitted the real cutting edge in retaining capabilities would be in
whether the duration was three or five years. David Aaron said this
could be put to the President to see if he wanted to reopen the issue.
In discussing the seismic network options there was agreement
that due to their high cost, time required for installation, and remaining
uncertainty, large numbers of arrays were not desirable. A consensus
was reached in favor of proposing 12–15 single stations with the right
to convert perhaps one or two of these to arrays subsequently (the con-
clusion was a little imprecise as to how many would be converted).
Since the basic network could be installed within two years, there
appeared to be agreement after some discussion that we should not at-
tempt to delay entry into force pending completion of the installation.
At the conclusion of the meeting, Schlesinger commented that con-
sidering the remaining negotiating problems, CCD involvement and
Senate ratification, it would probably be 18–24 months before the treaty
entered into force.
206.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Meeting with the President on CTB Issues
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
James Schlesinger, Secretary of Energy
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Stuart Eisenstat, Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs (first 10 minutes)
Dr. Frank Press, Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy
John Marcum, Senior Adviser, Office of Science and Technology Policy
Harold Agnew, Director, Los Alamos Nuclear Laboratory
Roger Batzel, Director, Livermore Nuclear Laboratory
Harold Agnew began by saying that he understood that it might be
good if he or Roger Batzel ran through a brief explanation of how nu-
in the White House Cabinet Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
clear weapons actually worked. The President agreed saying he had read
some simple text books but wanted a more complete understanding.
Harold Agnew presented a chart2 of a simple two-stage device to the
President and explained its design features. He noted that we had
made tremendous progress in nuclear weapons technology and illus-
trated this by pointing out that the current Trident warhead had a yield
[less than 1 line not declassified] with a weight [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] compared to a yield [less than 1 line not declassified] of the Hiro-
shima device with a weight of [less than 1 line not declassified] He said
this represented a factor of more [less than 1 line not declassified] in yield
to weight ratio. He observed that this tremendous gain was made
through very sophisticated technology. One major step was that in-
stead of using a solid glob of plutonium, we now use a [less than 1 line
not declassified] With this design we can get [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] in the primary or first stage, but an even more significant step was
in using tritium gas for “boosting” the primary. This boosting process
produces [less than 1 line not declassified] than the [less than 1 line not de-
classified] and increases the primary yield [less than 1 line not declassified]
causes the secondary stage of the weapon to ignite.
Harold Agnew noted that over the years nuclear weapon designers
had been under considerable pressure to develop designs that would
use less fissionable material, which could be in short supply for civil
purposes, and that would be smaller, lighter and safer. In explaining
what the two-stage primary act really does, he said that the Trident pri-
mary has a yield [less than 1 line not declassified] the secondary [less than 1
line not declassified]. The important consideration is that the primary
must produce [less than 1 line not declassified] there would be no ignition
from the secondary.
He then showed a picture of the Sprint ABM warhead3 noting that
this was the first neutron bomb that had been developed. He described
its features as [2½ lines not declassified] This device was tested and
achieved [less than 1 line not declassified] He then explained that at a later
point because of fratricide concerns—e.g., concern that the warhead
might be disabled [less than 1 line not declassified] another Sprint war-
head that had been detonated earlier, it had been decided to add a
hardened layer [3 lines not declassified] He noted that this wasn’t a com-
plete fizzle but was less [less than 1 line not declassified] necessary to ig-
nite the secondary stage. He asserted that if we had stockpiled the mod-
ified device without testing we wouldn’t have known about the
problem; stockpile surveillance was essential but could not determine
the yield of the device.
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Not attached.

Comprehensive Test Ban
The President asked what kind of stockpile surveillance method
was used. Agnew responded that all kinds of statistical sampling tech-
niques were employed, weapons were disassembled occasionally, and
the components were examined. He noted that the weapons were de-
signed to last 20 years, but that any time the materials used in manufac-
turing components are changed one can get problems. He pointed out
that the devices we had developed were very delicate and that in his
view it would not be prudent to consider maintaining the stockpile in-
definitely without testing.
The President asked what Agnew meant by indefinitely. Agnew re-
sponded that in an example which Roger Batzel would describe, a
problem had been experienced within four years. Roger Batzel ex-
plained that [3½ lines not declassified]
The President asked whether the problem had occurred after devel-
opment of the warhead. Batzel replied that it had actually been after
deployment of the warhead and had been discovered through surveil-
lance of warheads deployed in the fleet. The problem had been a me-
chanical safety device which was intended to insure that the weapon
would not produce a significant nuclear yield if the high explosive (HE)
was detonated accidentally.
The President said that he understood that the problem was not
identified in an explosion but in an inspection of the safety device.
Batzel agreed and stated that we had subsequently replaced the pri-
mary on that device. He pointed out that we have a similar problem
now with the primary of the Poseidon warhead. He pointed out that
the Poseidon produced a nuclear yield [less than 1 line not declassified]
packaged in a re-entry vehicle weighing [less than 1 line not declassified]
He explained that although primaries used to have hundreds of deto-
nators distributed over the surface of the HE in order to generate a
spherical implosion wave, [1 line not declassified] In the Poseidon pri-
mary a new HE material had been used which exuded a liquid which
corroded [less than 1 line not declassified] that with time, no yield would
have resulted. Fortunately, during the process of development, an al-
ternative design using different HE material had been fully tested and
we were able to simply substitute this primary for the defective one.
Otherwise further nuclear testing would have been required.
Roger Batzel also argued that US designers in responding to mili-
tary requirements had made remarkable achievements in minimizing
weight and maximizing yield of warheads. [3 lines not declassified]
Agnew interjected that without the one-point safety requirement we
would not be so close to the edge. Batzel agreed, adding that a factor of
two increase in weight would also avoid some problems. He also re-
marked that while these were remarkable accomplishments we might

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
have pushed the technology too hard and created problems for our-
selves in the current context.
Harold Agnew said that people could say that we haven’t been
testing stockpiled weapons for reliability for years, why now? He said
that they didn’t realize the benefits to stockpile maintenance that are
achieved from testing new weapons and continuing to produce nuclear
weapon materials and components. He observed that many devices
which are being tested in new warhead development programs use the
same primaries which are in the old stockpiled weapons.
The President asked whether the Soviets had more reliable war-
heads than the US. Harold Brown answered that in general their war-
heads were believed to be heavier, somewhat more roughly con-
structed and less sensitive to deterioration. Roger Batzel agreed and
pointed out that they had not had the same constraints on weight and
size, and appeared to have developed less sensitive warheads.
The President asked how long we have had small primaries. Roger
Batzel responded nearly 20 years and after thinking about Polaris and
Poseidon, said it was really about 10 years. Harold Agnew pointed out
that development of smaller primaries had really been a result of the
pressure of MIRVing of ICBMs and SLBMs.
The President asked what had been our experience with regard to
correcting problems in inventory. Roger Batzel replied that in the early
1960s a vulnerability test of one of our ICBM RVs had been carried out.
The President asked if this was for fratricide purposes. Batzel said yes
but added that it was primarily to check for vulnerability to Soviet
ABMs. [3 lines not declassified] Harold Brown pointed out that [2 lines not
declassified]
Harold Agnew stated that another example was with our B–25 air-
to-air warhead which consisted of [less than 1 line not declassified] The
plutonium at that time was manufactured in Hanford and Rocky
Flats—one making [less than 1 line not declassified]. After the weapons
were stockpiled, people began to notice [less than 1 line not declassified]
After disassembling them it was discovered [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] This was due to very slight differences in the manufacturing pro-
cesses at Hanford and Rocky Flats so that the plutonium [less than 1 line
not declassified] might shrink slightly while that [less than 1 line not de-
classified] expanded.
Agnew said that another example where the warhead did not per-
form as expected was the Talos/Terrier as mentioned earlier, [less than
1 line not declassified] As a result of these problems he felt that we
wouldn’t be able to certify warheads if the materials were changed in
any way without testing.
Frank Press commented out that he had brought a panel of experts
together to look into this issue. His panel had included the current labo-

Comprehensive Test Ban
ratory directors, former laboratory directors, such as Herbert York, and
other nuclear weapons experts. He pointed out that the laboratory di-
rectors concerns were as they had been stated today but the other
members had a different view and felt that reliability could be main-
tained for at least five years without testing, and that this had been
our basis in recommending the five year duration approach to the
President.
The President commented to the laboratory directors that one con-
cern he had is whether they were able to maintain their objectivity on
this issue in view of their desire for preservation of the laboratories. He
said he was trying to put a lid on production and development of all
new nuclear weapons and that an important element of this is to put a
cap on testing. He stated that we must maintain reliability of our nu-
clear weapons but that he would need as much flexibility from the lab-
oratory directors as possible to accomplish his overall objectives. He
pointed out that without their support a test ban would experience se-
rious difficulties with Congress. He noted that his own advice on the
issue was conflicting in that he had decided to ban testing for five years
while preserving the right to resume testing. He continued that in his
view a threshold test ban would circumvent the basic purpose of the
treaty. He wanted to make clear he was not referring to a few pounds
but to hundreds of pounds or a kiloton. He pointed out that had dis-
cussed this issue earlier in the day with Prime Minister Desai of India,4
and Desai had said that a 5KT level would open the flood gates to pro-
liferation. He said he was eager to learn from the laboratory directors
but expected them to support his objectives as much as possible.
Roger Batzel said that they were trying to be responsive but the
problem was that they didn’t know what problems would arise in 2, 3,
4, or 5 years.
The President then asked what the yield range was for our present
primaries. Harold Agnew replied that they ranged [less than 1 line not de-
classified] the Titan down to [less than 1 line not declassified] some of our
other nuclear systems. Harold Brown pointed out that the Soviets are be-
lieved to have larger primaries involving heavier, more rugged designs
which are probably less sensitive to deterioration. Roger Batzel said that
although some of our primaries had higher yields, testing [less than 1
line not declassified] enable us to recertify these primaries when prob-
lems arose. He said the laboratories have tried to be responsive to the
President’s objectives by holding the yield as low as possible, [less than
1 line not declassified] reproducibility is a real problem that there was se-
4 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Desai in the Oval Office
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
rious doubt that testing [less than 1 line not declassified] be useful. The
difficulty was that it is necessary to get significant boosting in order to
insure the primary worked properly. He said that to date we haven’t
resolved that testing [less than 1 line not declassified] was useful.
Harold Agnew elaborated on this point, explaining that we have
tested [less than 1 line not declassified] adding small amounts of boosting
gas but the yield varied widely and was unpredictable as the boosting
gas was added. There is no consistency in the results until the yield gets
[less than 1 line not declassified]
The President asked whether there was any statistical evidence on
gathered there was a difference in view here. Harold Agnew responded
that we expected all our weapons to last 20 years but as noted earlier in
some cases, such as Polaris, problems had been discovered in just four
years. The President pointed out they had not discovered it through
testing. Harold Agnew agreed and said they had discovered it by
surveillance.
The President asked whether they had ever discovered in a stock-
pile warhead any physical deterioration by nuclear testing. Agnew
replied that the [less than 1 line not declassified] when taken from the
stockpile and tested had produced an [less than 1 line not declassified]
However, it had never been tested before since it had been developed
and stockpiled while the moratorium was in effect. Harold Brown
pointed out that was a result of not testing the warhead rather than
of deterioration after the warhead had been properly tested and
stockpiled.
Frank Press, asking that the laboratory directors correct him if he
were wrong, pointed out that it was his understanding that most of our
warheads had worked properly the first time they were tested. Harold
Agnew responded [3 lines not declassified] Frank Press agreed that such
problems had occurred but stressed that most of the time the devices
had performed well the first time they were tested. Harold Agnew ac-
knowledged that this was true and said that was an argument fre-
quently used by some of Frank Press’ colleagues. In fact, 80% or so did
work the first time but the problem was that this might not include
Minuteman or Trident or some other important warheads.
David Aaron asked whether there hadn’t been enough testing of
enough designs over the years to get a good basis to predict how the
weapons would perform. The President asked whether he was referring
to new designs. Harold Brown said that that was not the issue. The ques-
tion was whether there would be deterioration in the stockpiled
weapons within five years. If so, then in his view, Frank Press’ point
was right—we could redesign and rebuild the weapon and have confi-
dence that it would probably work.

Comprehensive Test Ban
David Aaron asked Frank Press whether his panel had looked into
the previous record on the problems that had arisen in the stockpile.
Frank Press responded that his group had reviewed the record and it
was essentially just as the laboratory directors had said today. In his
view, the important point was that if the weapons were rebuilt the
same way as originally, they would have high confidence in their
performance.
The President asked whether stockpiled warheads were routinely
tested. Roger Batzel replied they were not and Harold Agnew noted that
we do have proof tests of each type of warhead before it is stockpiled
which certifies performance of all warheads of a type before they are
put into a stockpile. The President said this was good, otherwise we
would have to test every weapon. Harold Agnew returning to the ques-
tion, said that the primaries of old warheads were sometimes tested in
development of new weapons and sometimes the entire stockpiled
warhead would be tested for other reasons, such as vulnerability, but
not routinely.
Harold Brown offered to more clearly explain the issue, he said that
once the final proof test is completed, the weapons would be stockpiled
and subjected to surveillance procedures, but would probably not be
tested again unless for some other purpose such as Harold Agnew had
mentioned. Roger Batzel pointed out that some very peculiar problems
had arisen over the years even in the nuclear components themselves.
[2½ lines not declassified]
The President asked Jim Schlesinger whether he had any thing he
wanted to mention in this discussion. Schlesinger responded that there
were two points he wanted to raise. The first was that this was not a
typical statistical problem and that we are trying to determine the prob-
ability of a unique unpredictable event and we don’t have any idea
when or whether it will occur. In discussing his second point he pre-
sented a chart showing the utility of testing at various yield levels—
from a few pounds to ten tons would be useful for one point safety and
hydronuclear testing, from ten tons to 10 KT for reliability testing, and
from 10 KT to 150 KT for development of new weapons.
Schlesinger explained that the main point was that [less than 1 line
not declassified] we could meet our needs but that lower yield levels did
not give us the confidence that the primary will drive the secondary.
He said that left to their own devices the laboratories would prefer to
go on designing new nuclear weapons. In accomodating the Presi-
dent’s desires they had given up on that but they still had the responsi-
bility of certifying stockpiled warheads. As he pointed out this would
require testing [less than 1 line not declassified]
The President noted they didn’t routinely test stockpile weapons.
He then asked for the typical reliability of the launchers for these war-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
heads. John Marcum replied they were about 80%, Harold Brown said
yes, 75–80% but pointed out the real difference was that for the
launchers they didn’t have to worry, there was a 25% chance that none
of them would work.
The President said it was his understanding that there would be a
provision that if he or Brezhnev had a pressing national need they
would be able to withdraw from the treaty. Harold Brown agreed,
saying there would be a “supreme national interest” withdrawal
clause, but it would be very difficult politically to exercise that clause
since it would abrogate the treaty. Further, there would be undoubt-
edly fierce interagency fights over whether the particular problem was
serious enough to justify withdrawal.
David Aaron pointed out that it might be possible to define a flex-
ible “supreme interest” clause that would let either side resume testing
for national security reasons without collapse of the treaty. The Presi-
dent agreed that this might be possible.
Jim Schlesinger interjected that an alternative would be to have a
small quota of tests below 5 KT and that this would minimize the diffi-
culty associated with the threshold. The President noted that from what
Harold Brown said we would be able to test if really necessary and
asked how long it would take us to do so if a problem arose.
Roger Batzel replied that this would take from 6 to 9 months de-
pending on the level of readiness provided for in the Safeguards Plan.
The President asked how long the moratorium had lasted. Harold Brown
rold Agnew said that a lot of people thought he was paranoid but that he
had never gotten over this. He presented a chart5 showing that the So-
viets have resumed testing immediately with a massive and well pre-
pared program, whereas it had taken us an extended period to carry
out the first test. Frank Press told Harold Agnew that we really needed
his and Roger Batzel’s help in designing a Safeguard Plan which would
provide the right level of readiness and help keep our weapons group
together.
Harold Agnew said that he understood there could be concern as
the President mentioned with regard to whether the laboratories have a
vested interest in testing. He assured the President that their only con-
cern was to maintain our nuclear deterrent. He said that the labora-
tories constitute a valuable resource and they happen to think they are
smarter than anyone else and could do a better job in solving most new
problems. He commented that their staff spent 40% of their time on
5 Attached but not printed.

Comprehensive Test Ban
weapons and 60% on energy activities and they would supply the tech-
nical effort wherever the President wanted it.
The President asked what else they would do in maintaining the
stockpile. Harold Agnew said they had been examining this question
and, in his view, their present surveillance procedures were adequate,
although they could, of course, increase this program if it made anyone
feel better. He pointed out they used to test one out of fifty weapons
each year, but now did much less of this sort of testing.
Frank Press asked the lab directors whether they saw any real hope
for reliability testing at the 100 KT level. Both replied they didn’t think
this was likely. Harold Agnew pointed out that [2½ lines not declassified]
Harold Brown asked [2½ lines not declassified] Harold Agnew concluded
that [1 line not declassified]
The President, noting the particular names of some of the tests,
asked Agnew for the origin of those names. Harold Agnew responded
that many of them were place names from New Mexico. James Schles-
inger pointed out that there was a great deal of empiricism in nuclear
weapons, that in theory, it always appeared they would work well.
The President said his only remaining concern after this discussion
was the need to consider the relative effect of no testing on the Soviets.
As he understood there was no real effect, except for the massive
weight of their warheads. Harold Agnew said there was another point in
that Soviet missiles have much greater throw weight, which meant that
if a problem arose they could simply put another warhead on, which
might be less optimal in terms of weight or size, more easily than we
could. Harold Brown pointed out that since the size of their warheads
were larger, they might have to test at a higher yield than 3–5 KT. On
the other hand, since their warheads were less sensitive, they might not
have to test at all.
James Schlesinger [3 lines not declassified] Harold Brown [2 lines not
declassified] John Marcum [1 line not declassified]
Roger Batzel [5 lines not declassified]
The President asked Batzel [1½ lines not declassified] Batzel [1½ lines
not declassified] Harold Brown [1½ lines not declassified]
The President said he had a question for Frank Press, that he had
just heard we didn’t have sensing devices monitoring the treaty. Frank
Press assured him that we did have these devices for use in internal
seismic stations and they had been installed in bore holes in New
Mexico for testing. Although we had not completed packaging of these
sensors, we should be ready to begin installation in the Soviet Union as
soon as the treaty entered into force. He estimated it might take two
years to install a complete network of single stations and perhaps three
years for arrays.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The President asked how many seismic stations we were talking
about proposing in the negotiations. Frank Press replied that our
analysis indicated that a network of about 17 single stations would be
roughly comparable to about five arrays. James Schlesinger responded
we were thinking of proposing 12–15 single stations and this would get
us down to a threshold of about [less than 1 line not declassified]
Harold Brown and Frank Press objected noting that the real
threshold would be lower when other national means were taken into
account. Frank Press said we should be precise on this issue, that with
that kind of network we would detect down to 2/10 of a KT in many
cases. He noted that in seismic regions detection would be equivalent
to identification of the event and that in seismic regions, we were
looking at very remote locations so that any suspicious activity from
satellite photos would help identify the event. Other national means
could also help identify problems, and in general the identification
threshold should not be more than two times the detection threshold,
or about 4/10 of a KT in rock. He said this should be increased by a
factor of five in looser material and conceivably by a factor of 10, which
would get to the level James Schlesinger had mentioned, with dry allu-
vium. [7 lines not declassified] Harold Agnew inserted that the Soviets
were doing this right now. Frank Press noted that we had also con-
ducted tests in cavities.
The President [1 line not declassified] Harold Agnew [1 line not declas-
sified] John Marcum [4½ lines not declassified]
James Schlesinger showed the President another chart6 illustrating
the problem of unidentified events and said that even with the seismic
network we had in mind there could be 38 or so unidentified events an-
nually. He said we would be pretty comfortable in verifying at the 5 KT
level. He noted that seismic arrays were very expensive and that it was
probably not worth driving this down to 4 KT, although it might give
us more support on the Hill. He asserted that it was the combination of
our inability to verify or certify that would give rise to serious domestic
political problems.
Harold Brown said these were unrelated problems and that as noted
earlier the Soviets might not need to test at all. He felt the verification
problem was a consequence of our previous statements that any agree-
ment we negotiated must be highly verifiable. He felt the Soviets were
unlikely to cheat under the five year approach, but said that James
Schlesinger was right in that verification would be a political problem.
There was no doubt that a 5 KT threshold or a small quota would be
better in terms of a Senate ratification effort.
6 Attached but not printed.

Comprehensive Test Ban
The President asked if we had a real low threshold for a short pe-
riod, he emphasized that he meant very short, of perhaps six months,
what would the lab directors want to test? Harold Agnew responded
that if other needs had been met they would want to use their quota to
test stockpiled warheads for reliability purposes. The President asked
how they would view three years, maybe with a small quota. Roger
Batzel replied that a duration of three years would be much easier than
five years in maintaining laboratory capabilities. Harold Brown noted
we had gotten through 2½ years during the moratorium. Roger Batzel
agreed but said it was starting to hurt and that more than three years
would be particularly tough.
Frank Press commented that offering opportunities to work in laser
fusion and other related areas could be helpful in retaining scientists.
Harold Agnew agreed but argued that the best people would switch into
other areas on a permanent basis. In time we would lose our good
people and have little confidence in our stockpile, but he guessed that
presumably this was consistent with our long range objective.
David Aaron said in his view it wouldn’t help to have a short period
of testing unless a problem had been identified which needed to be cor-
rected. Harold Agnew agreed and pointed out that what was really
needed was a 3–5 KT threshold to cover any problems that would arise
and that this would be a major step forward in restraining testing.
The President asked what the effect of a CTB would be on SALT.
Harold Brown responded that SALT constraints were not applicable to
warheads. Roger Batzel commented there was a relationship in that the
CTB would constrain our ability to provide warheads for new missile
systems.
Harold Brown said that if we don’t test for three years and that, in
that time, deterioration had not occurred, then the same problems
would be experienced after three years as now. The President said we
could build all new warheads at that time for critical systems. He asked
if SALT II permitted new missiles what would be the effect of a CTB?
Harold Brown said there would be little effect, since if we were going to
resume testing after 3–5 years we would just design new warheads and
test them at that time.
John Marcum pointed out that it was his understanding that prior
to the threshold test ban we had fully tested new warheads which were
intended to meet the future needs of the M–X, TRIDENT II and cruise
missile systems. Harold Agnew agreed that this was the case and said we
had a family of tested warheads for use and planned to use these in de-
veloping new systems, since we would be unable to develop new stra-
threshold would not really help in this regard. Harold Brown said prob-
ably not although new tactical warheads might be developed. Roger

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Batzel commented that in testing these new warhead designs the labo-
ratories had tried to anticipate future strategic needs.
The President asked what the yield was on the largest device we
had tested. Harold Brown replied [less than 1 line not declassified] Harold
Agnew said it was more [less than 1 line not declassified] and for a very
dirty device (lots of fissionable material) the yield could have been as
high [less than 1 line not declassified]
David Aaron asked whether from the laboratory perspective it
would be better to have a small quota for reliability testing each year or
to have unlimited testing after five years. After having the question re-
peated, Roger Batzel responded that they would probably prefer a small
number of tests each year.
The President told David Aaron that with either a quota or
threshold he thought we would lose our non-proliferation impact and
the other political benefits we were seeking. In his view, a 5 KT level
would be high enough to permit further proliferation in other coun-
tries and might be just fine for India. Harold Brown said he agreed
completely.
Harold Agnew asked whether 2 KT would matter. The President said
he thought so, that the essence of our position is that for a period of
time we would not test at all and then could resume testing.
The President said he wanted to make clear that he did not share all
the laboratory director’s concerns. He said he wasn’t sure at all that he
shared their concerns about problems arising within five years, but said
he might not be qualified to judge. Harold Brown said this was a judg-
mental issue and the President’s opinion was as good as anyone’s.
The President asked whether there was any way to make the war-
heads less sensitive, possibly by adding more tritium. Harold Brown re-
sponded that we might make them less sensitive by relaxing the one-
point safety criteria, explaining that this requirement meant that an
accidental detonation of the HE at one point should not result in a sig-
nificant nuclear yield and that this requirement had required us to min-
imize the plutonium in the warhead.
Roger Batzel said they had examined all these ideas, that to rede-
sign the stockpile would take a lot of time and could have some disad-
vantages, and wouldn’t really help much. He said that at the expense of
more weight we could double the HE. Harold Agnew noted we could
also add plutonium to make the primary hotter so it would be more
likely to achieve an effective tritium burn.
The President said he had to leave for another appointment and that
the meeting was very useful. The meeting adjourned at 3:30 p.m.

Comprehensive Test Ban
207.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, June 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Les Gelb Director, Bureau of
David Aaron
Politico-Military Affairs
NSC
Defense
Reginald Bartholomew
Secretary Harold Brown
Benjamin Huberman
David McGiffert Asst Secretary
OSTP
for International Security
Frank Press
Affairs
John Marcum
Energy
CIA
Secretary James Schlesinger
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Donald Kerr Acting Asst
[name not declassified] Chief,
Secretary for Defense
Nuclear Energy Division
Programs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Y. Smith
ACDA
Paul Warnke
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Thomas Davies, Asst Director for
Multilateral Affairs
The purpose of the meeting was to review our CTB policy on dura-
tion, permitted experiments and verification in light of recent meetings
and deliberations by the President and to briefly discuss the CTB Safe-
guards Plan which the Working Group is preparing.
In beginning the meeting, Dr. Brzezinski observed that these were
highly interrelated issues and suggested that we begin with duration
and permitted experiments. He pointed out that after meeting with the
laboratory directors, the President continued to rule out kiloton-level
testing, but had more flexibility in considering a shorter duration with
very low level permitted experiments.
the White House Situation Room. The memorandum was originally dated June 26, and
an unknown hand wrote “7” over the 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The discussion then focused on the implications of shortening the
duration to three years with permitted experiments restricted to a few
pounds or somewhat higher as in PD/NSC–38. There was general
agreement that this would be a useful step in further limiting military
risks and maintaining laboratory capabilities, and that the treaty would
still be worthwhile from the non-proliferation and political standpoint.
Dave Jones agreed that the shorter duration would be helpful, but
stated he would have to meet with the Chiefs to determine whether
they could support this approach.
With regard to ratification, Harold Brown stressed that the sup-
port of both the Chiefs and the laboratory directors would be essential
and argued that in this context it would be important to retain the PD/
NSC–382 language on intention to resume testing at the end of the
treaty duration. Dave Jones agreed with this view and suggested that it
would be useful if the testing resumption were not limited to safety and
reliability purposes. All agreed with this recommendation.
The permitted experiments level was then discussed in detail and
it was agreed that this level should be raised slightly from the “few
pounds or somewhat higher” of PD/NSC–38 to “less than one hundred
pounds” in order to permit some benefit in maintaining design skills
and checking calculations while minimizing adverse non-proliferation
impacts.
The impact of the shorter duration on internal seismic stations was
also discussed. Frank Press pointed out that military risks would be
limited by the three year duration and we would probably not be able
to completely install our proposed 12 to 15 station network in just three
years. He suggested a two-step approach of proposing seven stations
during the three year treaty (the Soviets have informally indicated they
might accept this many) with the larger network deferred for consider-
ation in the context of a replacement treaty. A consensus was reached
in favor of authorizing the Delegation to propose this approach fol-
lowing the Soviet response to our 12 to 15 station proposal.
Dr. Brzezinski adjourned the meeting by reviewing the changes
that would be in PD/NSC–38 under this approach—e.g., duration of
three instead of five years, deletion from the intention to resume testing
clause of the restriction to reliability and safety purposes, and raising
the level of permitted experiments to less than one hundred pounds in-
stead of a “few pounds or somewhat higher.” He asked that the views
of the Chiefs and the lab directors on this approach be submitted by
Thursday3 evening so that a decision memorandum could be sub-
2 See Document 200.
3 June 29.

Comprehensive Test Ban
mitted to the President on Friday. At Jim Schlesinger’s request it was
agreed that the decision memorandum would include each agency’s
preferred position as well as their view on the acceptability of this
approach.
208.
Draft Presidential Directive/NSC1
Washington, undated
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Arms Control & Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban
The President has reviewed the recent deliberations of the SCC on
the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) issues,2 and has reached the fol-
lowing conclusions.
a. In view of the importance of maintaining confidence in safety
and reliability of our stockpiled nuclear weapons, the US should pro-
pose in the CTB negotiations that the treaty have a fixed, three year du-
ration. The treaty would automatically terminate at the end of three
years. During the third year there would be a review conference to de-
termine whether to negotiate a replacement treaty.
b. In forwarding the treaty to the Senate for ratification the Presi-
dent has decided to state his intention to resume testing at the end of
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “ok. J” The memo-
randum was attached to an undated memorandum from Brzezinski to Mondale, Vance,
Harold Brown, Schlesinger, Warnke, Jones, Turner, and Press that stated that the Presi-
dential Directive contained “CTB instructions which replace those of PD/NSC–38.”
2 See Document 207.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the three years unless a vigorous safeguards program and studies in
the interim indicate that this is not necessary. He has also decided that
any further agreement on testing limitations after the three year treaty
would be presented to the Senate for ratification.
c. The President has decided that routine scientific experiments at
minimal yield levels (less than one hundred pounds) should be per-
mitted under the CTB in addition to experiments in laser fusion and
other related areas for civil energy purposes. He has also directed that
the precise nature and yields of such experiments be detailed in a CTB
Safeguards Plan by the SCC and forwarded for his review by July 31,
d. Following the Soviet response to our current proposal for fifteen
single national seismic stations with the right to upgrade at least two to
arrays, the US should indicate in the CTB negotiations that in the con-
text of a three year duration treaty, we should be willing to accept a net-
work of ten simple stations and defer the larger network for consider-
ation in the context of any replacement treaty.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Not found.
209.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 1, 1978
Attached are memoranda from the directors of the DOE nuclear
weapons design laboratories responding to the request for comments
on the new position on CTB discussed at the SCC meeting of 27 June
ject File, Box 1, Chronological File, 1978 July. Secret; Restricted Data. Two tabs are at-
tached but not printed.
2 See Document 207.

Comprehensive Test Ban
You may also recall that both Dr. Agnew and Dr. Batzel provided
will be interested in reviewing those earlier memoranda which more
fully express their views on the fundamental issues and on the impact
of a CTB.
As stated in the earlier memoranda and in the enclosed responses,
a treaty limited to three years is clearly preferable from the point of
view of delaying the loss of weapons design capability. In either case,
however, it will be difficult to motivate good people to stay. There will
also be a penalty from the safety and reliability point of view, but the
expectation is that this penalty would be limited.
It is going to be difficult to maintain morale and motivation of key
designers and scientific staffs under a near zero yield test ban even for
the three-year period. In order to minimize losses, it will be necessary
to provide both tangible assurances which demonstrate the national re-
solve to resume testing and also the resources necessary to assure suc-
cessful start-up of a meaningful test program.
The verification problem will be intensified by both the shorter
term treaty and the more limited network of stations. During the ratifi-
cation process it will come to be recognized that we will only be able to
verify [1 line not declassified] As we have already seen, the Soviets will
take the position that the verification issue should be reconsidered and
that no other means of verification beyond national technical means
will be required.
In summary: the shorter period for the CTB alleviates some of the
national security concerns. Nonetheless, a noticeable risk remains if
testing of the performance of boosted primaries is foreclosed, since
there is some (low) probability that some deficiency may occur in crit-
ical weapons in the stockpile. It would seem essential, therefore, that
the Administration be able to articulate the compensating benefits of a
three-year moratorium.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
210.
Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
Washington, July 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Jerome Kahan Dep Director,
Hamilton Jordan
Bureau of Politico-Military
NSC
Affairs
Reginald Bartholomew
Defense
OSTP
Secretary Harold Brown
John Marcum
Dep Secretary Charles Duncan
CIA
David McGiffert Asst Secretary
Sayre Stevens Dep Director,
for International Security
National Foreign Assessment
Affairs
Center
Energy
[name not declassified] Chief,
Donald Kerr Acting Asst
Nuclear Energy Division
Secretary for Defense
Programs
JCS
General David Jones
Lt General William Y. Smith
ACDA
Paul Warnke
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Admiral Thomas Davies Asst
Director for Multilateral
Affairs
MINUTES OF MEETING
The purpose of the meeting was to continue discussion of the three
year approach on CTB, in light of comments received from the Chiefs2
and Laboratory Directors.3
White House Situation Room. Brzezinski summarized the meeting in a memorandum to
Carter, July 7; Ibid.
2 The JCS remained opposed to a CTB. See Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to Brown, June 29, 1978; Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown
Papers, Box 82, Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty #2.

Comprehensive Test Ban
In beginning the meeting, Dr. Brzezinski stated that we want to
pull together differing agency positions on this issue and noted that the
JCS position was less forthcoming than he had understood. He had ex-
pected that the three year approach would provide the basis for JCS
support from the national security perspective and the other agencies
had agreed on the three vs. five year approach on that basis. In his
view, if the three year approach did not generate more support we
might as well have the same fight over the five year proposal. Harold
Brown pointed out, however, that we wouldn’t get the same letter from
the Chiefs on the five year proposal.
Paul Warnke stated that if the Chiefs still felt that serious risks re-
mained he would recommend staying with the five year duration since
it is better from a non-proliferation standpoint. In his view, the very
limited support from the Chiefs and the Laboratory Directors was not a
good enough basis to change this position. Cy Vance agreed noting that
we are weakening the treaty from a non-proliferation standpoint by
agreeing to the three year approach and should go back to five years.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that Roger Batzel’s comments were fairly
supportive, and that Harold Agnew’s, while linking CTB to SALT, also
had some support. Harold Brown stated that his attitude differed from
the Chiefs and he has transmitted these views to the President.4 He
agreed that three years would not be as good for non-proliferation but
noted the non-proliferation arguments had not been fully analyzed and
he did not place as high an emphasis on them. On balance, however, he
felt the three year approach was better and more acceptable to most
policy officials than five.
Donald Kerr, speaking for Jim Schlesinger, stated that three years
was a better way to reduce risks. In his view, while they could only cer-
tify continuing reliability with testing at 3–5 KT, three years repre-
sented a good compromise for national security and retention of labo-
ratory personnel. He noted with regard to verification that a shorter
duration would weaken our bargaining position and that what we
could install would be less than what we hoped for.
(Hamilton Jordan entered at this point.)
Don Kerr continued that we could accomplish planned improve-
ments in our Atomic Energy Detection System earlier and could also
propose that the US and Soviets do some calibration testing taking ad-
vantage of the precedents of the Peaceful Nuclear Explosive Treaty.
4 Brown sent a memorandum to Carter on June 30 which transmitted the views of
the JCS on a CTB. He noted that his “views on this subject differ from theirs, as I have pre-
viously indicated to you.” (Memorandum from Brown to Carter, June 30, Library of
Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82, Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty #2)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Spurgeon Keeny commented that this wouldn’t help much since cali-
bration shots would be at test sites and would tell us very little about
evasion concerns.
Dr. Brzezinski summarized the three year approach saying that we
are trying to balance five elements—duration, level of testing, Safe-
guards Plan, verification, and commitment to resume testing, in striv-
ing for a package which meets our national security needs and permits
us to go ahead with our foreign policy objectives. He then read a draft
Presidential Directive.5 In reviewing the verification portion of the di-
rective, Dr. Brzezinski suggested that maybe we should go to 10 in-
ternal seismic stations, rather than 7. Harold Brown and Paul Warnke
supported this suggestion and after a brief discussion, it was agreed
that the directive should be modified to include seeking 10 simple sta-
tions instead of 7.
David Jones indicated that there was no subject on which the
Chiefs had been more consistent. He acknowledged that three years
with resumption of testing was far better than five, but to conclude that
the problems would go away would be erroneous. He said that the JCS
memorandum had been based on a thorough review of each element of
the package and left the final judgement to the individual Chiefs. In re-
sponse to Dr. Brzezinski’s question, he agreed that the elements of the
draft Presidential Directive were responsive to the Chiefs’ concerns but
stated that their basic feeling was that there is no way to maintain reli-
ability without testing at 3–5 KT—an indefinite duration would be cata-
strophic, five years would be very very serious, three years would be
less serious but would still be a problem.
Harold Brown commented that instead of leaving the final judg-
ment to the individual Chiefs, he felt the memo expressed judgment at
the end that a 3–5 KT threshold would be better. Bill Smith interjected
that in the best of worlds, we would have both the non-proliferation
benefits and continue to test at the 3–5 KT level. Dr. Brzezinski noted
that with a longer duration there could be a higher test level, and with
the shorter duration a lower test level. Bill Smith stated that a more ac-
curate non-proliferation assessment was needed to clarify the benefits
of the treaty since the military risks were quite real to the Chiefs.
Paul Warnke offered to provide as much detail as needed, noting
that this factor had been taken into account fully in the President’s Feb-
ruary 1976 decision.6 Cy Vance stated that it was pretty clear that India
and possibly Brazil would go along with the CTB. Paul Warnke agreed
and said that the CTB might lead India to accept full scope safeguards
5 See Document 208.
6 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
as well. David Jones acknowledged that military risks had to be bal-
anced against these possible gains for non-proliferation but noted that
the Chiefs would be more negative on the prospect of such gains.
Dr. Brzezinski stated that he wanted to go through the draft Presi-
dential Directive paragraph by paragraph and have each participant
register dissent or consent. On duration, Cy Vance said he preferred
five years but would go to three if the other provisions were satisfac-
tory. David Jones said it was clear to him that three was very much
preferable than five, but that he had to represent all the Chiefs’ views
and would have to fall back on the judgment in paragraph 8 of the
memorandum on the entirety of the package rather than item by item.
Jones said that as Roger Batzel had noted, testing at 3–5 KT was a fun-
damental requirement in the long term. Harold Brown observed that
this referred to concern about a continuation of the treaty after three
years, and Dr. Brzezinski noted that the burden of proof would be on
those who wanted to continue the treaty. David Jones disagreed as-
serting that the burden of proof would fall programatically on the
tester. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that the treaty would terminate after
three years and David Jones said that he thought the burden of proof
would fall equally on those parties.
Harold Brown said that the real question would be verification
and not reliability with regard to the burden of proof. David Jones
agreed stating that the Chiefs are convinced that without much diffi-
conclusion that we would have to stop and they would continue by
cheating. In his view, we couldn’t do that but the Soviets could in their
closed society.
At Harold Brown’s suggestion, Dr. Brzezinski then asked for and
received confirmation that all agencies including Energy would sup-
port this approach except the Chiefs. Donald Kerr stated that three
years was definitely better than five years. Harold Brown said that in
his view this approach was consistent with national security and that
Jim Schlesinger should clarify his position on that issue. Dr. Brzezinski
read the final paragraph from Jim Schlesinger’s transmittal of the Labo-
ratory Directors’ views7 and said he took that as an endorsement of the
three year approach. Harold Brown agreed that this meant he (Jim
Schlesinger) was on board. Donald Kerr also agreed.
David Jones, supported by Harold Brown, indicated that if the
Chiefs were pressed again on this approach it would probably be
counter-productive and we would get more no’s than yes’s. He indi-
cated that in time as the provisions of the treaty become clearer and
7 See Document 209.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with a better understanding of the non-proliferation benefits of a CTB
they might be more supportive of this approach. There was agreement
that State and ACDA would prepare a non-proliferation assessment for
this purpose. David Jones asserted however, that if the paper were sent
now the Chiefs would still say that it (the three year approach) doesn’t
meet their concerns.
Bill Smith observed that the “unless” clause in the commitment to
resume testing had not been included in the Chiefs’ assumptions, in
other words their view was based on unconditional commitment to re-
sume testing after three years. Harold Brown said that if this was true
the paper was internally inconsistent. He recognized the problem that
having a group of people with different concerns reduced the consist-
ency of conclusions. In his view the Chiefs may have assumed that
testing would resume but didn’t really believe it. David Jones, said that
paragraph 8 of the JCS memorandum was based on the most favorable
assumptions.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should go back to the President
and tell him that all agencies were prepared to sign on for the three year
approach, and that JCS was standing by its concern but were also more
satisfied with the three year than five year proposal. Donald Kerr indi-
cated that in his view the Safeguards Plan should not be mentioned in
the intent to resume testing clause, since there was nothing in the plan
that would be relevant to the decision of whether to seek a replacement
treaty. Harold Brown said there was some relationship but suggested
that the Safeguards Plan could be included in a separate sentence. John
Marcum disagreed with Kerr pointing out that the Safeguards Plan
would provide the essential data base for deciding whether to nego-
tiate a replacement treaty.
Paul Warnke stated that in his view, the non-proliferation benefits
were marginal as is and that he felt we should stick to the five year po-
sition unless a general consensus developed in favor of the three year
approach.
Harold Brown disagreed stating that the three year approach
would be an improvement in the ratification context in demonstrating
that risks had been limited.
Paul Warnke asked how we would deal with permitted experi-
ments. He thought that since testing would be limited to less than 100
pounds we would not need to seek an understanding with the Rus-
sians, but in any case we could proceed to table language for Article I of
the treaty and reserve our position on whether an understanding
would be needed.
Dr. Brzezinski asked the working group to examine this issue and
adjourned the meeting stating that we would report to the President

Comprehensive Test Ban
and that State and ACDA would send a non-proliferation assessment
to the JCS.
211.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones)1
Washington, July 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Value of a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
One of the most serious potential threats to our national security is
the further spread of nuclear weapons. We believe that a major national
security advantage of a CTB—in addition to the constraint it would im-
pose on Soviet strategic force modernization—would be CTB’s contri-
bution to the achievement of non-proliferation objectives.
By demonstrating the willingness of the nuclear powers to accept
restraints on their own nuclear capabilities, CTB would put the U.S.
in a stronger position to carry out our non-proliferation strategy. We
could better press key non-nuclear states to accept restrictions on their
activities.
The President has publicly repeated his commitment to a test ban;
and the intense interest of the non-aligned nations, as well as our allies,
in a test ban was expressed in the recent U.N. Special Session on Disar-
mament.2 Continued failure to reach a CTB would seriously impede
our non-proliferation efforts and could result in considerable erosion of
what we have achieved.
We believe that the longer the duration of the CTB, the greater
the benefits. But even a three-year ban, if non-discriminatory, would
have significant non-proliferation value. Following are some specific
benefits.
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty #2. Secret. Copies sent to Brown, Schlesinger, and Brze-
zinski. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads “SECDEF HAS SEEN,
help with JCS. HB.”
2 The UN Special Session on Disarmament was held in New York from May 23 to
June 30.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Prevent Testing by Threshold States.
A CTB would commit non-nuclear weapon parties to accept con-
straints upon nuclear weapon development. These nations would be
unable to obtain either the political benefit or the initial proof of
weapons afforded by tests. This would be important politically for na-
tions which have not joined the NPT—notably India, Pakistan, Egypt,
Israel, Argentina, Brazil, Spain, South Africa, and Saudi Arabia. Six of
these nations are parties to the Limited Test Ban Treaty. A widely sup-
ported CTB—one that, unlike the NPT, could not be attacked as dis-
criminatory—would be politically very costly for such states to reject.
There are reasonable prospects that a substantial number of them will
join. Even for those that choose not to adhere, the existence of a CTB
could well be a factor inhibiting any decision to test.3
2. Strengthen the NPT
Most of the non-nuclear parties to the NPT have stressed the im-
portance they attach to fulfillment of the reciprocal undertakings of nu-
clear weapons states to curb vertical proliferation. One of the steps
most persistently urged is a comprehensive test ban treaty, which is
considered a litmus test of nuclear power intentions. A CTB could
make it easier to persuade4 additional states to join the NPT, and re-
duce charges of discrimination and of failure to fulfill our obligations
under Article VI of that Treaty.5 It would also minimize the chances of
withdrawal by countries, such as Yugoslavia and Nigeria, that have
hinted at that possibility. If a CTB is in effect by 1980, it will improve
the negotiating position of the United States in the NPT Review
Conference.
3. Reinforcement of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
Argentina and Brazil, two states of primary proliferation concern
who have not joined the NPT, have interpreted the Treaty of Tlatelolco
as not foreclosing “peaceful” nuclear explosives. Since Tlatelolco could
well enter into force at about the same time as a CTB, the latter would
close out this possibility.
3 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Brown wrote “This is less useful an ex-
position than it would be if it [illegible] of these countries specifically” and underlined
the words “could well be.”
4 Brown highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins “Most of the non-
nuclear parties” and ends with “easier to persuade” and wrote in the right-hand margin
“same on this.”
5 Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty declared that signatories must pursue
“negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament” and make progress towards a treaty
“on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.”
(“Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons,” July 1, 1968, Documents on Disar-

Comprehensive Test Ban
4. India.
While Prime Minister Desai has declared that he will not authorize
any further explosions,6 it is important to translate this into a treaty
obligation binding India. Desai states that India will “support all non-
discriminatory measures toward nuclear disarmament,” and indicated
that a CTB would “remove a sensitive element of discrimination and
bring the chances of acceptance of a non-proliferation treaty both inter-
nationally and nationally much nearer.” Last month Foreign Minister
Vajpayee told U.S. Congressmen that India would join a non-
discriminatory CTB. Given India’s standing in the non-aligned move-
ment as well as the importance of Indian actions in this area in the wake
of its 1974 test, Indian adherence to the CTB would have a beneficial ef-
fect on other countries, particularly Pakistan.7
Our other major non-proliferation objective in India—full scope
safeguards—would be promoted by a CTB. At his January 5 press con-
ference, Desai said “India will agree to full scope safeguards only if the
nuclear powers, at least the big two, the United States and the Soviet
Union, signed a comprehensive treaty to avoid all types of tests” and
took certain other steps. In his recent meetings with Prime Minister
Desai, the President placed great emphasis on the CTB as a major part
of the solution to the safeguards problem.8 Since the Non-Proliferation
Act of 1977 requires termination of U.S. nuclear aid to India if full scope
safeguards are not in place in 18 months, a CTB may avert a serious di-
vision between the United States and India.
5. South Africa.
A CTB which South Africa9 joined would convert into a treaty obli-
gation the assurance Prime Minister Vorster gave the President that
South Africa would not explode a nuclear device.10 This would help re-
duce regional apprehensions about South African intentions as well as
6 On June 9, Desai told the UN Special Session on Disarmament that India had “ab-
jured nuclear explosions even for peaceful purposes.” (“Address by Indian Prime Min-
ister Desai before the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament:
7 Above and to the right of this paragraph, Brown wrote “useful.”
9 Brown circled and drew a line from the words “South Africa” and wrote “would
it?” above and to the right of this paragraph.
September 13, South African Foreign Minister “Pik” Botha had handed Ambassador
Bowdler a letter from Vorster to Carter that “led off with reiteration of SAG’s previous
assurances that South Africa does not have or intend to develop nuclear explosives for
any purpose, that Kalahari is not a nuclear test site, and that there will not be any nuclear
testing in South Africa.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840081–
2508)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the risk of consequential decisions by others to go nuclear. In the near
term, a CTB could advance the progress begun during Ambassador
Smith’s recent visit in achieving South African adherence to the NPT
and full scope safeguards.11
In summary, we believe that a CTB is a central element of our ef-
forts to prevent the further proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Cyrus Vance
Paul C. Warnke
11 Gerard Smith, the President’s Special Assistant for Non-Proliferation Matters, vi-
sited South Africa from June 26–28 to discuss nuclear issues.
212.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Vance-Gromyko Meeting, SALT, CTB
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
USSR
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Paul C. Warnke
First Dep. Foreign Minister G.M.
Ambassador Malcolm Toon2
Korniyenko
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Dep. Foreign Minister V.S.
Interpreter
Semenov
Mr. A.M. Petrosyants3
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin4
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev,
Interpreter
Box 8, Vance-Gromyko July 1978. Secret. The meeting took place at the Soviet Mission.
Drafted by Krimer on July 15.
matters. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.

Comprehensive Test Ban
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
Noting that in the person of Ambassador Warnke Secretary Vance
had a specialist on all questions, Gromyko said that for the purpose of
discussing CTB matters he would have to call in his experts.
Ambassador Toon, Chairman Petrosyants, Minister Semenov and
Ambassador Dobrynin joined the group for discussion of CTB matters.
Ambassador Warnke expressed his belief that Chairman Petro-
syants would agree with him in saying that good progress had been
achieved toward a CTB Treaty. The Delegations were now working
diligently to develop a separate verification agreement that would con-
tain appropriate provisions. Warnke could really not see any issue of
principle remaining. Initially there had been three major issues before
the sides:
(1) Peaceful nuclear explosions;
(2) Verification; and
(3) Duration of the Treaty
Warnke would take them up in inverse order, because due to the
fact that on September 2 President Brezhnev had agreed to a morato-
rium on peaceful nuclear explosions for the same duration as the
Treaty, we could now agree to a limited duration and thus a limited
moratorium.
We had agreed in principle that the duration of the Treaty would
be either three years or five years. The two sides had also agreed that
during the moratorium they would continue to consider together if
there was some way to permit resumption of peaceful nuclear explo-
sions without involving military aspects or endangering our common
objective of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Thus, we now had
substantive agreement on two of the three issues. As for verification,
we did have agreement in principle. We had given up our traditional
insistence on mandatory on-site inspection and had moved toward the
Soviet position that such inspection be on a voluntary basis. We still
had to work out the circumstances under which on-site inspection
would be carried out, and the two sides were working on the condi-
tions for such inspection. For our part, we were working on the as-
sumption that a well substantiated demand for on-site inspection could
not very well be rejected without affecting the viability of the Treaty.
There were proposals on the table concerning specific numbers of loca-
tions for national seismic stations on the territory of the Soviet Union
and the United States, and the experts of the two sides were currently
engaged in intensive work on this question. Finally, there was no dif-
ference of views between the two sides regarding the fact that we were

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
working toward a general and comprehensive test ban, and not merely
toward a threshold test ban.
Warnke thought that both sides recognized that there were areas
of routine scientific experiments producing very low yield that would
have to be provided for. He knew that last year it had been pointed out
in the course of discussions that one such area was that of laser fusion
as a means of generating electricity. Experiments in that area would
produce low nuclear yields, to be measured in terms of pounds. He was
sure that there was no intention on either side to interfere with these
scientific developments. Chairman Petrosyants would be an expert in
this area, and would be familiar with the nature of these experiments.
Thus, Warnke would say, he was satisfied with the progress that
had been achieved, and believed the prospects were good. He knew
that they should consider together the question of the timing and entry
into force of the Agreement, particularly in light of the recent UN Spe-
cial Session on Disarmament and the proposal to reconstitute the Con-
ference of the Committee on Disarmament.5 There were matters of pro-
cedure and timing, and how best to enlist international support, that
could be worked out between the sides. He hoped that Chairman Pe-
trosyants would in general agree with his review of where we stood at
the present time.
Chairman Petrosyants said that, in general, the situation as set out
by Ambassador Warnke was correct. Their negotiations were indeed
being carried on successfully. The Delegations were engaged in inten-
sive and important work on certain issues. However, he would have to
report that they had not yet resolved and, he would even say, not even
approached resolution of one major question. Some time ago the Soviet
Union had suggested and tabled a proposed text for so-called Article I,
the purpose of which it was to define the objectives of the Treaty. The
language proposed by the Soviet side very clearly indicated the pur-
poses of the Treaty and the ultimate objective of complete cessation of
nuclear weapon tests in all environments. The U.S. Delegation, on the
other hand, had merely set out its considerations in the so-called
Working Document, but had not put forward a draft for Article I,
i.e., for the Article which was to spell out the main purpose of the
Treaty. He would ask that a draft of this Article be presented as soon
as possible. That would make it easier to continue the work of the
Delegations.
Petrosyants said that the greatest difficulty in the negotiations in-
volved the question of verification. The Soviet Union was in favor of
verification, and in this sense stood on common ground with the
5 See Document 501.

Comprehensive Test Ban
United States. The first element of verification was on-site inspection in
the event of ambiguous physical phenomena which raised questions
about compliance with the Treaty. On-site inspection would be imple-
mented on a voluntary basis. In general, he would say, the work of
specifying the functions of the personnel to be involved in on-site in-
spection was proceeding rather successfully. There were still some dif-
ferences between the sides on this subject, but Petrosyants did not be-
lieve them to be so important as to warrant airing at so important a
meeting as the current one. He was sure that he would be able to re-
solve them with Warnke.
As for the second element of the verification question—automatic
national seismic stations—there were still quite a few unresolved ques-
tions and quite a few divergent views. The Soviet side believed it
would be best to carry out verification by national technical means, in-
cluding national seismic stations, which were in the possession of all
the states involved. The U.S. Delegation had proposed installation of
so-called automatically operated seismic stations on each other’s terri-
tory. He and Warnke had discussed the various characteristics of such
stations, their range of operation, etc. At their invitation the principal
inventor had come to Geneva, bringing with him documentation and
figures. As a result of discussions with specialists, it had been estab-
lished that to date these stations exist only on the drawing board, and
that one could not expect even one such station to be assembled in the
United States any earlier than October of this year. From a technical
standpoint that station was very complex, and when the Soviet side
had asked how much time would be required for testing it, the inventor
had specified a period of no less than three months. In the Soviet view it
would be impossible to guarantee that a station produced in just one
sample and tested for only three months would operate reliably. He be-
lieved that it would be quite wrong to jeopardize the Treaty by in-
stalling this kind of equipment, since it would be very likely to mislead
people. He did not believe it possible to put one’s faith into the opera-
tion of such a station without having any assurance of the reliability of
its operation. One most important element of that station, the so-called
authenticity block, did not even exist on the drawing board so far, and
would not be completed even by October. For all these reasons he
thought the sides should limit themselves to inspection by personnel
and by using the technical facilities, including seismic stations, which
the sides have at their disposal at present. Finally, the Soviet side be-
lieved that it should be possible to divide the verification question into
two stages. At the first stage verification would be carried out without
the use of national seismic stations on the territory of the other side,
and at the second stage they could proceed to the use of improved
seismic stations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Gromyko asked if the two sides had agreed on the possibility of
using national seismic stations.
Petrosyants replied in the negative.
Secretary Vance asked what the quality of verification would be
during the initial period without improved and installed seismic
stations.
Petrosyants replied that first and foremost he would point out that
neither side had any intention of violating the Treaty and conducting
nuclear explosions.
Gromyko remarked that this should be viewed as the moral policy
of all the countries involved.
Petrosyants pointed out something that he thought might be even
more important. The United States had in its own country a well-
developed network of seismic stations, as well as stations located along
the perimeter of Soviet borders, particularly south and east of these
borders. Thus, everything was subject to observation and identifica-
tion. Moreover, there were systems for an international exchange of
seismic data from seismic stations. All this, taken together, would in his
view assure a good level of verification. This is why the Soviet side had
not advanced any proposal to locate seismic stations on the territory of
the United States. They simply were not needed.
Gromyko noted that there were evidently three issues that were
not as yet finally agreed. The first concerned the purposes of the Treaty.
It was obviously necessary to reach agreement on Article I, specifying
that the Treaty was aimed at ensuring a complete ban on the testing of
nuclear weapons. It should not be a difficult task to draft such an ar-
ticle. The fact that the United States had not provided a draft so far gave
rise to certain doubts on his side. Secondly—duration of the Treaty. He
had the impression that the United States was losing its taste for the
five-year duration it had previously proposed. When he had been in
Washington last and had indicated that a five-year term might be ac-
ceptable, he had thought that he had made a concession that would be
readily grasped by the United States. He thought if a three-year dura-
tion were now to be established, people would become suspicious that
the participants to the Treaty were developing new facilities and would
engage in a new round of testing after the three-year period. Third, as
to verification. Some progress had been achieved in view of the under-
standing on the participation of personnel on a voluntary basis. As for
automatic equipment, he thought it would be best of all if agreement
were reached to use the technical facilities as the disposal of each of the
parties on a national basis. If any third country were to ask the United
States to install so and so many stations on its territory, no one would
object. But, in the absence of such requests, national technical means
should be sufficient. After all, the initial participants in this Treaty were

Comprehensive Test Ban
countries that had adequate technical means at their disposal. More-
over, the automatic “machine” the U.S. side had mentioned was still on
the drawing board. From the standpoint of the tasks it was to perform it
was a very crude piece of equipment. It could not distinguish between
nuclear explosions and other explosions carried out for economic pur-
poses, such as mining, for example. Would it then be necessary to call
out the fire brigades each time that such a crude machine gave a signal?
He would surely not characterize that kind of equipment as a miracle of
technology. In fact, the use of a machine that could not distinguish be-
tween nuclear explosions and other explosions, carried out for eco-
nomic purposes, could be likened to the use of an automatic lawn
mower one controlled from one’s living room, which in addition to cut-
ting the grass also destroyed one’s flower beds. It seemed to him that
this whole question should be viewed in proper perspective and that
agreement not be made contingent on some “miracle machine” of
doubtful merit. He thought the two sides should agree to use the na-
tional technical means at their disposal for purposes of verification.
Fourth and last point: what should the agreement to be concluded
be like? The United States somehow wanted it to provide for some kind
of an exception. The Soviet side wanted to ensure that all nuclear
weapon tests were ruled out under the Treaty, because in dealing with
nuclear weapons it would make little difference whether the yield was
expressed in terms of kilotons or pounds. We did have a threshold test
ban agreement between us, although it had not yet been ratified and
had not entered into force. Why, then, should our two countries sign a
second threshold agreement? No, what was needed was a treaty com-
pletely banning all nuclear weapon tests. A new threshold agreement
would only create doubts and make an unfavorable impression on
world public opinion. As for scientific research, that would be a dif-
ferent matter, but it must not permit testing of nuclear weapons. If the
U.S. side was aiming at another threshold agreement, the Soviet Union
could not agree to such a concept. He would want to see the United
States display greater flexibility in this respect. Of course, the distance
between the two sides had been reduced to some extent, and that was
good. But a certain distance nevertheless still remained.
The Secretary wanted to comment briefly on the four points Gro-
myko had made, and would then ask Mr. Warnke to state his views.
First concerning the purposes to be spelled out in Article I of the Treaty.
There was no difference between the two sides on the question that
what we were seeking was a complete test ban. As for the time when
we would be in a position to table our own version of Article I, he
would ask Mr. Warnke to comment after he had finished. As for dura-
tion—we have been considering whether a three-year term or a five-
year term would be most appropriate for the Treaty. When our consid-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eration of this matter was completed, we would be in touch. On the
question of verification—the form of the instrument to be used in con-
nection with verification was important from the standpoint of ratifica-
tion in the United States, and it was a matter that would receive major
attention during Congressional discussions in the process of ratifica-
tion. Finally, on the fourth point—what we were talking about was lab-
oratory research. There was no real difference between us in this
respect.
Warnke said he did not have much to add to the Secretary’s com-
ments. On the first point—we had submitted a Working Paper, and
were developing an Article I which we hoped to submit in the near fu-
ture. Secondly, regarding duration of the Treaty. Of course, one of the
things to be considered in this connection was the impact of the Treaty
on other countries, and the need to further the non-proliferation objec-
tives we had in common. The Soviet Union had proposed a three-year
duration. Warnke had listened to the arguments of the Soviet Delega-
tion and had found them to be quite persuasive. Third, on verification.
He did not believe it necessary to comment any further on on-site in-
spection. As for national seismic stations, he had thought that we had
reached the point where the issue was not whether or not such stations
were to be used, but rather when, how many and where. If the Soviet
Union was now changing its position in this respect, Warnke could
only view this as a serious setback to the negotiations. He believed it
was necessary to recognize that neither side anticipated that we would
not have an agreement that would replace the current one after three
years. After all, it would hardly be worthwhile to negotiate on a three-
year agreement unless we expected it to be replaced at the expiration of
that period. He believed that one of the key factors for determining
whether or not there would be another treaty banning nuclear testing
would be the question of whether or not there was sufficient confidence
in the verification procedures in the treaty now being negotiated. As
Secretary Vance had pointed out, acceptability of the Treaty to the U.S.
Senate would depend in large part upon Senate satisfaction with the
verification procedures. He believed that the national seismic stations
would prove to be an important element in such procedures. He fur-
ther believed that from the standpoint of furtherance of our common
non-proliferation objective, and from the standpoint of the impact on
other countries, it was necessary to be sure that there were verification
procedures and facilities that would give them confidence that the nu-
clear powers had stopped nuclear testing. Therefore, he would agree
with what he understood Chairman Petrosyants had suggested—that
there was the possibility of dividing verification into two stages, recog-
nizing that time would be required before equipment could be installed
in connection with these national seismic stations. However, he would
not feel confident unless there was acceptance of the principle that after

Comprehensive Test Ban
a certain period of time national seismic stations would in fact be in-
stalled. Thus, he felt that we ought to continue discussing the question
of how many such stations would be installed, where and when. How-
ever, he believed that if there was a difference in principle on the entire
question, he would say quite frankly that his optimism would be seri-
ously set back. Concerning the technology involved, he did not think
we needed to fear that the equipment in question would operate like
the lawn mower to which Gromyko had referred. He believed that in-
stalling the equipment would be a substantial step forward in terms of
verification and rather than raise questions, would settle them and pro-
mote confidence.
Gromyko noted that Warnke had avoided the question Gromyko
had asked. He would therefore repeat it: will that equipment be ca-
pable of distinguishing between nuclear explosions and ordinary non-
nuclear explosions carried out for economic purposes?
Warnke said the answer to that question was no.
Gromyko said that in his country, with its vast territory, hundreds
and perhaps thousands of economic explosions were carried out annu-
ally, especially in the eastern part of the country. He would ask, then,
will there be fire brigades constantly travelling throughout his country
pursuant to signals received from that machine? He thought this would
hardly promote confidence on either side. Such were his views con-
cerning the equipment in question. As for national means, on its own
territory each country could install as many machines as it felt were
needed.
Warnke thought that Gromyko’s comments were not relevant to
the issue. Obviously there will be chemical explosions, whether or not
one had seismic stations. Chemical explosions could be appropriately
dealt with through pre-notification procedures. But, he would point
out, this was not a problem that would be created by the stations; the
problem existed in any case. Otherwise one might also say that national
technical means should not be very good, because if they were, they
will raise questions. For purposes of verification we had proposed the
use of national technical means, voluntary on-site inspection and these
additional seismic stations. Without all three elements there would not
be adequate confidence in compliance with a complete test ban. A lim-
ited threshold treaty would be futile in terms of furthering our non-
proliferation objectives.
Gromyko said he could see that Warnke was quite hypnotized by
his machine, a machine that could not distinguish between nuclear and
chemical explosions. Well, that was his business. In a country as large
as the Soviet Union there would be many chemical explosions for many
different economic purposes. Could that machine distinguish chemical
explosions from nuclear explosions? No, it could not. In the case of nu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
clear explosions, could it distinguish between weapons related explo-
sions and economic explosions? No, it could not. It does not even exist
as yet, has not been tested, and already the U.S. side was trying to im-
pose such equipment on other countries. The Soviet Union was not in
favor of that. The Soviets would like to see a more reliable system of
verification. As far as the present parties to the negotiations were con-
cerned, i.e., the United States, the Soviet Union and Great Britain, they
were quite capable of assuring reliable verification through the use of
their own national technical facilities. As for the number of stations, of
course the Delegations could discuss that matter; he would not reject
that. But, things should be simplified and a certain flexibility displayed.
Further, Gromyko wanted to be sure that Secretary Vance and Mr.
Warnke were not talking about nuclear explosions as such, but of labo-
ratory experiments and research for scientific purposes. He would like
to get some clarification of the nature of such laboratory explosions. If
they were what he thought they were, perhaps there was a way out.
What would be the scientific purposes of such laboratory experiments?
Warnke had two comments to make. First, he would return to his
hypnotic machine. He would point out again that the chemical explo-
sion problem would not be created by that machine. Practically, the so-
lution to that problem would be to provide more information re-
garding the location of such explosions.
Gromyko interrupted to say that Warnke was just confirming
what Gromyko had said.
Warnke would not pretend that the equipment would be perfect.
However, it would be better than anything we had now. To object to
the equipment because, while it could detect chemical explosions, it
could not distinguish them from nuclear explosions, would be tanta-
mount to saying that we must reduce the crime rate by reducing the
number of police reports. Finally, regarding the question of scientific
experiments. What we had in mind were routine scientific laboratory
experiments, producing low yields. We were not proposing that either
of us be enabled thereby to test nuclear weapons.
Gromyko felt it necessary to ask an additional question. When
Warnke spoke of laboratory experiments did he really have in mind ex-
periments conducted in an enclosed building, such as the buildings in
which laboratories were usually located? Or did he have in mind exper-
iments conducted in open spaces, somewhere in Nevada, or Nebraska,
or some desert area?
Warnke replied that what he had in mind were experiments con-
ducted in a reusable laboratory.
Gromyko said he could see that he had not received an answer.
Mr. Korniyenko added that the type of laboratory to be used re-
quired definition.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Secretary Vance said it was his understanding that what we were
talking about were experiments in an enclosed space.
Gromyko said it would be necessary to obtain additional informa-
tion and confirmation regarding the purposes of the experiments, if the
U.S. side could provide them, because the Treaty does place a great re-
sponsibility on the three countries involved.
The Secretary expressed his hope that the Soviet side would give
some further thought to what appeared to be a radical change in the po-
sition of the Soviet side with respect to the machine Warnke had talked
about. He could tell Gromyko that without doubt these three elements,
this tri-partite verification process, would be very important in terms of
Congressional consideration.
Gromyko said that the U.S. Government would best know how to
deal with the U.S. Congress; he could not provide any advice in this re-
spect. At the present time he could add nothing to the Soviet position. It
seemed to him that the Soviet side had displayed a great deal of flexi-
bility in the negotiation of the CTB Treaty. Thus, when the main ques-
tion had appeared to be the question of duration, the Soviet Union had
accepted the U.S. position, but now seismic stations were regarded as a
matter of new importance.
Warnke said he could not accept the statement that this was a new
matter. It had been an essential part of our position from the very
beginning.
Gromyko recalled that in May President Carter had characterized
the question of duration as being the most important question. He
would refer the Secretary to the record of that conversation to confirm
this fact.6
The Secretary said that what the President had in mind was based
on his impression that duration was one matter on which there was dis-
agreement. In the CTB negotiations, duration and verification were of
coequal importance.
Gromyko reminded the Secretary that in May he had told Presi-
dent Carter that the Soviet Union would be prepared to accept a five-
year term for the Treaty in the event that all other matters were agreed,
including verification. The President quite definitely stressed duration
as the most important question.
He could see that there was still some distance between the respec-
tive positions on the test ban treaty. This was not a simple matter; he
would suggest that the Delegations continue their work. In general, the
attitude of the Soviet Union, based on principle, toward the advis-
ability of concluding a treaty on the complete banning of nuclear
6 See Document 201.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
weapon tests had not changed in the least. He continued to believe that
this would be an important international step. He would only ask the
Secretary not to assume that the Soviet Union was interested in conclu-
sion of such a treaty to any greater degree than the United States. In his
view all three countries negotiating the treaty were equally interested
in its conclusion.
The Secretary wanted to assure Gromyko that we assumed that all
were equally interested in achieving this extremely important goal.
Gromyko said it was good to know that we shared the same
objective.
213.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, July 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Duration of a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
Our trilateral talks with the USSR and UK on a Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty are continuing to proceed well.2 A good number of the
formal treaty provisions have been agreed and the Soviet Delegation is
talking seriously on the issues of the way in which on-site inspections
would be conducted and the characteristics of the national seismic sta-
tions that would be established in the Soviet Union and the U.S.
The question of the initial duration of the treaty is, however,
impeding the final development of on-site inspection procedures and,
even more seriously, Soviet consideration of the number, timing and
specific characteristics of the national seismic stations. Accordingly,
substantial further progress will require that we state soon our final po-
sition on treaty duration.
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Paul C. Warnke Files, December 1974–July 1979, Ac-
siles, CTB, NPT, and Indian Ocean Arms Control, January–October 1978. Secret.
2 The trilateral CTB negotiations resumed on May 4 in Geneva and continued into
August.

Comprehensive Test Ban
It is, however, also clear that a final decision that moves from a five
year treaty to a three year treaty will interfere seriously with our ability
to negotiate any extensive and effective network in the USSR. This
could make our ratification problems more severe. There are also indi-
cations that moving to a three year term could adversely affect pros-
pects for gaining adherence by key-nuclear states, and thus reduce a
CTB’s non-proliferation value.
Verification. Our discussions with the Soviet CTB Delegation sug-
gest strongly that, for a five-year treaty, the Soviets would be prepared
to come quite close to meeting our proposals on national seismic sta-
tions, including our proposal that they accept a substantial number of
stations. After press accounts alerted them to a possible U.S. move to
three years, however, they have taken a much more reserved position.
The head of the Soviet Delegation has made it clear that his government
would accept substantially less in terms of verification, particularly
seismic stations, for a three-year treaty than for a five-year one. He
maintains that, for a three-year duration, it is virtually impossible to
justify a seismic network that would take over two years to install,
would require considerable effort and expense, and would involve ad-
vanced equipment that has not yet even been fully developed or tested.
In addition, we are told by members of the Soviet Delegation that
our far-reaching seismic station proposals have encountered strong re-
sistance in the Soviet bureaucracy because of their unprecedented in-
trusiveness. While the Soviet government appears reluctantly prepared
to accept most of our proposals in the context of a relatively durable
CTB, it can be expected to have much greater difficulty swallowing
what they probably regard as a serious compromise of Soviet doctrine
for the sake of a treaty that could lapse after only three years.
We believe, therefore, that a U.S. shift to three years would result
in a significant weakening of the verification package we could hope to
negotiate. It is unlikely, for example, that we could obtain more than a
few stations on Soviet territory, and even then the Soviets would be
very reluctant to agree in advance or in any detail to the sophisticated
technical features we are proposing.
The implications of having to settle for less could be quite serious.
Clearly, verification will be a key factor in the ratification debate, and
the type of seismic network that seems attainable for a five-year treaty
could be a major asset. It would have substantial appeal both in the
Senate and with the American public as a breakthrough in terms of So-
viet acceptance of intrusive verification measures and as an important
precedent for future arms control measures, such as SALT. Our shift to
three years could undercut this opportunity.
Effect on India and other key states. Foreign Secretary Mehta recently
told our Ambassador that the Indian Government was troubled by a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
New York Times story3 indicating that we had decided to permit certain
kinds of nuclear testing under a CTB and to shift to a three-year treaty.
Ambassador Goheen reported that Mehta seemed to be saying that
India would not become party to so limited a CTB.
The Indians are probably more concerned by the prospect of
movement away from a comprehensive ban than they are by a possible
shift to three years—and they may well be prepared to go along with
the shorter duration provided that the treaty is comprehensive. None-
theless, they would almost certainly find the five-year approach easier
to support.
We would expect other key non-nuclear states also to favor a
longer treaty, and in some cases this preference could be a decisive
factor in whether they choose to adhere. A number of these states may
interpret the three-year approach as lack of a true commitment on our
part to a CTB and as a clear indication of our intention to resume
testing, and they may decide that, rather than join from the start, they
should wait and see whether the nuclear powers are serious enough
about a test ban to continue it after the three-year moratorium.
Negotiating Leverage. Because the Soviets earlier proposed a form of
three-year treaty, we had assumed that, by moving to three years, we
could seek to obtain corresponding Soviet movement on other issues.
However, not only have the Soviets signaled clearly that they could ac-
cept a five-year treaty, but the Soviet Delegation leader has told us that
he prefers five to three. If anything, our move to three would give the
Soviets additional leverage on us. The Deputy Chairman of the Soviet
Delegation recently expressed to the UK Deputy his disappointment
that with the three year duration we would end up with only “a brief
self-imposed moratorium.” He complained about the influence of the
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff and said that he regretted now that the Soviet
side had failed to accept the idea of unlimited duration.
United Kingdom Position. The British have repeatedly emphasized
to us their strong view that five years is the minimum term which
should be negotiated. Their Delegation head informed me that Prime
Minister Callaghan planned to mention this to you in Bonn.4 Although
the UK would probably go along with a three year term if we urge it,
they will do so reluctantly.
“troubled” by a July 1 story in the New York Times that said “US military and nuclear ex-
perts have forced a change in our position so that certain kinds of testing will be per-
mitted and the duration of the CTB will be reduced to 3 years.” (National Archives, RG
4 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Stockpile Reliability Implications. No technical basis has been ad-
duced for questioning our ability, without nuclear testing, to maintain
high confidence in the reliability of our stockpile for a substantial pe-
riod of time, and certainly for five years. Any expressions of preference
for a three year period seem to derive more from an eagerness to re-
sume testing than from any serious contention that the problems of
maintaining stockpile reliability for five years are significantly greater
than those for a three year period.
Indeed, a three year treaty might be insufficient time to provide ex-
perience in maintaining the stockpile without testing to enable us to
make a sound judgment on whether a test ban can be continued.
These various circumstances tend strongly to support a five year
treaty duration. The longer term would permit negotiation of more ef-
fective and more domestically attractive verification measures and
would elicit greater support among key non-nuclear countries. The
three year period would, as a practical matter, foreclose the installation
of a significant seismic network in the Soviet Union and could be re-
garded by other countries as, in the words of the Soviet Deputy, just “a
brief self-imposed moratorium”. Indeed, if other considerations lead
you to modify your earlier decision in favor of a five year treaty, I
would suggest that a four year treaty would much more adequately ad-
vance our CTB objectives than one of three years.
In short, the costs to our negotiating position and to our non-
proliferation objectives resulting from the reduction of the CTB term
would be heavier than I believed when we first discussed this possi-
bility. I wonder whether the gains in quieting CTB opponents would be
sufficient to offset these costs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
214.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, September 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban Negotiations
With the CTB negotiations now in recess, it is appropriate that we
review our approach and take decisions which will allow us to move
ahead when the negotiations reconvene. We believe that our review
should be guided by these three objectives:
—We should seek to preserve the momentum of the negotiations
and to capitalize on the Soviet leadership’s current readiness to work
out an agreement along the basic lines we have proposed.
—We should strengthen the chances of wide adherence by non-
nuclear states by providing for their involvement in the negotiating
process, but we should choose a form of involvement that does not run
the risk of unraveling the results of the trilateral negotiations.
—We should avoid submitting a CTB treaty to the Congress at a
time when that might complicate ratification of either SALT or CTB.
We have devised a strategy which we believe satisfactorily recon-
ciles these objectives.
—First, we would proceed expeditiously in the trilateral talks to
resolve the remaining substantive issues. The Soviets have seemed
eager to complete the talks and have continued to move toward our po-
sitions on all major issues, including our approaches on national
seismic stations, on-site inspection procedures, and peaceful nuclear
explosions. Prospects are good for settling outstanding issues during
the next round. But rather than terminate the trilaterals at that time, we
would plan to hold a final round at a later time, aiming perhaps for late
spring or early summer 1979.
—Second, before this final round, we would undertake an exten-
sive series of consultations with other states. We would begin with key
Allies (France, FRG, Japan) and then proceed to other Allies and pivotal
non-aligned countries (for example, India, Yugoslavia, Brazil, Sweden,
Mexico, Nigeria). The purpose would be to explain and build support
for the trilaterally negotiated text. We would expect to receive a
number of suggestions for changes, and we, the Soviets, and British
would decide whether any of these were acceptable when we got back
together for the final round.
—A final decision on whether the treaty would go to the Geneva
Disarmament Committee would be taken during the last trilateral
unlabeled Folder. Secret.

Comprehensive Test Ban
round. From the preceding consultative phase, we would gain a better
understanding of how strongly others felt about taking the treaty to
this multilateral body and how much difficulty we might have in pro-
tecting our interests there. We would make our decision based on
gaining maximum international support, consistent with our own re-
quirement for a realistic CTB.
The principal advantage of this approach is that it would enable us
to nail down agreement with the Soviets soon without having either to
proceed directly with ratification or to delay the process artificially. We
would have the flexibility to decide how best to maximize other na-
tions’ support, and to adjust CTB timing to the SALT schedule.
215.
Message From the White House Situation Room to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
FM The White House Situation Room. Sitto 124. To Dr. Brzezinski
for the President. WH81232. Message to President Carter from Prime
Minister Callaghan.
Dear Jimmy,
I believe you will be making important decisions about the Com-
prehensive Test Ban before the tripartite negotiations resume in Ge-
neva on 28 September.
I know that your people have been giving a great deal of thought
over the past weeks to some of the outstanding issues in the negotia-
tions. I recognise that these raise difficult military and technical prob-
lems. But I am sure that, like me, you continue to believe that we must
do all we can to bring the negotiations to a positive and satisfactory
conclusion. The political benefits of a successful treaty could be
enormous. The Wests’ relations with the Soviet Union are not in good
shape at present and a CTB treaty in the near future would do much to
improve them. It would also be seen by the world at large as a major
step forward in arms control. I am particularly anxious that it should be
a treaty that will win the support of leaders of non-nuclear states like
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister James

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Prime Minister Desai and so help to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
If we are to achieve these political benefits, then the longer the
treaty lasts the better. The longer it is, the more serious our commit-
ment to a test ban will be seen to be and the more time we shall have to
persuade other countries to sign it. Earlier this year we agreed on a
treaty lasting five years. I know that for very good reasons you are now
considering whether that period should be shorter. If you decide that
you can no longer go for five years, then I very much hope that you will
conclude that you need not go below four.
When we met in Bonn in July I said I was afraid that non-nuclear
powers would be deterred from supporting a treaty if you found it nec-
essary to make a statement that the United States would be likely to re-
sume testing after the expiry of the treaty. I remain of that view. But I
accept entirely the need to safeguard the future: none of us can foresee
what the world will be like in four or five years time. Nonetheless, if
you decide that it is essential to make a statement, I wonder whether it
might be made in such a way as to limit its effect on the non-nuclear
world. We have some ideas on how this might be done, and my people
will be ready to discuss them with yours in the talks due to start
tomorrow.
I believe that you will also be considering the question of per-
mitted experiments. I think that the yield limit of 100 pounds which
was mentioned to Gromyko2 is low enough for us to be able to claim
that the test ban really is comprehensive. But a higher limit would
make the treaty appear to be a threshold treaty, which you and I have
decided against, and this, I know, would be badly received by countries
like India.
We might also be able to make the treaty more attractive to the
non-nuclear powers if they saw the prospect of participating in a re-
view conference which would give them a say on what, if any, further
arrangements should follow the treaty when it ends. For this reason I
believe that we should seek to give the conference the role of consid-
ering all possible options and that we should not appear to rule out at
this stage any option, including an extension of the treaty. An approach
of this kind would also be likely to help overcome our present differ-
ences with the Russians on the role of the review conference.
I look forward to hearing your views on these issues to which, I
know, we both attach great importance.
With warm regards,
Jim Callaghan
2 See Document 212.

Comprehensive Test Ban
216.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 19, 1978
I have the memorandum to the President from Secretary Vance
and Paul Warnke on the CTB negotiations, dated September 2nd.2 It
raises serious concerns in my mind about the potential negative impact
on SALT ratification which the proposed strategy may have.
As a procedure to consult with other nations to involve them in
non-proliferation efforts, and as a way to control the timing of a presen-
tation of a CTB treaty to Congress, the proposed strategy makes sense.
However, I do not believe the strategy would work to prevent an early
confrontation with Congress. As soon as a policy is enunciated on 3 vs 5
years, permitted experiments, and particularly on our intention on re-
sumption of testing after the 3 or 5 years, there would be a response
from the JCS and from at least the working levels of DOE. Opponents in
Congress will then hold hearings, claiming that they have as much of a
right to be consulted and to influence the text of the agreement as do
the non-nuclear states. There will be testimony from the JCS and the
laboratory directors that in their judgment such a treaty is not in the
best interest of national security. Though others of us will be able to
point out the stockpile reliability will not be degraded unacceptably in
3 or even in 5 years, the whole process will in my view make severe
trouble not only for CTB but also for SALT ratification.
My own judgment is therefore that we should hold off on these de-
cisions, instead pressing the Soviets further at the resumed CTB negoti-
ations on the issue of verification and its relation to a duration clause.
Moreover, I believe that we should further explore the idea of com-
bining a comprehensive test ban of limited-duration with an unlimited-
duration threshold test ban treaty at a substantially reduced yield.
If the President nevertheless decides to proceed as Cy and Paul
recommend, I suggest that he make a decision only to go to a 3 (or 4)
year duration, reserving until after SALT ratification any decisions
on permitted experiments and on any softening of a resumption
commitment.
Harold Brown
2 See Document 214.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
217.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, September 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Future of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Negotiations
Our trilateral talks with the USSR and UK will resume a week from
Thursday, September 28. Progress in these talks requires the release of
your decision setting a three year fixed term as our objective.2
Harold Brown and Zbigniew Brzezinski, and probably Jim Schles-
inger, believe that release of this decision will cause a domestic debate
which could prejudice SALT’s chances. But the controversy is about
your intent that the treaty be a genuine comprehensive test ban and not
merely a lower threshold test ban. It won’t be heightened by a cut-back
from five to three years.
We have repeatedly affirmed to the Soviets and to the British that
our objective is a comprehensive test ban. The resumed talks would be
directed toward this end. But we cannot settle the verification issues,
particularly the number and types of seismic stations, without a firm
decision on duration.
Accordingly Cy Vance and I believe your decision on the three
year term should be released and trilateral negotiations continued, fol-
lowing the strategy for securing multilateral support set forth in our at-
tached memorandum.3
In our view, the only alternative would be now to approach the So-
viets and the British and to tell them we have decided to suspend the
CTB talks until after SALT ratification. We believe that to do so would
cause far more controversy and difficulty than going ahead as we
recommend.
The Soviets are already charging us privately with welching on a
CTB. If we suspend the talks, there is no question of the fact that they
will saddle us with the blame. The non-aligned countries, probably led
by India, will complain that they have been misled and our non-
proliferation efforts will suffer a severe setback. Domestically, there is
both a Congressional and private constituency that puts a comprehen-
sive test ban high on its priority list. These constituencies will be disap-
2 Not found.
3 See Document 214.

Comprehensive Test Ban
pointed and vocal. The picture that will be painted is that the Adminis-
tration has steadily retreated from a genuine test ban of indefinite
duration to a ban of a fixed and limited period and now to the indefi-
nite suspension of the talks.
From the standpoint of SALT, we feel that, if there is to be a con-
frontation about your reaffirmation that we are seeking a comprehen-
sive test ban, it would be better to have that confrontation now, rather
than having it smoldering during the critical stages of SALT.
218.
Message From President Carter to Prime Minister Callaghan1
Washington, undated
Dear Jim:
I appreciated receiving your message of September 14th on the
CTB2 and have carefully considered your views on the question of du-
ration. I have not yet completed my review of all the CTB issues, but I
would prefer that when the negotiations resume we should negotiate
on the assumption that the duration of the agreement will be three
years. I agree with you on the lower threshold. Further, assuming that
the duration is three years, we should propose a network of ten simple
seismic stations with a larger network deferred for consideration in the
context of any negotiation of a follow-on agreement. I will keep in mind
your suggestions regarding the CTB review conference provision and
your views on the assurances I plan to give the Senate on resumption of
testing.
I share fully your view on the importance of a CTB, and I am com-
mitted to achieving a CTB. But I want to be frank with you on the time-
scale for completion of the negotiations. In my view, it is important,
while we continue to make progress on CTB, that the trilateral agree-
ment should not be concluded before a SALT II agreement. I know this
will likely result in a somewhat slower pace than both of us had hoped.
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister James
forwarded a draft message to the President for his approval under a September 25 cov-
ering memorandum. (Ibid.) Carter initialed Brzezinski’s cover memorandum and wrote
“Zbig—ok as amended.”
2 See Document 215.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
But I am now convinced that this is the soundest approach to assure fa-
vorable Congressional action on both the CTB and SALT agreements.
Sincerely,
Jimmy
219.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown,
Secretary of Energy Schlesinger, the Director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke), the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones), the Director of Central
Intelligence (Turner), and the Director of the Office of
Science and Technology Policy (Press)1
Washington, September 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban Instructions (C)
The United States Delegation to the Test Ban Negotiations should
focus its negotiating efforts on achieving our objectives in the field of
verification. For negotiating purposes, it should be assumed without
commitment that the Comprehensive Test Ban agreement would have
a fixed duration of three years and that in the final year of any agree-
ment, there would be a review conference to determine whether to ne-
gotiate a replacement agreement.
In addressing the issue of verification, the United States Delega-
tion can indicate that, assuming a three-year duration agreement, we
would be willing to accept a network of 10 simple stations deferring a
larger network with arrays for consideration in the context of any re-
placement agreement.
As these negotiations proceed, any changes in the Delegation’s po-
sition on any remaining issues should be referred to the SCC for consid-
eration and approval.
ject File, Box 2, Energy Department, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, General, 1978,
Sept.–Oct. Top Secret; Sensitive.

Comprehensive Test Ban
There should be no multilateral CTB consultations without the ap-
proval of the President.
The Delegation should bear in mind that the President has decided
to resume testing at the end of the agreement unless a vigorous safe-
guards program and studies indicate that this is not necessary.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
220.
Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (Rogers) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, September 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation Value of a Comprehensive Test
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have carefully studied your memo-
randum of 10 July 1978,2 subject as above. While they agree that prolif-
eration of nuclear weapons is a serious national security issue, they
remain unpersuaded by the evidence you have presented on the poten-
tial nonproliferation benefits of a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) of the
type currently under discussion.
2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have been unable to establish to their
satisfaction any causative relationship between a ban on nuclear testing
and the cessation of the development of nuclear weapons by states
without such weapon. They feel at this point that a nation’s decision to
develop nuclear weapons is dependent upon perceptions of vital self-
interest, not upon the existence of a CTB. Further, they believe the ben-
efits stated in your memorandum would be uncertain and debatable in
the case of a CTB of unlimited duration, and that significant nonproli-
feration benefits would not be derived from the type of CTB now being
considered by the United States—one of 3- to 5-year duration with an
announced option to resume testing.
3. (S) Clearly, there are divergent views concerning the nonpro-
liferation benefits of a 3- to 5-year CTB followed by resumption of
testing. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that an interagency paper
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty #2. Secret. Copies were sent to Brown, Schlesinger, Brze-
zinski, and Warnke.
2 See Document 211.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
weighing the nonproliferation impacts and the national security risks
of a CTB should be developed for consideration by the National Secu-
rity Council. The Secretary of Defense has been so advised.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Bernard W. Rogers
General, USA
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
221.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Carter-Gromyko Plenary Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Warnke
Ambassador Toon
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.G. Makarov
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The conversation is

Comprehensive Test Ban
CTB
The President said he would like to see us move rapidly to conclu-
sion of a complete test ban treaty.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
Gromyko noted that the CTB negotiations were indeed moving
forward, but rather slowly. The main thing he would want to point out
was that whenever the situation at these negotiations appeared to im-
prove, US representatives would introduce new proposals that threw
cold water on the whole process. There was a time when the United
States had argued in favor of a five-year term for a CTB treaty. At that
time the Soviet Union was more in favor of a three-year term, although
it did not oppose five-years. It simply thought that it was easier to work
out a three-year treaty. Then, quite suddenly, in the United States
various officials began to assert that five years was too long, that such
duration would interfere with certain national plans for testing nuclear
weapons, while a three-year term would not. That position was hardly
convincing. The Soviet Union had finally expressed agreement to the
five-year term, but then the United States changed to three. All these
zigzags were most perplexing and difficult to understand. The Soviet
Union would take this into account in the future. For their part, the So-
viets could also talk about national plans, but they stand on a different
position. Things would be very difficult indeed were they to reply in
kind. Nevertheless, since the United States had changed its position,
obviously the Soviets would have to take this into account, because
there were two other parties to the negotiations. Basically, they would
like to see this agreement completed. It would be a limited agreement,
of course, because apart from the three particular powers, other nuclear
powers would not be signatories to the agreement. Nevertheless, it
would have a positive impact on the international situation.
In conclusion, Gromyko said that these were the specific consider-
ations he had wanted to convey to the President, and in general wanted
to tell the President on behalf of the Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev
personally that the Soviet Union’s policy was aimed at good relations
with the United States and remained as set out and formulated in
Brezhnev’s message to the President.2 The Soviet Union would do all
2 Just before this meeting, Gromyko handed Carter a message from Brezhnev.
Carter “said that he found this letter to be interesting and constructive,” and asked if he
could “respond to it more directly in writing.” (Memorandum of Conversation, Sep-
ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
in its power to maintain and develop good relations with the United
States.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
In this connection the President said that a three-year term for the
treaty would suit us better. He hoped we were in harmony on this and
would proceed to conclude the treaty without delay. He did not, how-
ever, want to conclude it before concluding a SALT Agreement. It
would be better if he submitted a CTB Treaty to Congress together with
a SALT Treaty. We believed that there should be no testing other than
laboratory testing, and that there should be adequate verification.
222.
Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence
(Turner) to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban Instructions
cerning the change in our negotiating position for the current round of
CTB talks in Geneva. I am very concerned about the decisions to reduce
our requirement for internal seismic stations [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] Since monitoring of Soviet compliance with a CTB will be the re-
sponsibility of the DCI, I am further concerned that I was not consulted
on this decision prior to its implementation.
2. I recognize that the implementation of a full [less than 1 line not
declassified] network [less than 1 line not declassified] might not be pos-
sible during the term of a three year treaty. I believe it to be unwise to
immediately and unilaterally reduce our requirements until we have at
least explored Soviet reaction to our three year treaty proposal. More-
fied]. Copies were sent to Vance and Warnke.
2 See Document 219.

Comprehensive Test Ban
over, establishing the right to have [number not declassified] stations [less
than 1 line not declassified] is important in itself. If, for instance, the treaty
were extended for a second three years, we would be without grounds
for establishing any [number not declassified] over the six year period.
[2 lines not declassified] I believe that it would impair the prospects for
ratification if we had abandoned what might turn out to be a very
useful element of verification.
Stansfield Turner
223.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
15493. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations:
Status of Verification Issues.
CTB message no. 332
1. Summary. During the initial weeks of the current negotiating
round, the US Delegation has devoted most of its efforts to pressing the
Soviets to make early and favorable responses to US proposals on the
remaining verification issues. In our three plenary statements and in
many informal exchanges at various levels, we have emphasized the
top priority we assign to verification, urged the Soviets to join us in
concrete negotiations particularly on arrangements for national seismic
stations (NSS), and stressed our view that verification measures must
be effective regardless of the length of the treaty. While we have not yet
gotten into detailed negotiations, there have been some promising
signs that the Soviets may be preparing to get down to serious business
in the near future. End summary.
2. Beginning with our opening statement on September 28,2 we
have tried to use every available opportunity, either in formal plenary
sessions or in informal conversations, to emphasize the importance of
getting down to detailed work on outstanding verification issues, espe-
cially NSS and OSI, and to call on the Soviets to respond favorably to
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the proposals we have already put on the table. One obstacle to pur-
suing verification matters in the opening days of the round was the So-
viet Delegation’s initial reluctance to agree to proceed with the negotia-
tions on the assumption of a three-year duration. This problem was
compounded by the timing of Gromyko’s discussions in New York3
and Washington,4 which the Soviet Delegation said made it difficult for
them to give us a considered response to our proposed approach on
duration. The Soviet Delegation has now confirmed that it is prepared
to proceed on a three-year basis.
3. On-site inspection. All Delegations have recognized that, of the
principal verification issues left, the question of OSI rights and func-
tions is the one where we are closest to reaching agreement. However,
the Soviets at first resisted specific discussions in the OSI working
group, claiming that it was up to the US to adjust its OSI proposals to
the shorter duration of three years. Heckrotte (US) vigorously rejected
this idea on the grounds that the technical requirements for effective in-
spections were independent of treaty duration. In subsequent informal
conversations, Neidle, Giller and other US Delegation members rein-
forced the position that it was illogical, and unacceptable, to cut back
on OSI procedures because of a three-year duration. At the second
meeting of the OSI working group, held after a delay of several days,
the Soviets did not return to the theme that OSI procedures should
be streamlined. Instead, they made a concrete and serious proposal on
one of the significant technical OSI issues remaining, the question of
position-fixing. Another encouraging development was Soviet Chair-
man Petrosyants’ remarks to US Reps Johnson and Neidle on October
12 that the question of OSI rights and functions should move rapidly to
agreement. Sov Dep Rep Timerbaev also confirmed to Neidle on Oc-
tober 12 that OSI rights and functions would not be affected by whether
there was a three, as opposed to a five, year duration.
4. National Seismic Stations (NSS). We have told the Soviets that
we consider NSS to be the most important issue left in the negotiations.
We have made clear that they owe us responses to our proposals on the
technical characteristics of the stations and on procedures for site selec-
tion, installation, and maintenance. On October 11,5 we tabled the loca-
tions for our revised 10-station network, emphasizing that the question
of NSS numbers was the only verification issue that required revision
General Assembly meeting. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Docu-
ment 148.
4 See Document 221.
5 The proposed locations for National Seismic Stations are in telegram 15307 from
0174)

Comprehensive Test Ban
in light of the move to a three-year duration. Subsequent informal con-
versations, including US rep Johnson’s conversation with Timerbaev
October 12,6 have stressed that we view agreement on high-quality NSS
arrangements as a prerequisite to the successful conclusion of a CTB
treaty. In separate conversations, Neidle strongly encouraged Chair-
man Petrosyants and Timerbaev to reply soon to our proposal for 10
stations, and urged that the Soviet Delegation make as positive a re-
sponse as it is authorized to make, rather than simply come back to us
with a counterproposal reduced for negotiating purposes. Neidle
stressed that agreement on a good NSS network was of the greatest im-
portance and that the highest levels of the US government were
watching to see the Soviet response. Finch, Givan and other US Deloffs
have conveyed similar messages to Soviet counterparts.
5. On October 12 Sov Deloff Slipchenko, after being pressed by
Einhorn on when Sov Del would get down to business on NSS, indi-
cated that his Delegation was giving active consideration to a response
on numbers, and thought they might be in a position to make a coun-
terproposal as early as next week. Tarasov separately confirmed to
Finch that Sov Del planned to present its NSS position next week, al-
though not as early as at the NSS working group meeting on Oct. 16.
6. In a number of recent conversations, the Soviets have begun
stressing the notion that it is hard to justify the burdens of NSS for a
three-year treaty that might not extend. We have tried to discourage
them from thinking that there is mileage in that argument. Finch ar-
gued with Tarasov that an effective NSS program could be even more
important with a three-year duration, since we would be facing deci-
sions in the third year regarding future CTB limitations. If the NSS pro-
gram had gone well, it would not only make a direct contribution to
verification of the initial treaty but—as evidence of our countries’
ability to succeed in a cooperative verification effort—it could con-
tribute to a positive climate and increase the prospects of decisions to
have CTB beyond three years. For these reasons, Finch thought the US
position was sound, that there should be no compromise in qualitative
aspects of NSS, and he urged a positive Soviet response soon.
7. When Timerbaev told Neidle that there was resistance on the So-
viet side to accepting a large NSS network for a treaty which might end
after three years, Neidle responded that he saw no prospect of getting
off the ground with any treaty without a good NSS network; nor did he
see prospect for continuing with a CTB after the initial duration if such
a network had not been established.
0887)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
8. Chemical explosions. On October 9, we presented our proposal
regarding prenotification of large chemical explosions.7 The Soviets
have indicated to us informally that they will not be able to respond
right away since they do not have people with the necessary expertise
on their Delegation. They say that Soviet officials will have to do re-
search regarding such factors as the frequency and purpose of chemical
explosions in the USSR that would be covered by the prenotification
provision.
Johnson
224.
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and U.S. Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
President Carter1
Washington, December 21, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
You have charged me with coordinating your Administration’s ef-
forts in the nonproliferation field. One of the heaviest burdens that
nonproliferation policy carries is the continued absence of progress on
a comprehensive test ban. I think we must face up to the prospect of de-
fections from the Nonproliferation Treaty if a CTB is not reached before
the Treaty comes under review at a conference in the spring of 1980. I
can think of no greater threat to the security of our country than such an
unravelling of the ties that keep a number of nations from going for nu-
clear weapons.
Among the direct benefits of such a treaty could be binding legal
commitments by nations such as India, Pakistan, South Africa, Israel,
and Egypt not to conduct nuclear test explosions. In the case of India,
this would codify the policy position taken by the present Prime Min-
ister against any repetition of the 1974 explosion; in the case of South
Africa, it would reinforce the assurances given by the Prime Minister in
Christopher, and Brown.

Comprehensive Test Ban
1977 that his government would not carry out nuclear weapon tests;
and in the case of Israel, Egypt, and Pakistan it would not only con-
strain weapons development, but inhibit demonstration of a nuclear
weapons capability.
To the extent that other states, such as Argentina and Brazil, assert
that their present treaty obligations do not preclude “peaceful” nuclear
explosions, a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty would provide a nondis-
criminatory vehicle for removing any ambiguity on this point.
While these benefits would, of course, depend on gaining the ad-
herence of these states to a CTB, all but two of them (Argentina and
Pakistan) joined the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and Prime Minister Desai
has indicated willingness to join a nondiscriminatory CTB.
More generally, achievement of a CTB would be of material help in
meeting demands for balancing the restraint we are asking of non-
nuclear weapon states by placing long promised constraints on vertical
proliferation. This step appears indispensable to an Indian decision to
accept full-scope safeguards, and it clearly is crucial to the success of
the conference to be held in mid-1980 to review the operation of the
NPT, as well as to our ability to avoid the deterioration of that pillar of
our nonproliferation policy.
I urge you to include among the nation’s New Year’s resolutions a
determination to get a significant comprehensive nuclear test ban in
1979. The prospects for success of your nonproliferation policy would
then be substantially improved.
Respectfully,
Gerard Smith2
2 Smith signed the letter “Gerry.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
225.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation and the CTB (C)
In the attached letter,2 Gerry Smith states his view of the linkage
between US non-proliferation goals and a CTB. He concludes that the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) will be seriously endangered if a CTB
agreement is not reached before the international NPT Review Confer-
ence scheduled for June 1980. (C)
It is already clear that there will be two contentious issues at the
NPT Conference: the failure of the nuclear suppliers to live up to their
obligations under Article IV and Article VI of the Treaty. Article IV in-
volves the “right” of all parties to the “fullest possible exchange” of ma-
terials and technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The ef-
forts of the London Suppliers Group and of unilateral US policy make
this a particularly sensitive issue. Article VI pledges the parties to
pursue measures to end the nuclear arms race. Debate will focus on the
success or failure of the major powers in reaching SALT and CTB agree-
ments, and on the adequacy of the provisions of these agreements.
Some countries will argue that enough time has now elapsed to prove
that by failing to control the nuclear arms race, the weapons states do
not intend to live up to their half of the NPT bargain, and that the
Treaty should therefore be abandoned. (C)
Certainly a CTB agreement will make the Review Conference
much easier for us. Beyond this, it is difficult to judge whether Gerry is
accurate in predicting the consequences if we fail to reach a CTB agree-
ment by then. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you read Gerry Smith’s letter. (U)
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 42, Proliferation: Comprehensive Test Ban,
ski. Carter initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum indicating that he
saw it.
2 See Document 224.

Comprehensive Test Ban
226.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
14457. Subject: CTB Negotiations: UK Statement at US/UK Bilat-
eral Meeting, January 17, 1979.
Following is the text of the opening statement presented by Am-
bassador John Edmonds, CTB Delegation leader, during the US/UK bi-
Washington, I set out what we saw as the important outstanding issues
facing the United States and British Governments in the Comprehen-
sive Test Ban Negotiations. They were:
A. The duration of the treaty;
B. The question of what happens after the initial duration;
C. Permitted experiments;
D. The verification arrangements, including the National Seismic
Stations required for a treaty of relatively short duration.
2. For various reasons, the last round of negotiations, from 29 Sep-
tember to 14 December, was not very productive. There was definite
progress only on the first of these four issues. The US proposal that ne-
gotiations should proceed on the basis of a three-year treaty was ac-
cepted by the Russians—and by the UK, although we stressed that our
final position on duration would depend on the entire treaty package.
The other three issues are still before us, and we look forward to a full
discussion of them today and tomorrow.
NSS in the UK and dependent territories.
3. NSS is the subject on which there has been the greatest change
since September. I think it fair to say that the Soviet proposal of 27 No-
cret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow. Drafted
by Barbara Schrage (ACDA/MA); cleared by Joseph Hulings (S/S); and approved by
Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA).
tion on the CTB negotiations. Edmonds said his government had four objectives: to “curb
the development of new types of nuclear warheads by the nuclear weapon states without
adversely affecting Western security;” to “contribute to the improvement of East/West
relations;” to “show the world that 3 nuclear weapon states are capable of giving prac-
tical effect to their long-standing commitment to genuine measures of arms control;” and
to “make a worthwhile contribution to our non-proliferation objectives by attracting the
support and adherence of important non-nuclear weapon states, especially those who
are not parties to the NPT.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
vember3 for ten NSS in the UK and dependent territories took all con-
cerned, British and American, by surprise. Maybe we should have real-
ized that the Russians might interpret their principle of “equal
obligations” in literal mathematical terms, without serious regard to
the usefulness of NSS for monitoring British compliance with the
treaty. Anyway, that is what the Russians have done, apparently after
considering the whole NSS issue at a very high level.
4. I said in Geneva that we do not intend to create unnecessary dif-
ficulties over the Soviet proposals for NSS in the UK and dependent
territories. I also stressed that the proposals are different in kind from
those for NSS in the USA and USSR. The proposals have since been
very thoroughly examined in London. Although we have looked at
them positively, they present a complex series of problems—constitu-
tional, technical, financial and logistic. I have copies for you of a
working paper4 reviewing theoretically possible locations for NSS in
the UK and in all our dependent territories, including those not on the
Soviet list. We hope you will have time to look at this and let us have
some comments before we leave Washington.
5. The position so far is that British Ministers are willing in prin-
ciple to accept at least one NSS in the UK and probably one or two in
dependent territories. A final British commitment to these or any other
specific number or locations will be subject to clarification of the tech-
nical and financial implications.
6. However, it is the Soviet proposal for as many as nine NSS in UK
dependent territories which raises the serious problems:
A. Some of the territories suggested by the Russians are politically
unsuitable; two of them are independent and two others soon will be,
and other objections are noted in the paper I am giving you.
B. The Soviet view of “equal obligations”—that the UK, like the US
and Soviet Union, should accept ten NSS—is questionable, since the
UK is not seeking independent verification rights in the Soviet Union.
An equally good case could, for instance, be made for equality of obli-
gations between east and west: i.e., ten NSS in the USSR and ten in the
west divided between the US and UK. One might even turn the
equality concept against the Russians by proposing that each SVA
party could have the right to five NSS in the territory of each of the
other two.
C. The most important difficulty is the absence of any verification
case for NSS in UK dependent territories. NSS are needed to supple-
4 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
ment national technical means for monitoring the large land areas of
the Soviet Union and the United States. But the total area of UK de-
pendent territories is very small. Soviet satellites can observe these ter-
ritories and seismic monitoring can be deployed close to them, so that
even if testing were likely, it could readily be detected without NSS. In-
deed, the Russians have admitted that they want NSS in UK and de-
pendent territories for political, not technical, reasons.
D. We have nevertheless considered all our dependent territories
as possible sites for NSS. Most of the territories are seismically entirely
unsuitable: in many cases NSS would only be of use in relation to
events within a few tens of kilometers. The costs of NSS could not be
justified on verification grounds. And there are dangers in accepting
technically useless NSS: for example degrading the criteria for selection
of NSS sites in the Soviet Union and thus discrediting the value of the
whole NSS system.
E. Finally, many dependent territories are remote and lack facil-
ities. I shall return to this aspect in a moment.
7. We have identified several possible British responses to the So-
viet proposals. Some would be suitable for use when the negotiations
resume, one objective being to probe how serious the Russians really
are in proposing so many NSS in UK dependent territories and to dis-
cover their minimum position. Some other options may be more appro-
priate as fall back positions for a later stage.
Each option has advantages and disadvantages, some of which I
shall mention. We have not yet decided which options are best. On the
basis of our discussions here, Ministers will be consulted as soon as we
return to London. The options are:
A. To challenge the Soviet interpretation of “equality”, on lines I
have already indicated.
B. To say that we have no objection in principle to NSS in UK and
dependent territories, but that we have only identified about three loca-
tions which, as well as being constitutionally appropriate, have any
verification value. Subject to Soviet reactions, we could later say that
we are willing to discuss without commitment other constitutionally
appropriate locations where we so far have seen no verification value.
C. The same as option B, but with the UK undertaking a purely
nominal “obligation” to accept up to ten NSS, although not all would
actually be installed.
D. To offer a number of NSS including some in independent com-
monwealth countries, subject to their agreement. Two possibilities for
consideration might be Australia (where the UK has conducted nuclear
tests) and Canada; these countries offer much better seismic sites than
could be found in UK dependent territories. Under this arrangement it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
would be particularly appropriate for data to be made available to the
International Seismic Data Exchange, thereby enhancing its role and re-
ducing criticism of the exclusiveness of the SVA.
E. To offer less than ten NSS but including some stations with
arrays of seismometers, and therefore superior performance to simple
NSS, as compensation for the reduced number.
F. To offer NSS at sites of our choosing in UK and dependent terri-
tories. The paper I am giving you about all the possible locations sug-
gests that we could offer ten without unacceptable political or security
consequences. The big disadvantage of this option is that there is no
verification case for the very considerable effort and cost.
8. We are concerned about costs. Since many of the possible loca-
tions in UK dependent territories are isolated and lack the most basic
facilities, NSS would be particularly expensive to install and operate.
Costs might be divided in various ways under the SVA. The possibil-
ities include:
A. Each party pays all the costs of those NSS which it requires on
the territory of others. We should prefer this solution but the Russians
could be expected to resist it strongly, since they are seeking 20 NSS in
the west against ten in the Soviet Union.
B. Each side pays all the costs for NSS on its own territory. If the
UK agreed to accept an equal number of NSS, this course would be un-
favorable to the UK because of the higher cost of installing NSS in re-
mote places with bad communications and other facilities.
C. Each side pays one third of the total cost of all NSS. But all
parties might be unwilling to share in costs they could not control.
D. Some split arrangement, for instance—each party pays the real
estate cost of NSS on its territory plus maintenance and manning, and
the other two parties share the costs of the seismic equipment, its instal-
lation and data retrieval.
9. It would be helpful to have your estimate of the capital costs of
the equipment itself and its installation at a typical site in the United
States. This would help us to estimate how much more expenditure
would be required because of the remoteness and lack of facilities of
some of the sites in UK dependent territories.
10. We look forward to discussing the negotiating options and the
general principles underlying NSS in the UK and dependent territories
with you before our experts examine the technical issues involved. One
of the points on which we would welcome your views is how we
should keep up the pressure on the Russians to reveal more of their po-
sition on the technical characteristics and timetable for installation of
NSS, while discussion continues on numbers and locations in all three
countries.

Comprehensive Test Ban
What happens after three years?
11. I described here on 14 September the British Government’s con-
tinued belief that we should leave all our options open. Since then we
have regularly advocated early tabling of fresh language for the review
conference, and the Russians have repeatedly asked for it. We very
much hope that you can very soon propose to us a formula which
leaves all the options open and is likely to be negotiable with the
Russians.
12. I should also like to recall the British Government’s close in-
terest in any statement about US intentions to resume testing at the end
of a three-year comprehensive test ban. We still believe that such a
statement could undermine the effectiveness of the treaty and deter a
number of non-nuclear weapon states from adhering. We hope that, if
the US Government feels it necessary to make a statement about re-
sumption of testing, this will be sufficiently qualified to minimize the
disadvantages.
Permitted experiments.
13. I turn now to permitted experiments. We have been consid-
ering further the position you reached last May that experiments at
minimum yield levels should be permitted under a CTB. We have since
been told that the yield limit will be 100 pounds. I can confirm that the
UK supports your general position. British Ministers have not yet taken
a decision regarding any British program of experiments. We should
now like to discuss various aspects of the subject, including its rele-
vance to the adherence of non-nuclear weapon states to the treaty.
14. In particular, we should be interested to hear whether your
studies on this subject cover both civil and military experiments; and
whether you have reached any views on the conditions and locations
for conducting permitted experiments.
15. In the negotiations, the Russians have been pressing for clarifi-
cation of the statement about permitted experiments in your working
paper of 7 December 1977. We cannot therefore avoid returning to the
subject in Geneva. In our view, permitted experiments should not be
mentioned in the treaty. Moreover we think the Russians have no in-
terest even in an informal understanding. If they expressly dissented
from a US statement that small experiments would continue to be per-
mitted, this might weaken the legal case for conducting the experi-
ments. It might therefore be best to go for a low-key unilateral state-
ment in the negotiations, which would be designed to pass without
contradiction by the Soviet Union.
16. We take it that the US program of permitted experiments is cer-
tain to become public knowledge as an element in your package of safe-
guards. The intention that such experiments should continue under a
CTB is certain to be criticized by some non-nuclear weapon states.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Some may use it to justify a refusal to adhere to a short term treaty. We
will need, with both the NNWS and the public, to insist that permitted
experiments under 100 pounds yield are not nuclear tests in the ac-
cepted sense of the term and anyway cannot be monitored. We should
explain that the CTB is not intended to restrain research except where
that involves nuclear weapon test explosions or peaceful nuclear explo-
sions. We should seek to convince any critics that permitted experi-
ments will not serve the development of new designs for nuclear war-
heads. But these arguments may be challenged by the well-informed;
we should be interested in how you propose to deal with this.
Conclusion.
17. We are ready to discuss with you other current issues in the ne-
gotiations as well. These include technical aspects of on-site inspection;
the question of an agreed understanding about on-site inspection re-
quests; chemical explosions; and the multilateral handling of the CTB
treaty after the tripartite negotiations.
18. When we return to Geneva we should aim quickly to get to
grips with the Russians on the difficult problems of NSS and the role of
the review conference. We want to try to negotiate on more than one
problem at a time in the next round, in order to move forward as
quickly as we can. We shall need to re-emphasize to the Russians our
determination to achieve a comprehensive test ban without undue
delay. As long as they have any reason to doubt our resolve, there is
less incentive for them to be flexible especially on verification.
19. I should like to sum up as far as possible in terms of action.
A. We are here to seek your views on our response to the Soviet
proposals for NSS in the UK and dependent territories. We shall then
prepare a position for putting to the Russians early in the coming
round of negotiations.
B. We believe that the UK and US should persuade the Russians to
negotiate on all other NSS issues, concurrently with the consideration
of NSS in the UK and dependent territories.
C. We believe that the US and UK should propose revised lan-
guage for the review conference early in the next round. We look for-
ward to your proposals for this.
D. We believe that it will be desirable to say something to the Rus-
sians about permitted experiments in the course of this next round.
Again, we look forward to your views on this.
E. Finally, we should also like to hear your latest thinking on the
desirable timetable for the CTB negotiations. End text.
Vance

Comprehensive Test Ban
227.
Options Paper Prepared by the Special Coordination
Committee Working Group1
Washington, January 23, 1979
COMPREHENSIVE TEST BAN NEGOTIATIONS:
THE REVIEW CONFERENCE
This paper considers options with regard to legal formulas that the
US might propose for the CTB treaty’s review conference provision.
Background
In May 1978, the President decided that the CTB should have a
fixed duration, that there should be a review conference in the final
year of the treaty to determine whether to negotiate a replacement
treaty, and that any further agreement should be submitted to the US
Senate (PD–38).2 To implement this decision, the US and UK Delega-
tions in June3 proposed the following three sections of illustrative
treaty text:
(1) This Treaty shall remain in force for . . . years.4
(2) During the . . . year5 after the entry into force of this Treaty, the
[Depositary/Depositary Governments] shall convene a conference of
the Parties to review the operation of the Treaty and to consider the
question of whether there should be a replacement Treaty.
(3) Any decision on this question shall be made by a majority of the
Parties to the Treaty, which majority shall include all Parties that are
Permanent Members of the Security Council of the United Nations.
The Soviets have accepted the first and third sections, but in the
August 10 plenary and subsequently, they have rejected the “replace-
ment treaty” formulation. The Soviets say they recognize that the US is
not willing or able to commit itself beyond the three year period, and
that it must therefore keep all options open for that period. But they in-
from the NSC Staff Secretary, Christine Dodson, to Vance, Brown, Schlesinger, Warnke,
Jones, and Turner.
2 See Document 200.
4 It was subsequently decided that the negotiations would proceed on the assump-
tion of a three year duration. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 It was subsequently decided that the negotiations would proceed on the assump-
tion of a three year duration. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sist that language be used which recognizes the possibility of extending
the comprehensive treaty, under certain conditions.
Under the formulation that the Soviets proposed in July, 1978,6 the
review conference would be convened to “review the operation of the
Treaty and to consider the question of extending it, depending on
whether any states not Party to the Treaty will conduct nuclear explo-
sions”. Aside from the question of “extension”, the Soviet formulation
is deficient in that it heavy-handedly points a finger at France and
China, which we are unwilling to do on broad policy grounds, and it
highlights one possible reason for discontinuing the treaty to the exclu-
sion of reasons that might be more relevant, to U.S. security interests.
The Soviets have said that, just as the question of seismic stations is
the most important remaining issue for the United States, the most im-
portant issue for them is finding a mutually acceptable formula for this
clause (informal trilateral meeting, November 28). Soviet Delegation
chairman Petrosyants stressed in the final plenary meeting in De-
cember that this issue is “also of great importance in terms of finding
mutually acceptable solutions to verification issues, and in particular to
the issue of national seismic stations”. Proposing a solution to the “re-
placement treaty problem” and the construction of a new review con-
ference formulation at the beginning of the next round could, therefore,
put us in a stronger position to insist that the Soviet Delegation respond
to our proposals on the technical characteristics of national seismic
stations.
In addition, the British have frequently criticized the “replacement
treaty” formulation (they agreed only reluctantly to table it last June),
and have urged the US to put forth a new formulation. The British Del-
egation that visited the US on September 14 requested that the US alter
its proposal, and suggested a formulation referring to treaty arrange-
ments following the period of three years. We said then that we would
keep the British suggestion under review. In December, the British re-
stated their belief that it would be necessary to propose a new formula-
tion on this issue in order to induce the Soviets to be more forthcoming
on verification. They said that a number of possible formulations could
meet our needs, including one that authorized the review conference
“. . . to consider the question of any future treaty arrangements”.
Objectives
Our objectives are as follows:
—to promote US national security by protecting all options for the period
beyond three years. The President has decided to state his intention to re-

Comprehensive Test Ban
sume testing after the expiration of the treaty unless a vigorous safe-
guards program and studies indicate that resumption is not necessary.
The review conference formulation therefore should not create a bar-
rier either to having no treaty obligations beyond three years, to having
different treaty provisions, or to having the same treaty provisions.
—to permit the US to carry out the President’s commitment that any fur-
ther agreement on testing limitations after the three year period would be sub-
mitted to the Senate for approval. We would insist on seeking Senate ad-
vice and consent on any subsequent treaty obligation regardless of
whether other treaty parties would be required to obtain legislative ap-
proval in their countries.
—to find a formula, consistent with these objectives, that is more likely to
be negotiable with the Soviets and British. The Soviets have stressed that
the language must at least provide for the possibility of extending the
same comprehensive treaty.
—to increase the prospects for adherence to the treaty by non-nuclear
weapon states. Non-nuclear states may be less likely to join the treaty if
the review conference formulation unnecessarily provokes questions
about whether certain nuclear weapon states are already tilted against
having a treaty after three years.
—to avoid singling out the question of French and Chinese testing in re-
lation to the function of the review conference. We might want to refer to
factors affecting the concerns of individual nations, but if we did so, we
would want to broaden the phrase to reflect other relevant factors.
In examining alternative review conference formulations, it is im-
portant to bear in mind the extent to which our interests are protected
by provisions that have already been agreed in the negotiations. For ex-
ample, by virtue of language to which the Soviets have already agreed,
the treaty will have a three year duration. Therefore, US agreement
would be required for any treaty obligation regarding prohibitions
after that period, and we would only accept such obligations with
Senate approval. In connection with the tabling of any new review con-
ference language, we would reaffirm formally that such prohibitions
would be submitted for a new approval by the US Senate.
In addition, it is already agreed that the review conference cannot
take any decision on the period beyond three years without the ap-
proval of all parties that are Permanent Members of the U.N. Security
Council. Thus, it is clear that the treaty will simply expire at the end of
three years and no new arrangement will follow unless the U.S. agrees
to it. Before the review conference, we would conduct private consulta-
tions with the UK and USSR to coordinate a nuclear weapon state posi-
tion. Regardless of the outcome of these consultations, we will have a
veto over actions by the review conference.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Options
Our present review conference language (“to consider the ques-
tion of whether there should be a replacement treaty”) is directly based
on language used in PD–38. One approach is to stick with this formula-
tion in the negotiations. Another is to hold to the present formulation
but, at an appropriate time, to pursue an agreed understanding with
the British and the Soviets to clarify that the intent of the treaty lan-
guage is to assure that all options are open regarding the future of the
treaty. Alternatively, we could decide to propose a new formulation,
inserting one of the phrases listed below after the words “review the
operation of the treaty and”.
Option “A”
“consider the question of extending its provisions”
Option “B”
“consider the question of subsequent treaty prohibitions”
Option “C”
“consider the question of whether there should be future treaty
arrangements”
While there are many more possible variants, the above options
represent a range of formulations which would demonstrate some
movement if we decide to change our review conference proposal. Op-
tion “C” closely parallels the latest British suggestion (p. 4) and would
involve the least change in the PD–38 language. On the other hand, Op-
tion “A” uses the word “extending” and represents greater contrast
with the language used in PD–38 than do the other two options. Option
“B” drops the conditional “whether” and uses the term “prohibitions”
rather than the broader word “arrangements”.
The dependent clause
Regardless of which option is selected, there is agreement that it
would be advantageous to propose a final clause to the review confer-
ence provision, as follows:
“, taking into account all relevant factors.”
The Soviets have proposed a final clause that refers specifically to
the question of continued testing by non-parties. The clause set forth
above is broad enough to reflect our stockpile reliability concerns and
may simultaneously meet a Soviet need for some reference to testing by
non-parties.

Comprehensive Test Ban
228.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
David Aaron
Jerry Kahan Dep Director, Bureau
NSC
of Politico/Military Affairs
Reg Bartholomew
Defense
Ben Huberman
David McGiffert Asst Secretary
OSTP
for International Security
Frank Press
Affairs
John Marcum
Energy
Secretary James Schlesinger
Dr. Robert Bowie
Duane Sewell Asst Secretary for
[name not declassified] Chief,
Defense Programs
Nuclear Energy Division
JCS
General David Jones
General Edward Giller
ACDA
General George Seignious
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Herbert York (CTB Delegation
Chairman)
The purpose of the meeting was to review the status of the negotia-
tions and develop guidance for the resumption of the talks on February
5. The main issue for decision was whether we should change our posi-
tion on the CTB review conference provision.
In beginning the meeting, David Aaron welcomed Herb York as
the new CTB Delegation chairman and asked George Seignious for an
update on the negotiations. Seignious briefly summarized the results of
the Fall session, noting that although the Soviets had agreed to a three
year duration and a 10 station NSS network, little progress had been
made on the detailed verification issues. In his view the main task now
was to nail down effective NSS provisions and a new review confer-
ence provision could be helpful in this regard.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Aaron stated without objection that there was agreement on how
to proceed on the other issues. This would involve continuing to defer
discussion of permitted experiments in the negotiations, maintaining
our positions on the OSI and NSS verification issues, and responding
positively to the Soviet proposed NSS network in the US.
There was also general agreement with Cy Vance’s observation
that a long period of negotiations lay ahead and that it was clearly un-
desirable to go to the Hill on CTB before SALT is ratified. He noted that
major differences remained on NSS issues such as the location of sta-
tions, equipment design and who would manufacture it, as well as data
transmission. Similarly difficult OSI issues remained and in the best of
all worlds, he could not see winding up trilateral agreement until
sometime approaching early Fall.
Aaron noted that the review conference issue should be consid-
ered in the context of the burden of proof or presumption regarding ex-
tension of the treaty, and the relationship of the review conference pro-
vision to other nuclear weapon states, particularly the Soviet effort to
use the provision for leverage in France and China. He then asked for
views on the three options developed by the Working Group. There
was agreement that the formulation selected should end with the
phrase “taking into account all relevant factors” to attempt to get the
Soviets to drop their linkage of extension to whether France and China
continue testing.
Seignious favored an option which referred explicitly to “exten-
sion” of the treaty. However, Frank Press noted that in his view a more
neutral formulation, “to consider the question of whether there should
be future treaty arrangements” was more consistent with the Presi-
dent’s objective of providing a credible opportunity to resume testing.
Bob Bowie stressed that in the long term [less than 1 line not declassified]
was somewhat concerned about any reference to extension.
Dave Jones, noting the Chief’s concerns about both verification
and reliability, preferred to stick with our current position, but could
support the “arrangements” approach if a shift was needed for policy
reasons. Dave McGiffert and Jim Schlesinger also favored the “arrange-
ments” approach.
Cy Vance supported Seignious’ position but offered a compromise
formulation using the term “renewal” instead of “extension.” Aaron
suggested that “modification” also be included and a near-consensus
was reached on “to consider the question of renewing its provisions
and any modifications.” Schlesinger and McGiffert were willing to ac-
cept this as a backup to the “arrangements” approach, but Dave Jones
was concerned that the compromise changed the tone of “whether
there should be arrangements.” He reserved his position and asked for

Comprehensive Test Ban
more time to study the language. (Jones subsequently informed the
NSC that the JCS recommend against this compromise.)
Aaron concluded the meeting by confirming that the “arrange-
ments” approach was acceptable to all though some preferred going
beyond this and others preferred our current position. He stated that
this would be reported to the President along with the compromise for-
mulation, noting that some preferred this approach while others could
either support it as a backup or had reserved their position. At their re-
quest, he also agreed to note that Vance and Seignious preferred the
“extension” formulation.
229.
Editorial Note
The United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom
(UK) continued to meet in Geneva over the next 2 months to discuss a
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), but they made little progress, in partic-
ular on the issue of on-site inspection of testing sites. Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance sent UK Foreign Secretary David Owen a letter noting
that a “deadlock” had developed because the UK government had ap-
proved the construction of only one National Seismic Station (NSS) on
British soil. Vance acknowledged that the United States sympathized
“with the problems that your government faces on the NSS question.
But it seems quite clear now that this stalemate could go on indefi-
nitely” since the Soviets had agreed to allow ten stations on their soil,
which Vance described as “the most intrusive verification arrangement
in any arms control agreement to date.” Vance also instructed the U.S.
Ambassador to the UK, Kingman Brewster, to tell the UK government
that “we believe it would probably require a British proposal to move
more than halfway toward the Soviet position if we are to have any
hope of getting the Soviets to be more flexible on this issue.” (Telegram
Policy File, D790182–1031)
CTB discussions also took a back seat in overall arms control nego-
tiations as Washington and Moscow spent much of the spring final-
izing the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks II treaty. For more on these
discussions, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II,
Meanwhile, the political position of the ruling Labour Govern-
ment in the United Kingdom had become precarious after Prime Min-
ister James Callaghan lost a vote of no confidence on March 28, 1979,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
which forced him to call a general election for early May. On April 23,
Brewster said that if Labour won the election, the administration could
expect the UK “to move ahead on the CTB.” If the Conservatives won,
however, Brewster predicted “we cannot expect an early UK move on
NSS, and should not, in my view, expend too much of our influence
trying to elicit one. Important as progress toward a CTB is, there will be
other more immediately pressing issues on which we will want to bring
the new British government along, such as Southern Africa and SALT. I
believe that we have a chance to secure Conservative government co-
operation on these issues, and on CTB.”
Brewster warned, however, that the Conservatives “will want to
take a fundamental look at the CTB. Their first and preeminent concern
will be that such a ban not inhibit Britain’s future as a nuclear power,
nor foreclose any of the options which a Conservative government will
be examining in its early months for the maintenance of such a British
role through the end of the century.” The last thing the United States
should do, Brewster stressed, was “have them learn that the US had
sought, only a few days before a change in government, to modify the
UK position, apparently siding with the Soviet Union” on the issue of
NSS. He recommended that he delay delivery of the message contained
in telegram 100316 to London until after the election. (Telegram 7959
from London, April 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790186–0104) Vance agreed with Brewster, and on April
26 instructed the Ambassador to deliver a note on NSS to “the Senior
Career Level of the FCO” rather than the Foreign Secretary. (Telegram
Policy File, D790190–0244)
On May 4, the Conservative Party under the leadership of Mar-
garet Thatcher won the general election and assumed power. A week
later, President Jimmy Carter wrote a congratulatory letter to the new
Prime Minister and, while he did not directly raise the CTB issue, he
promised to “work closely with all the NATO allies” on SALT, other
arms control issues, and “future nuclear cooperation.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Materials, Brzezinski Office File,

Comprehensive Test Ban
230.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 4, 1979
SUBJECT
CTB-RELATED ENHANCED TEST PROGRAM
Following up our telephone conversation of yesterday afternoon,2
this memorandum highlights two major problem areas regarding the
study of an enhanced nuclear weapons test program that DOE and
DOD have been preparing.
The study defines a two-year enhanced test program which in-
81. This program would be expensive—on the order of an additional
ministration program. In view of the extremely tight budget constraints
facing the DOE, the existing FY 79 and FY 80 test program levels were
judged to represent the best balance of DOE resources within the de-
fense programs’ area. These incremental costs could not be accommo-
dated from within DOE’s resources without significantly affecting our
ability to meet Presidential guidance on the production of weapons re-
quired for DOD systems.
Due to the large incremental costs involved, I believe it would be
most useful to obtain an initial Administration estimate on the amount
of money to be made available for this enhanced effort and then size the
test program to this sum. I believe that the potential political repercus-
sions of any other potential courses of action could be substantial. If the
recommended program were to be reduced for financial reasons, ques-
tions would undoubtedly arise concerning the Administration’s com-
mitment to do all that is necessary to prepare for a CTB. This would be
far worse, having recognized a significant enhancement to be advis-
able, than not proceeding on the recommended path.
It should be borne in mind that DOE, in FY 79, has already sent to
the Congress a $12.8 M supplemental for the two additional confidence
tests; we have two additional supplementals pending with OMB total-
sent to Brown, Jones, and Press.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
latter one already has been earmarked within the President’s Contin-
gency Fund); and a sizeable supplemental would be required if the ad-
vanced dates for readiness of National Seismic Stations are to be met.
Given the large amount of FY 79 supplemental funding being re-
quested for DOE Defense Program activities, it would seem wise to de-
termine in advance that the Administration would lend its full weight
in support of an additional request.
The second problem bears on the structure and scope of any out-
side review of the DOE/DOD recommendations. Given the highly
technical nature of an integrated nuclear weapons test program, the in-
dividuals comprising the review group must be currently and inti-
mately familiar with the detailed technical purposes of each test ele-
ment that will make up this program. I remain skeptical that such
expertise is to be found outside DOE and DOD, though there are many
vocal critics of the test program. Consequently, I believe that Harold
and I should pass on the membership of the review group to assure
competency and balance. This is especially important in light of the ear-
lier OSTP review of seismic verification and stockpile reliability in
which the lack of technical competence of the group’s review was
manifest.3
3 In a May 10 memorandum to Brzezinksi, Press called Schlesinger’s criticism about
the OSTP’s review “surprising” and characterized the OSTP panel’s technical compe-
tence as “indisputable.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Comprehensive Test Ban
231.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Seignious) to Secretary of State
Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, Secretary of Energy
Schlesinger, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones), and the Director of Central Intelligence (Turner)1
Washington, May 8, 1979
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban: The Review Conference Issue
Last round we proposed that the multilateral review conference
“consider the question of whether there should be future treaty ar-
rangements, taking into account all relevant factors.” However, the So-
viets continued to argue for a formula that referred to the possibility of
extension and that cited testing by non-parties (i.e., China and France)
as a factor affecting extension.
We must, of course, fully protect our option to resume testing after
three years if required for national security. In my view this option is
already well protected: the treaty will end automatically after three
years; we will have a veto over any review conference decision on fu-
ture restraints; the Senate will have to approve any follow-on treaty;
and we will make it clear to the Congress and American people that we
will resume testing if required for our security.
The problem, I believe, is that we have tried to use the review con-
ference provision as still another means of protecting our options. We
have chosen general terms like “future treaty arrangements” that were
designed to reflect the broad range of options we will want to choose
from in determining, within our own government, what should follow
after three years. However, I believe we have lost sight of the fact that
the review conference provision deals not with internal USG options
but with the role of a multilateral conference. I feel that role should be
very limited.
Clearly, it is not in our interest for the conference (and therefore a
large number of non-nuclear and non-aligned countries) to get in-
volved in decisions that vitally affect U.S. security—such as whether
the CTB will be followed by a threshold ban. Presumably, we would
not even want a multilateral threshold treaty, which would tend to legit-
imize low-yield testing by all parties. The most practical way of pur-
Ambassador Herbert York.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
suing a new threshold measure would be to withhold our consent for a
follow-on CTB at the review conference, thus allowing the CTB to ter-
minate. We could then negotiate a new threshold treaty on a bilateral or
trilateral basis.
As to verification, we are negotiating a separate trilateral agree-
ment for the measures we consider essential, especially national seis-
mic stations. If there is to be a CTB after three years, the verification
changes we would want, such as more seismic stations in the USSR,
would involve upgrading this separate agreement, not the verification
provisions of the multilateral treaty—and this should be done trilater-
ally, with no interference from the multilateral conference.
For these reasons, the review conference language should not
imply (as does “future treaty arrangements”) that the multilateral con-
ference would have a broad mandate to shape the future of the treaty.
Nor should it indicate (for example, by using the term “modifications”)
that we expect the conference to deal with changes in the multilateral
treaty—the normal amendments procedure would handle those.
Instead, the multilateral conference should serve essentially to af-
firm what we have decided prior to the conference. If we decide on no
treaty or a new threshold ban, we would insist on treaty expiration at
the conference, and our veto would guarantee that result. However, if
we, the Soviets, and the British were all prepared to accept a compre-
hensive ban after three years, we would seek what would be certain en-
dorsement by the conference. The review conference language should
therefore authorize a very limited choice: letting the treaty lapse or
having a CTB after three years.
On the basis of these considerations, I recommend the following
package proposal:
—Instead of the Soviet term “extension” which implies continuous
obligations, we would propose revised US language authorizing the
conference to “consider the question of renewing” the treaty.
—We would insist that the Soviets drop their reference to testing
by non-parties and accept a general formula like ours.
—We would propose a new provision specifying that a review
conference decision to renew the treaty would enter into force when 20
states, including the US, the UK, and the USSR, have given notification
of their acceptance of that decision. Under this provision, we could con-
trol when the renewed obligations became effective, and we would not
permit entry into force until the Senate had approved.
—We would seek a provision in the trilateral verification agree-
ment to the effect that, prior to the multilateral conference, the three
parties would consider modifications of the agreement that would take
effect if the multilateral treaty is renewed. This would give us a clear

Comprehensive Test Ban
basis for making upgraded verification a condition for renewing the
treaty.
I am attaching a text of what these review conference provisions
would look like.
I feel that the approach I am suggesting promotes U.S. interests
better than our current position, and I therefore recommend that we
take the initiative in putting it on the table when the talks resume.
Text of Proposed Multilateral Review Conference Provision
ARTICLE VII
1. This Treaty shall remain in force for three years.
2. During the third year after the entry into force of this Treaty, the
Depository shall convene a conference of the Parties to review the oper-
ation of the Treaty and to consider the question of renewing it, taking
into account all relevant factors. Any decision on this question shall be
made by a majority of the Parties to the Treaty, including all Parties that
are Permanent Members of the Security Council of the United Nations.
3. A renewal of this Treaty shall take effect, for those Parties ac-
cepting it, when the governments of 20 Parties, including the gov-
ernments of all Permanent Members of the Security Council of the
United Nations, have notified the Depositary of their acceptance.
Text of Proposed Provision for the Trilateral Verification Agreement
1. To promote the objectives and implementation of the provisions
of the Treaty and of this Agreement, the Parties to this Agreement shall
establish promptly a Joint Consultative Commission within the frame-
work of which they will:
. . . Consult prior to the conference of the Parties to the Treaty pro-
vided for in Paragraph 2 of Article VII of the Treaty, review the opera-
tion of this Agreement and consider any modifications to this Agree-
ment that may be desirable in the event of renewal of the Treaty.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
232.
Memorandum of Conversation1
London, May 22, 1979
PARTICIPANTS
US
The Secretary
Assistant Secretary Vest
Ambassador Brewster
Minister Streator
Peter Sommer (Embassy Notetaker)
UK
Francis Pym, Secretary of State for Defense
Sir Frank Cooper, Permanent Under Secretary, MOD
Michael Quinlan, Deputy Under Secretary, Policy and Programs, MOD
Roger Facer, Private Secretary to the Secretary
SUBJECTS
Conservative Commitment to Defense, NATO Issues, TNF, US Strategic Systems,
SALT, ABM, MBFR, UK’s Nuclear Deterrent, SALT III, CTB, Anti-Satellite
Negotiations, Arms Sales to China
Conservative Commitment to Defense
Pym said he was privileged the Secretary could visit the MOD and
he personally wanted to emphasize the Conservative Party’s anxieties
over the growing Soviet threat and Britain’s weakened defense posture.
The Conservatives are determined to do something positive. As a first
step, the Conservatives had increased military pay, which in some
ways was only a minor achievement, but it did underline the Conserva-
tives’ commitment to defense. He added that the Conservatives, how-
ever, would be hard-pressed to improve substantially current defense
programs because the UK economy is at zero growth. The Secretary re-
plied that he was pleased to be able to come to the MOD and the US is
pleased with the Conservatives’ strong commitment to defense.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Comprehensive Test Ban
The Secretary said he and Lord Carrington had gotten hung up the
question of how many national seismic stations should be located in the
Drafted by Peter Sommer (EUR). The meeting took place at the Ministry of Defence. The
conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe.

Comprehensive Test Ban
British Isles.2 Carrington had explained the British problem—the mon-
etary implications—and the Secretary agreed that clearly ten stations
on a country the size of the British Isles was unreasonable. The Secre-
tary felt, however, the Soviets would not settle for anything less than
five UK stations. He added perhaps a worthy idea was to have some of
the Commonwealth states, like Australia and New Zealand, accept a
station. The Secretary noted that yesterday Michael Palliser had sug-
gested a formula allocating seismic stations in relation to each coun-
try’s land mass. The Secretary joked that under such a formula, Britain
would probably end up with only half a station. Pym said a change in
the rules at this stage would make it difficult to achieve agreement. The
Secretary underlined that we will be under pressure to make progress
in the next CTB round, which begins on June 4, because if we do not it is
unlikely negotiations will be completed on time for the NPT Review
Conference. The Secretary said the US will press the Soviets at the
Summit3 to stop linking the number of seismic stations and the other re-
maining technical problems related to verification, but he was not san-
guine that the Soviets would budge. Pym promised to discuss these
issues with Lord Carrington. Cooper asked if there would eventually
be a threshold under the CTB treaty. The Secretary said the US would
insist on limiting it to laboratory tests for a treaty of three years dura-
tion. That is as far as we can honestly go in keeping the Joint Chiefs
aboard and considering the reliability of our nuclear stockpile.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
from the Secretary’s Delegation, May 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P840171–0170)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
233.
Telegram From the Secretary’s Delegation in London to the
Department of State1
Secto 4025. Department for Christopher only. White House to Dr.
Brzezinski for the President. Subject: Meeting With PM Thatcher.
1. Secretary Vance met for an hour with PM at No. 10; also present
were Foreign Secretary Carrington; Lord Privy Seal and House of
Commons Foreign Affairs Spokesman Sir Ian Gilmour; Brian Cart-
ledge, P.M.’s Private Secretary for International Affairs, and U.S. Am-
bassador Brewster.
2. Topics covered were SALT; Begin and Middle East; C.T.B.;
Turkey; Rhodesia and Southern Africa.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
13. Discussion then turned to C.T.B. Mrs. T. indicated that she had
private scientific advice, unknown perhaps to Carrington and Gilmour,
that Soviet salt mines made it possible to defy detection; especially if
timed to coincide with predicted earthquakes. Secretary said simply
that our scientific advisors did not agree with hers and suggested that
we send our most knowledgeable to talk with hers.
14. Mrs. T. then harked back to Eisenhower moratorium2 and the
advantage this gave to Soviets who used moratorium to prepare for
tests while we did not. Result, she said, would be spate of Soviet tests
which left US behind. Secretary said this is why we would have safe-
guards program which would put US in position to respond quickly if
Soviets took actions putting US at a disadvantage. He said we were sat-
isfied we could plan tests and keep test scientists and engineers in alert
status for that length of treaty and that the stockpile would not be deni-
grated during the three year period of the treaty. On the way out the
PM asked Secretary who we could send over and he suggested Frank
Press as an outstanding expert in this area. She was extremely pleased.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Also sent Immediate to the White House. The conver-
sation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe.
rold MacMillan announced a one-year moratorium on nuclear testing, to which the So-
viets agreed a few days later. (American Foreign Policy, Current Documents, 1958, pp.

Comprehensive Test Ban
234.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
10489. Geneva for CTB Delegation. Subject: CTB: UK Ministerial
Decision on NSS.
1. (S—Entire text). Ambassador Edmonds, head of UK CTB Dele-
gation, called on DCM to convey UK ministerial decision on National
Seismic Station issue. Text of Amb Edmonds talking points follows:
Begin text:
As you know, both the Prime Minister and Lord Carrington dis-
cussed the comprehensive test ban with Mr. Vance during his visit to
London.2 Both voiced their misgivings about the requirement that the
United Kingdom should accept 10 National Seismic Stations (NSS).
Ministers have now reflected further on the question of NSS. In
doing so, they had very much in mind the need to hold the Russians to
their acceptance of 10 NSS on Soviet territory. They are also aware
of the importance of bringing the CTB negotiations to a successful
conclusion.
On the other hand, they were also much concerned about the diffi-
culty of defending a decision to spend large sums of money on a project
for which their is simply no technical justification. The Russians know
that the United Kingdom has no independent nuclear testing facility
and could not possibly establish one, either in the United Kingdom or
the dependent territories, without detection. Our technical people are
satisfied that NSS would not provide any effective addition to means
already available to the Soviet Union for monitoring United Kingdom
compliance with the treaty.
Ministers have considered the NSS issue against the background
of their commitment to severe retrenchment in public expenditure.
This will make it even more difficult to justify capital costs of 20–30
mission pounds on a project which is bound to appear nonsensical to
parliament and the public.
The government attaches high priority to increasing the resources
made available to defence, thereby improving our contribution to
NATO. The money needed for 10 NSS could be much better spent on
re-equipping our forces in Europe.
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Geneva.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Ministers are therefore unwilling that the United Kingdom should
pay for more than the one NSS which we have already agreed to accept,
at Eskdalemuir. If your government concludes that we must accept
more than one in order to secure Soviet agreement, we hope that you
will be able to find some way of providing the necessary funds. In that
case, Ministers would be prepared to accept up to four NSS on British
territory. We should be glad to discuss the implication of this with you.
End text.
2. Comment: Embassy’s earlier de´marche3 and Secretary’s discus-
sion here last week4 prompted, we understand, ministerial discussion
chaired by P.M. last week at which foregoing decision was reached. We
consider it, however, a bargaining position from which UK can be fur-
ther moved. In view of fact that Secretary Vance has already empha-
sized the importance USG places on progress in CTB, embassy believes
that a presidential message to P.M. Thatcher may be needed now to
move British to reconsider their position. Such a message could empha-
size importance US attaches to early progress in CTB, argue benefits re-
sulting from agreement, highlight need for adequate verification, and
urge reconsideration of UK position.
Brewster
3 See Document 229.

Comprehensive Test Ban
235.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Energy
Schlesinger1
Washington, June 14, 1979
SUBJECT
CTB Enhanced Test Program (U)
This is in response to your memorandum of May 42 concerning the
CTB Enhanced Test Program. I recommended development of this pro-
gram to the President3 to redress the growing asymmetry in US and So-
viet testing rates, and to investigate some of the uncertainties involved
in maintaining reliability without testing. The President directed me to
proceed on this basis but was concerned that the additional tests
should support a CTB—e.g., the program should investigate reliability
problems rather than generate “new” warhead development needs.
Subsequently, the President reaffirmed his support for this effort in the
context of his review of the Quicksilver II testing plan.4 (S)
In light of this support, the preliminary incremental amounts you
mentioned do not appear unreasonable and I am optimistic that the
Administration will support such a request. I understand that the FY 81
figure is in fact consistent with the preliminary request DOE has al-
ready submitted to OMB.5 We need to move quickly, however, since
the Committee mark-up of the FY 80 budget is in progress and we are
losing valuable time for carrying out additional tests prior to the advent
of a CTB. Consequently, it is requested that you facilitate participation
by your staff and the lab directors in the ad hoc NSC Working Group to
ensure prompt completion of the Enhanced Test Program for review by
the President. (S)
In this regard, Assistant Secretary Sewell of your staff has previ-
ously submitted a list of prospective members6 and Frank plans to
draw from this list in establishing the panel. Frank also tells me he
would welcome an opportunity to discuss with you any further sug-
Jones, Seignious, and Press.
2 See Document 230.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
5 Not found.
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gestions you might have regarding the composition or activities of the
review group.
Zbigniew Brzezinski7
7 Aaron signed the memorandum for Brzezinski.
236.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Third Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev
Topics: SALT III and other arms control issues
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
General David Jones
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
General G. Seignious
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Joseph Powell
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
President L.I. Brezhnev
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Marshal D.F. Ustinov
Mr. K.U. Chernenko
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
Mr. L.M. Zamyatin
Drafted by Krimer on June 20; and approved by Aaron. The meeting was held at the So-
viet Embassy. The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations,

Comprehensive Test Ban
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.M. Vavilov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Further, the President said we would like to proceed with a com-
prehensive nuclear test ban agreement, either with or without the par-
ticipation of Great Britain. We will do everything possible to induce
other nations, France, Great Britain and China, to join in substantial re-
ductions in nuclear weapons development and deployment. Obviously
he could not speak for them and would think that the Chinese would
be difficult to persuade. But it is obvious that for several years now the
United States and the Soviet Union had such massive nuclear inven-
tories that their predominance over the other nuclear powers is ade-
quate. Moreover, the Soviet SS–20 missiles and other medium-range
systems constituted a formidable means for dealing with these nations.
But the absence of nuclear cooperation from other countries should not
be allowed to interfere with progress on a bilateral basis toward the
SALT III agreement.
Turning to another subject, Brezhnev said it would be very impor-
tant promptly to complete and sign a treaty on the general and com-
plete prohibition of nuclear weapon testing. The Soviet Union had
done a great deal in that direction, having met Western positions on a
number of important matters. Speaking frankly, he would have to say
that the CTB negotiations were being slowed and delayed, and by no
means through any fault of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev expressed the
hope that the United States and England will change their inflexible ap-
proach, in particular, to questions of verification. If that were done, all
three partners could jointly and without further delay finalize their
agreement on this important and necessary measure.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
The President wanted to make one more comment. He had out-
lined to Brezhnev several very specific and important thoughts and
suggestions regarding future arms negotiations leading to SALT III.
Brezhnev had not responded, but the President saw an area of agree-
ment in Soviet willingness to halt the production of nuclear weapons
and to reduce stockpiles, taking into account current stockpiles and the
security interests of the sides. Secondly, he believed it very important
that we agree and publicly say that we will not deliver nuclear fuel to
any nation that is not under the NPT or under IAEA control. We
needed to move forward on the comprehensive test ban. Personally,
the President thought that a requirement for ten stations in a small na-
tion such as Great Britain was excessive. Great Britain shared this view.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
If the talks failed for that reason, we were prepared to discuss with
Prime Minister Thatcher the withdrawal of Great Britain from the talks
so we can proceed to reach agreement on a bilateral basis.2 Third, the
President thought that good progress could be made today on mutual
and balanced force reduction if the discussions were continued be-
tween Secretary Brown and Marshal Ustinov. We needed to follow up
further on President Brezhnev’s suggestion concerning notification of
tests and exercises. The President hoped that before he left Vienna these
proposals could be pinned down so that our discussions could be
fruitful and not wasted.
2 Shortly before he and Brezhnev signed the SALT II Treaty, Carter handed
Brezhnev a brief handwritten letter listing his proposals for the next round of arms con-
trol talks that would comprise SALT III. Among other issues, Carter said the two nations
must conclude a “comprehensive test ban treaty with or without Britain. (hopefully with
them.)” The letter is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Document 202.
237.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
12262. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations: As-
1. (Secret—Entire text). Summary: This message contains my as-
sessment of the June 4–July 20 round of CTB negotiations. It incorpo-
rates numerous suggestions from members of the Delegation but has
not been cleared by all of them. In sum, there has been very little se-
rious negotiation, and therefore very little progress toward a CTB,
during this round. At the beginning of the round the UK Delegation an-
nounced that the new UK government was studying the question of
National Seismic Stations (NSS) on UK territory and would state its po-
sition later. The fact that it failed to do so during this round was the os-
tensible reason for the Soviets to continue to refuse to move on NSS.
However, their refusal to move may also reflect a more fundamental
problem, namely a growing doubt about the ultimate success of these
negotiations—a doubt related both to their uncertainty over the SALT
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.

Comprehensive Test Ban
debate and to the possible impact on the CTB negotiations of the ap-
proaching US presidential campaign. The fact that the US Delegation
has been unable even to state a position on several political issues, such
as the preamble to the multilateral treaty and permitted experiments,
probably reinforces Soviet fears that the US is no longer fully com-
mitted to completing the project. If there is to be progress during the
next round it will obviously be necessary to settle the UK NSS issue. In
addition, we should be properly instructed so that we can get on with
negotiating the remaining political issues of the treaty, as well as deal
with Soviet requests for US NSS components and two complete NSS.
End summary.
2. General situation and atmosphere. The negotiations remain
stalled, a situation that was already apparent during the last round.
Only two plenary meetings were held. At the first, on June 5,2 the UK
Delegation stated that the new UK government had not yet completed
its study of the NSS question and was therefore not ready to respond to
the Soviets (as it still is not). The Second Plenary was held July 113 at
our request so that I could restate and clarify the US position on NSS
equipment, including the requirement that NSS equipment installed in
the Soviet Union must be US-manufactured. Although the Soviets had
let it be known that they planned to make a statement on July 11, they
did not do so and did not explain why they had changed their mind.
Nor did they show much interest in holding private substantive discus-
sions. Symptomatic of their lack of interest in substantive exchanges,
the Soviets took the initiative in arranging a trilateral lunch, instead of
the usual plenary, to end the round.
3. Although the Soviets continued to press the UK to respond on
UK NSS, they conveyed less sense of urgency that we should get on
with the negotiations and they were less active in seeking US interven-
tion with the UK on the NSS question. The apparent relaxation dis-
played by the Soviets gave US the impression that they were somewhat
less concerned than before with moving the negotiations forward.
4. Relationships among the Delegations continued to be cordial,
providing a good basis for further constructive work when and if the
negotiations are unblocked. We are impressed in particular by the ap-
parent desire of the Soviets to keep up a show of cooperative activity,
and they excelled themselves in arranging social activities, presumably
to show goodwill. The visit to Moscow by me, Dr. Johnson, and John

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Marcum,4 as well as the completion of plans for the visit of Soviet and
UK experts to US NSS facilities, contributed to good relationships
among the Delegations.
5. Accomplishments during this round. A few modest accomplish-
ments can be recorded. The political working group agreed on lan-
guage for a paragraph in Article III of the separate verification agree-
ment dealing with the privileges and immunities of On-Site Inspection
(OSI) designated personnel. In addition, at the end of the round, the US
tabled draft language for another paragraph of the same article, dealing
with expenses incurred during an OSI. The OSI working group re-
viewed the texts of Article III that had already been negotiated, and
agreed on a joint composite text (with some brackets denoting issues
not yet agreed) of the entire article. Apart from this accomplishment,
the OSI working group devoted many hours to debating the accept-
ability of portable seismometers as OSI basic equipment. The Soviets
introduced this issue at the beginning of the round by challenging the
US and UK Delegations to provide data showing that portable seis-
mometers would be useful in determining the nature of ambiguous
events and would not result in false alarms. Throughout the debate the
Soviets refused to deal in specifics but rejected all US/UK arguments as
unconvincing. It is still not clear whether the Soviets have serious objec-
tions to the use of portable seismometers or were merely looking for a
convenient issue that would keep the OSI group busy.
6. Our major effort during the round was to restate, clarify, and ex-
pand upon the US position regarding the use of US equipment for NSS
in the USSR. In that context I also outlined the main elements of a coop-
erative NSS program. In informal meetings, we concluded arrange-
ments for the visit by Soviet and British experts to our NSS develop-
ment facilities. In addition, the trip to Moscow mentioned above (June
25–30) provided an opportunity to establish contact with Sadovsky, Di-
rector of the Soviet Institute of Geophysics, who was identified to US as
the man responsible for the Soviet NSS Program.
7. The UK role in the negotiations. In private discussions with US,
members of the UK Delegation have betrayed some embarrassment
and concern over the prolonged delay in London in deciding on a posi-
tion concerning NSS on UK territory. It is our impression that the UK
Delegation recommended that the UK answer the Soviets during this
round by proposing a few (perhaps as many as four) NSS on overseas
territories (paid for by Britain, not the US). I have little doubt that the
tour of the seismic observatory at Obninsk which the Soviets planned to use as a National
Seismic Station under a CTB treaty. York’s report of the visit is in telegram 11274 from

Comprehensive Test Ban
Delegation strongly opposed “Zero NSS”, which would imply UK
withdrawal from the SVA, arguing that this would be unacceptable to
the Soviet Union and damaging to British prestige. From contacts with
the British here and in London, I have the impression that the new UK
Government has some basic reservations regarding the value of a CTB
treaty. For example, Minister of State Douglas Hurd referred in a con-
versation with me to a low-threshold treaty as a hypothetical possible
substitute for a CTB. He also asked why Britain should play the Soviet
“Numbers Game” and whether it would not be in the UK interest,
though not necessarily in US interest, for the UK to withdraw from the
negotiations altogether. These reservations about the value of the CTB
may help explain why the UK Government has been so slow in reach-
ing a decision on NSS.
8. The Soviet role and attitude. Throughout the round the Soviets
continued to wait for a UK response to their proposal for ten NSS on
UK territory. They repeatedly made it clear that they had no interest in
NSS within the British Isles, and that the withdrawal of the UK from the
NSS arrangements would be unacceptable. Finally, they continued to
refuse to discuss any other NSS issues before the question of the
number and location of UK NSS was settled. At the opening of the
round, the Soviets hinted at some flexibility regarding the number of
UK NSS they could accept, conveying the impression that they might
settle for fewer NSS in UK territory than the ten proposed for the USSR.
By the end of the round, however, the Soviets were again saying that,
whatever number of NSS there were in UK dependent territories, the
USSR would accept the same number in the Soviet Union. The Soviets
may have hoped that their apparent show of flexibility would elicit an
early UK answer, to which they could reply by reaffirming their re-
quirement of equal numbers. The Soviets may in fact have in mind
using whatever number the UK comes up with as a basis for driving the
US toward a lower number of NSS in the USSR, at least during the first
three years. On several occasions Petrosyants and Timerbaev infor-
mally raised the possibility of adjusting the phasing of the installation
of the NSS, in effect of agreeing to install a small number of NSS (or
none) during the first duration of the treaty with a commitment to in-
stall more if the treaty is renewed.
9. During this round, in contrast with the last, the Soviets in in-
formal discussions avoided any suggestion that they will be ready to
begin serious negotiations on other NSS issues as soon as the UK issue
is settled. This may be because, as I have just indicated, the Soviets have
in mind using the number proposed by the UK as a basis for proposing
a reduction in the number of NSS in the USSR, possibly linking this to
an adjustment in the phasing of installation. They may expect a pro-
longed debate over these issues and for this reason no longer expect to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
move promptly to NSS technical issues. Or they may envision a pro-
longed and difficult debate over whose equipment will be used in the
Soviet Union. Either way we should not assume that settling the UK
issue will necessarily open the door for a speedy settlement of NSS
technical issues.
10. The question of US equipment in Soviet NSS. We have now left
no room for doubt that we will require the use of US-manufactured
equipment in the NSS installed in the Soviet Union. I and other
members of the Delegation discussed this matter informally with the
Soviets several times. We also went over the US position with Korni-
yenko during the Moscow visit, and I of course stated our position in
detail in my plenary statement of July 11, placing the requirement for
using US equipment in the context of reciprocity and of a cooperative
NSS program.
11. The Soviets have not categorically rejected the use of US equip-
ment in the Soviet Union. In his comments at the plenary Petrosyants
even avoided restating the Soviet position (which has been generally
negative but not a categorical rejection), on the grounds that the posi-
tion was well known and did not need to be repeated. In private discus-
sions, he and other members of the Soviet Delegation described the US
position as very hard. Their emphasis, however, was less on the sub-
stance of the US position (which they refuse to discuss before the UK
NSS question is settled) but on their contention that the US statement
represented an essentially new position and came as an unpleasant sur-
prise. We pointed out that US spokesmen had said as early as May 1978
that it would be necessary to use the US downhole unit.5 Nevertheless,
I tend to believe that the Soviet reaction of surprise contains truthful el-
ements if not the whole truth, in the sense that our previous statements
about using US equipment were never given much emphasis and
therefore may not have been taken seriously. In rereading the record, I
think it is at least possible that the Soviets were convinced that we
could be persuaded to compromise on this issue. They may dig in on
this point, holding to the argument that their acceptance of NSS is on
condition that Soviet equipment will be installed in Soviet territory. Or
they may try to drive us toward some sort of compromise involving
few or no NSS in the first three years with a commitment to settle the
question of whose equipment will be used in a full scale system when
or if the treaty is renewed.
12. CTB negotiations, SALT, and the US political scene. It is evident
that the SALT debate in the US has slowed these negotiations. The So-
viets have asked US if the SALT debate will interfere with US decisions
on CTB. They have also referred to the fact that President Carter told
5 A method of seismic testing.

Comprehensive Test Ban
Gromyko that we would not finish the CTB negotiations before SALT
was concluded.6 We must assume that the Soviets will not wish to
commit themselves further to the CTB, and especially not to make any
significant concessions, before they are confident that the SALT treaty
will be ratified and that the US seriously intends to go ahead with the
CTB. The Soviets have also frequently referred to the 1980 presidential
campaign as something that might make it impossible for the US to
proceed with the CTB, and therefore a matter of concern to their negoti-
ators. From the Soviet perspective, the obvious question is whether any
concessions can be expected from the US in the present situation, and
whether any Soviet concessions would be worthwhile. It is relevant, in
this connection, that the Soviets no longer talk of the need to complete
the CTB by any particular time. Early in this round we occasionally re-
ferred to the NPT conference in May 1980 as a target date, but got no
response from the Soviets. Clearly they no longer regard May 1980 as a
realistic target date. Members of the Soviet Delegation have even spec-
ulated that the negotiations would require two more years.
13. Conclusions. The fact that the US Delegation entered this round
with no new instructions, and that it remains uninstructed on several
political aspects of the treaty—notably the preamble and the question
of permitted experiments—has contributed to the present impasse. The
fact that we are still unable to state a US position on these issues tends
to undermine Soviet confidence in our commitment to the CTB objec-
tive. If we are to make any progress during the next round, and if we
are to avoid the possibility that these negotiations might unravel alto-
gether, I believe we must return next round in a position to negotiate
most open issues, including not only the outstanding political issues
but also the Soviet request to buy US seismic components and two
complete NSS. Our ability to make constructive proposals on these
issues would contribute substantially to improving the negotiating
atmosphere.
14. Further, the delay of the UK in responding on the NSS question
probably strikes the Soviets as further evidence that both the UK and
the US are losing interest in the CTB objective. During the recess, I hope
that the UK will reach a decision regarding the number of NSS in UK
dependent territories and that the US will come to a firm conclusion
concerning our reaction to this new decision. Without new instructions
for both the US and the UK Delegations, we are unlikely to make any
progress next round. If we continue to appear in Geneva lacking in-
structions, the Soviets (and the UK too) may interpret this as proof that
we are no longer seriously committed to achieving a CTB treaty.
York
6 See Document 221.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
238.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Nuclear Test
[8½ lines not declassified]
I strongly urge that this Government seek an explanation of this
event from the Soviet government. [2½ lines not declassified] The United
States has adhered scrupulously to this bilateral moratorium. It ap-
pears that the Soviets have been less scrupulous.
The US response to this type of event could have a major impact on
Senate deliberations on the SALT II Treaty. Some Senators could see US
actions in this area as being indicative of future US actions with respect
to compliance ambiguities in SALT. Consequently, I urge your serious
consideration of this issue.
239.
Memorandum From John Marcum and Marshall Brement of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Nuclear Test (S)
Jim Schlesinger has written you (Tab B)2 to point out that the most
recent Soviet nuclear test has a high probability of having exceeded the
150 KT threshold and to urge that we seek an explanation of this event
2 Document 238.

Comprehensive Test Ban
from the Soviets. This is technically correct, but the situation is actually
less certain since other seismic data, which we do not understand fully,
indicate that the yield may have been considerably smaller. Never-
theless, Schlesinger’s concerns are well founded and, per David’s in-
structions, the State Department delivered a de´marche we had already
initiated to the Soviets this afternoon (Tab C).3 (S)
At David’s suggestion, we also called in Bessmertnykh to reinforce
State’s protest. We asked him whether or not, in light of the three large
explosions this summer, the Soviets intended to adhere to the 150 kt
limit and made clear that we were free to respond appropriately. Bess-
mertnykh reaffirmed strongly that the Soviets considered themselves
bound by this limit and fished for an indication that we were more con-
cerned about the domestic consequences than the actual yield of the ex-
plosion. We responded that it was the large size of this explosion and
the earlier ones this summer that prompted our concern. (S)
We have prepared a brief response to Schlesinger at Tab A,4 in-
forming him that you share his concerns and that the text has been pro-
tested to the Soviets. (S)
Recommendation
That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.
3 Attached but not printed. That afternoon, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
European Affairs Goodby handed Soviet Charge´ Vasev a de´marche based on the draft at
Tab C that noted the administration’s “concern” over the test. The text of the de´marche is
Foreign Policy File, D790394–1013)
4 Tab A is an August 24 memorandum from Brzezinski to Schlesinger which noted
that the United States had “requested that they [the Soviets] provide technical data re-
lating” to the test to which Schlesinger had alerted Brzezinski on August 22 [Document
previously.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File,
and August 8 respectively, discuss the U.S. de´marches to the Soviet Union concerning the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
240.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
245697. CTB Delegation for Okun. Subject: CTB: Approach to UK
on NSS Question.
1. On behalf of the Secretary PM Director Bartholomew called in
UK Embassy Counselor Weston (in absence of DCM Robinson) Sep-
tember 17 to make de´marche along following lines:
—The US government continues to place great importance on the
progress of the CTB negotiations.
—The negotiations are stalled on the NSS issue because of the So-
viet rejection of the present UK position.2 The Soviets consider the ball
to be in the Western court on this question. They may believe they have
the UK and US on the defensive and that they can make it appear that
the two Western parties are responsible for the stalemate and have lost
interest in the talks.
—We therefore need a combined US/UK strategy which will:
(A) solidify our joint approach on this issue; (B) put some pressure on
the Soviets and test their willingness to negotiate seriously; and
(C) move the negotiations off dead center and ensure that the talks do
not unravel over this issue.
—We recommend, therefore, that your government consider the
following strategy for this round:
—Both the US and UK would work together to counter Soviet
claims that the UK would have the same number of stations as the US
and USSR.
—We would propose instead that the UK make a credible step in
the direction of the Soviet position, a step which would include the ac-
ceptance of NSS in dependent territories. We note that this was dis-
cussed by the President and the Prime Minister at their Tokyo meeting3
and that the Prime Minister said HMG would be taking this matter
under serious consideration.
cret; Exdis; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to the Mission in Geneva and
Moscow. Drafted by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), Arnold Ra-
phel, Avis Bohlen (EUR/SOV), and Robert Steven (S/S); and approved by Bartholomew
2 On September 27, Carrington told Vance that his government had “perhaps em-
barrassed the US with their position on a verification presence.” Vance replied that the
United States did “not believe that one seismic station is an adequate answer.” (Telegram
eign Policy File, D790441–1007)
3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Thatcher in Tokyo on
this meeting has been found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
—The US would give its strong support to a meaningful new UK
position. We would make it clear to the Soviets that we do not believe
the UK could go any further. We would push them hard to accept this
offer and press them on this both in Geneva and at a senior level in
Washington and Moscow. We would suggest that the UK also take
such action.
—At the same time, we would urge the Soviets—while this issue is
being considered in Moscow—to move on to serious negotiation of
other issues of concern to the UK and US.
—To make the maximum impact upon the Soviets, such a move
should optimally be made by US (UK and US) at the start of this
coming round, and, in any event, as early in the round as possible. We
would appreciate it, however, if London would allow time to consult
with US, as it is indispensible that we fully coordinate the approach
that we will each take in presenting our new position.
2. Bartholomew noted that full substance of de´marche had been
approved by the Secretary and by senior levels of other concerned
agencies. Weston asked if we could elaborate upon the meaning of a
“credible” step. Bartholomew said that this has not been defined by
USG. Speaking on strictly personal basis, he pointed out that even if the
UK does not judge that such a move would have a good chance of So-
viet acceptance, such a move is still worthy of consideration. It will
place UK and US in better position on NSS issue and will put the So-
viets to the test.
3. Weston asked if we had any time frame in mind. Bartholomew
replied that the key factor on timing now is that its very much in mu-
tual UK and US interest to have made substantial progress in CTB by
the time of the NPT review conference. Further, we continue to have an
intrinsic interest in moving CTB ahead on its own merits. Its in our mu-
tual interest to overcome the impression of a stalled negotiation and the
potential for unraveling.
4. Weston said US views would be taken into account and that UK
decision could be expected September 19.4 US approach was therefore
opening statement, British Ambassador John Edmonds said that after “a much more
thorough review,” the new UK Government could “confirm” that it “wishes to work for
the early achievement” of “a good comprehensive test ban treaty.” However, Edmonds
said that despite the Soviet proposal that each of the three nations should build 10 na-
tional seismic stations to verify a CTB, after “careful and intensive consideration,” the UK
Government had concluded that “there is no justification for locating national seismic
stations in United Kingdom dependent territories. They have therefore decided that one
national seismic station in the United Kingdom, at Eskdalemuir in Scotland, is the appro-
priate British contribution to an effective and realistic system of verification by these sta-
opening plenary statement, York said that the U.S. Government “strongly supports both
the British desire for a test ban and the offer to accept one national seismic station in the
United Kingdom,” which it believed was “appropriate.” York’s plenary statement is in
Policy File, D790441–1051)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
timely. Weston said he could not speculate on the outcome of UK Min-
isters’ meeting which would make decision.
5. Weston also noted that US approach did not mention the possi-
bility of UK staying out of the SVA, and he asked for explanation. Bar-
tholomew, speaking personally, acknowledged that this was not in-
cluded in US approach, and pointed out that even if UK does decide
that this would be the best course of action, it still might be better for
tactical reasons at least to try first the strategy recommended in this US
approach. He noted that a British decision to withdraw from the SVA
would not solve the issue automatically, as US and UK would have to
press Soviets to accept this solution. He pointed out that we would, of
course, be happy to hear out the British if they have other views on this
question.
Vance

Comprehensive Test Ban
241.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
19619. USCTB. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Final Assessment of
CTB message no. 522
(S—Entire text)
Summary: Since previous assessments this round, agreement has
been reached on complete ad Ref text for Article III of separate verifica-
tion agreement. This, together with earlier report on agreed technical
characteristics of NSS, constitutes modest progress this round. How-
ever, Soviets continue to refuse to negotiate NSS text before number of
UK NSS is settled. End summary.
cret; Exdis; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.
the Soviets had “taken two modest but potentially useful steps long urged by the U.S.: 1)
they have indicated some flexibility regarding their previous position on the number of
NSS to be located in the UK and dependent territories; and 2) they have formally agreed
to begin ‘ad-hoc’ discussion of technical characteristics of NSS even before the numbers
issue is resolved. Soviet negotiating strategy evidently is to try to trade movement on
these two matters for U.S. and UK flexibility on the UK NSS numbers issue.” The ad-hoc
meeting, the Mission reported, would meet for the first time on October 17. (National Ar-
the activity of the ad-hoc working group on NSS technical characteristics, which “pro-
vided the busiest and most productive period of the past year. The report of the working
group represented limited, but useful, progress, which was unexpected at the start of this
round, or at the start of the working group’s operation.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D790524–0789)
that the Soviets had agreed to drop a provision in the Separate Verification Agreement of
the proposed CTB treaty “which would have provided that the rights and functions of
OSI designated personnel, and the equipment used by them, would be specified in detail
in the consultations on the conduct of each individual OSI. The U.S. Delegation had op-
posed such a provision, maintaining that the fundamental OSI rights and functions
should be arranged during these negotiations and spelled out in the SVA, not deferred
for agreement on a case-by-case basis. Soviet agreement to drop this paragraph,” the Mis-
sion contended, “thus represents a useful move in our direction.” (National Archives, RG
UK Ambassador Edmonds had called 1979 “a disappointing year for the negotiations,
with little progress achieved.” York called 1979 “less than satisfactory. The foremost
problem has been the Soviet unwillingness to proceed on other NSS issues until the UK
numbers question is resolved. This Soviet position was not a useful one, and should
not delay us further.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790561–
0796)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. As reported previously the Soviets agreed to limited technical
discussions on NSS before the question of the number of UK NSS was
settled (Ref A). These discussions resulted in a report agreeing on tech-
nical characteristics of the seismic portion of most of the NSS downhole
package in which U.S. specifications and explanatory text were ac-
cepted by the Soviet side (Ref B). Three issues, the specification of lin-
earity and noise level, and the recovery of the data “with fidelity” were
not settled in the report, and remain to be resolved.
2. Additional progress was agreement in Article III of the separate
verification agreement on the definition of designated personnel for
conducting On-Site Inspections (OSI) and on the burden of costs of OSI.
The Soviets also agreed to drop a bracketed paragraph in this article,
making Article III complete, unbracketed ad referendum text (Ref C).
3. On the issue of UK NSS, the Soviets indicated early in the round
that they could be flexible on their proposed number (ten), but have in-
sisted the UK first move off its position of one NSS—a number the So-
viets say is totally unacceptable. The UK has remained firm in main-
taining that one NSS is the correct number for monitoring UK
compliance with a CTB. The U.S. has firmly supported the UK position
throughout the round.
4. The U.S. proposed in the final plenary a cooperative NSS devel-
opment program to install and evaluate U.S. NSS in the USSR and in
Alaska. The initial Soviet response was cool. They said that the pro-
posal seemed to contain a number of preconditions, and would have to
be studied carefully (Ref D).
York

Comprehensive Test Ban
242.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
The President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster
Ambassador at Large Henry Owen
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State
Robert D. Blackwill, NSC Staff Member
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher
Lord Carrington, UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
Sir Nicholas Henderson, Ambassador to the U.S.
Sir Robert Armstrong, Secretary to the Cabinet
Sir Michael Palliser, Permanent Under Secretary of State, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Sir Frank Cooper, Ministry of Defense
Michael Alexander, Private Secretary to the PM
George Walden, Principal Secretary to the Secretary of State
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
As the meeting neared its end, Lord Carrington said that he and
Secretary Vance would talk about Belize in their meeting in the after-
noon. The President said he would discuss China and perhaps Namibia
at dinner with the Prime Minister. The CTB should also be addressed.
Mrs. Thatcher quickly replied that the UK could only afford one seis-
mic station and had offered to withdraw if that would help the negotia-
tions.2 The President said he had discussed this issue with Brezhnev at
Room at the White House. The conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
2 Brewster had briefed Vance about Thatcher’s misgivings about a CTB and particu-
larly the construction of more than one NSS in the United Kingdom. Given her “in-
grained” suspicions about the Soviet Union and her predisposition “to give greater
weight to defence preparedness and less to arms control,” Brewster contended that “it
would be useful for the President to review with Mrs. Thatcher the range of complexity
the U.S. and its allies face on the world scene by a frank statement of the U.S. approach to
East-West relations,” especially on the CTB issue. The recent “slight signs that the Soviets
are beginning to show greater flexibility” on the NSS, Brewster said, validated her gov-
ernment’s “firmness” on the issue. (Telegram 23716 from London, November 29; Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Vienna who had objected to UK withdrawal.3 If the British could not
accept ten seismic stations, perhaps four would be an appropriate
number. The Prime Minister, her voice breaking, said four was a ridic-
ulous number. The UK only needed one and had much better ways to
spend its money. The President wryly noted that Britain might con-
sider these stations as a kind of status symbol and asked the Prime Min-
ister to again consider accepting four of them. Mrs. Thatcher replied
that although Britain had no wish to withdraw, these stations were
very expensive. (S)
The President, Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski and the Prime
Minister, Lord Carrington and Sir Robert Armstrong then moved into
the Oval Office for further discussion. (C)
3 See Document 236.
243.
Telegram from the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
321521. Geneva for CTB Delegation. Subject: TTBT Data Exchange.
Ref: State 315631 (Notal).
1. S—Entire text.
2. In his meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on December 6,2 the
Secretary handed over the following Non-Paper relating to TTBT data
exchange noting that this was not just a technical question but a matter
of political significance.
Begin text:
Both our governments have recently reaffirmed their intention not
to take any actions incompatible with the 150 kiloton limit on under-
ground nuclear explosions called for by the Threshold Test Ban Treaty
available. Secret; Immediate. Sent immediate to London and the Mission in Geneva.
2 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
mutual interest to take steps to minimize any misperceptions regarding
adherence to these statements of intent.
The achievement of a CTB retains its very high priority in the view
of the USG. It is our desire to move ahead with it expeditiously and to
build the popular support needed for its ratification. However, it
should be clear that unless we can resolve the current uncertainties re-
garding nuclear testing, we will be unable to generate and maintain
this necessary public support.
[12 lines not declassified]
The Soviet de´marche of September 17,5 which raised the question
of whether our September 6 event had exceeded 150 kt demonstrates
that we indeed have a common problem. We have confirmed that the
yield of that US test did not, in fact, exceed 150 kt. However, our own
teleseismic measurements suggest that the signals generated, unless
analyzed in conjunction with accurate geological and geophysical
knowledge of the testing area, could lead to an erroneously high esti-
mate of the yield.
To reduce our uncertainties regarding seismic signals from the So-
viet tests I mentioned, we would like to receive from you pertinent geo-
physical data on the area where these tests were conducted. We would,
for our part, be happy to provide to you similar data to reduce the un-
certainties you expressed over our test of September 6.
We note that in response to an earlier request which we made for
such data, the Soviet side suggested that such uncertainties would not
arise if the US had ratified the TTBT. We do not consider this a feasible
course of action at this time, as pressing for ratification of the TTBT
would complicate our efforts to conclude a CTB—which remains our
priority objective in this area. But, as I said, this climate of uncertainty
regarding current testing activities undermines the basic political sup-
port which a CTB will require.
To make this data exchange as constructive as possible, to reduce
the uncertainties which I have described, and to enhance the mutual
sense of confidence which is so important in this area, we propose the
establishment of an ad hoc joint technical panel or working group.
We would ask this ad hoc panel or group to develop procedures
for the exchange of geological and geophysical data for those regions of
active test sites where unusual geology and other factors have appar-
ently contributed to incorrect yield estimates that resulted in expres-
sions of concern by both our governments. The concerns we both hold
5 Bessmertnykh delivered the Soviet de´marche, which was a reply to the August 24

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
could perhaps be dealt with by precise data on quite limited areas,
building on the hypothetical sample profile of a testing area already ex-
changed in connection with the TTBT. The panel could also develop
procedures for participation of US and Soviet experts in an exchange of
calibration data from past explosions at these sites. And there are un-
doubtedly other measures that the panel could consider as well to elim-
inate unnecessary uncertainties.
End text.
Christopher
244.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
803. Subject: (S) US/UK CTB Consultations.
Secret—Entire text
1. Following the meeting on issues related to high yield testing, the
UK asked for a meeting at FCO to cover broader CTB issues. UK side,
led by Assistant Under Secretary Patrick Moberly and Ambassador Ed-
monds, included Dennis Fakley (MOD), Tony Reeve (FCO), Michael
Warner (MOD) and Ivor Callen (FCO). US side led by John Marcum
(OSTP), included Larry Finch (ACDA), Steve Steiner (PM/DCA), Jack
Griffin (DOE), Col. Dick Thornton (JCS) and Embassy Pol-Mil officer.
2. Moberly stated that UK wished to cover four areas: The status of
CTB in the light of Afghanistan,2 the UK–NSS issue, other CTB issues in
1980, and plans for future US/UK bilaterals.
3. Marcum said that in the course of deciding on actions US would
take in response to Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, USG had looked at
whether CTB negotiations should continue. Decision was taken that ne-
gotiations should continue at a slow pace. Talks should continue be-
cause they are in the US and Western interest, and because they have
an important international dimension, particularly with the NPT
REVCON approaching in August. The US would, therefore, continue
with its previous positions and current initiatives in CTB, and will not
cret; Priority. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow.

Comprehensive Test Ban
try to turn back the clock. In particular, US wants to continue bilateral
discussions with the UK on the NSS question, pursuant to the Carter-
Thatcher3 and Vance-Carrington4 talks in Washington, at which US un-
dertook to look into possibility of providing equipment for 3 stations in
UK dependent territories, while UK looked into possibilities for lo-
cating them. US and UK should work expeditiously to develop a
common position on this issue, and then consult closely on the tactics of
how and when to use this move with the Soviets in Geneva.
4. Moberly said UK ministers would regard this statement of USG
policy as important. He said that although UK ministers had not specif-
ically reviewed future of CTB post Afghanistan there was no intention
to halt negotiation or to disengage from the talks as a result of the crisis
in Afghanistan. He inquired regarding the meaning of the phrase, “pro-
ceed at a slow pace.” Marcum responded that US plans to continue
with CTB, but expected that the agreement would not be completed
prior to SALT II ratification. This meant that the work remaining would
be stretched out over a longer period. Marcum stated that the US did
not intend to halt progress in the talks, or to delay the talks. At present
we believe the talks should resume on Feb 4 as scheduled. Also, in
preparation for the NPT REVCON, negotiations should show some
limited progress over the next few months, even though US forsees ac-
tual CTB completion in a much longer time frame. The essential thing
now, he suggested, was for US and UK to make progress bilaterally as
soon as possible, so the Soviets cannot exploit differences between us.
5. Moberly said Soviets may try to raise CTB in the CD and asked
how we should respond. Both US and UK participants agreed that one
should try to insure that CD has other issues to work on in order to
keep pressure off CTB. UK side asked whether US could permit multi-
lateral negotiation in the CD of the CTB preamble or review conference
language. Marcum replied that while the preamble might be a possi-
bility eventually, the review conference language is much more sensi-
tive. UK side pointed out that even if we succeeded in holding off CD
pressures, US and UK face a multilateral problem with the coming
NPTRC. US side acknowledged this, and pointed out that it is therefore
important for US and UK to be on the high ground in the talks.
6. UK/NSS issues: UK presented US with preliminary working
paper on NSS issues.5 Moberly said NSS is not necessarily the key issue
to get the talks moving and could possibly be saved for later. US side
responded in general terms that US sees broad range of verification
issues as crucial, and did not want separation of multilateral treaty
3 See Document 242.
4 Not found.
5 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
from SVA issues. UK side then agreed that NSS is one of several impor-
tant issues. Marcum pointed out that since this issue is the key question
publicly known to be at stalemate, US and UK should concentrate on
agreeing bilaterally on this issue on the basis of discussions during the
Thatcher visit. US and UK should also consider the tactical aspect of the
issue. For example, one might want to see what the Soviets put on the
table prior to deciding how to play a new UK NSS position in Geneva.
7. UK side asked status of internal US deliberation on NSS fi-
nancing issue and stressed that this would be important to decision by
UK ministers. Marcum said work is in progress on whether US would
be able to fund equipment for additional UK NSS stations, but USG will
need more time to reach final position. It would be helpful to US in
meantime to know how UK views the issue at this stage. Moberly re-
plied that the UK paper demonstrates that the UK is looking seriously
at possible sites in the Southern Hemisphere. He urged that US get its
views to UK as soon as possible. US side agreed that it would do its best
to get back to UK as soon as possible.
8. Marcum pointed out that NPT monitoring value—and prospects
for US funding of equipment for additional UK NSS sites in Southern
Hemisphere—could be enhanced if additional monitoring equipment
such as acoustic and ionospheric sensors, ocean bottom seismometers,
radiation detectors, etc., could be installed at these locations. He noted
utility such sites would have had in context of problem of evaluating
September 22 possible nuclear explosion in South Atlantic.
9. Prototype: Marcum said US also wished UK to look at possibility
of participating in the NSS prototype program, and possibility of
placing a prototype station in Southern Hemisphere UK site. Fakley
(UK MOD) agreed that there would be a case for doing this in Southern
Hemisphere, as it could provide helpful experience on stations on
small island locations. While technically interesting, much will depend
on whether UK ministers agree to the principle of NSS in dependent
territories. Moberly asked whether the prototype question could be
considered regardless of whether the UK were willing to accept 3 addi-
tional stations. The US side responded that the issue might be viewed
independently, although it would be preferable to resolve UK NSS
numbers issue at same time. Moberly said this was an interesting idea
which UK would consider.
10. Next steps: Edmonds said it seemed unlikely that one would
have both a firm US offer and a UK Ministers’ decision by Feb 4.
Marcum agreed but said US would hope for further discussions before
then or shortly thereafter. There would also need to be consultations
between the two Delegations before the negotiations resume. Reeve
said UK had explored NSS issue with FCO Minister of State Hurd in a
preliminary way. It was clear that before UK could review its position

Comprehensive Test Ban
the shape of the US offer must be clear. UK side undertook, however, to
see how much further issue of sites might be reviewed at senior official
level on basis of information now available. Marcum repeated that
USG would also get back to UK with its views as soon as possible.
11. Other issues: Edmonds asked that US reconsider its refusal to
discuss the preamble, as he felt current US position could not be de-
fended at NPT REVCON. He expressed concern that this issue could be
placed in a multilateral forum against US wishes if US was not ready to
discuss it. Marcum took note of this and said US would review all open
CTB issues, both on substance and tactics. On review conference, Ed-
monds acknowledged that ball is in Soviet court in formal sense and
that this is more delicate issue than preamble. Marcum noted the US
saw no need to reconsider its position on this issue and UK agreed. UK
also asked that US look at presentation of CTB issues at NPTRC (and
publicly if Soviets break ranks). UK agreed with US view that coordina-
tion on these matters would best be done in Geneva, with support from
London and Washington.
12. On question of next bilateral, UK side suggested that US Dele-
gation members and possibly some Washington officials come to
London for consultations on Jan 30 or 31, prior to resumption in
Geneva.
Brewster

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
245.
Paper Prepared by an Interagency Review Group1
Washington, January 30, 1980
NEW NSS ISSUES IN THE CTB NEGOTIATIONS
A basic issue relating to National Seismic Stations (NSS) which has
been under consideration on an interagency basis over the past several
weeks is:
—whether our willingness to provide US NSS equipment to the
USSR should be reconsidered, and in particular whether our offer to
lend an NSS unit to the USSR for joint testing should be changed, in
light of post-Afghanistan guidelines on scientific exchanges and tech-
nology transfer to the Soviet Union.2
If it is determined that we want to maintain our general approach
to NSS in the negotiations, and that we are still prepared to lend the So-
viets an NSS unit, then two NSS issues in relation to the UK are:
—whether we should offer to fund the equipment for three addi-
tional UK NSS in the Southern Hemisphere, in the context of the UK
shifting from a one-site to a four-site NSS position, and
—whether the US should offer to lend the UK an NSS unit for joint
US–UK–USSR testing at a UK site in the Southern Hemisphere.
This paper provides a brief review of the background on these
issues for decision, together with the principal factors bearing on each
of them. Negotiating tactics and timing are also discussed.
As background for considering the NSS issues outlined above, fol-
lowing is the projected timetable for production of prototype NSS
units. The first unit will be installed in Alaska in February 1980. An
older unit which has been tested in Tennessee will be upgraded to cur-
rent standards; this unit could then be available for loan to the USSR or
the UK (although it will differ in some respects from the other NSS
units). Another unit should be ready in March 1981, with additional
units expected in May and July 1981; these units are being produced for
use in a 5-station research network in the US, but they could be made
available for other uses if deemed appropriate.
I. Technology Transfer Issue
The immediate case at issue is whether our offer to lend an NSS
unit to the USSR for joint testing should be withdrawn in light of post-
2 On January 4, Carter announced that he had “directed that no high technology or
other strategic items will be licensed for sale to the Soviet Union until further notice.”

Comprehensive Test Ban
Afghanistan guidelines on scientific exchanges and technology transfer
to the Soviet Union.
A. Background
This issue must be considered in light of earlier analyses of the
technology transfer question, the US proposal to lend the Soviets an
NSS unit, and new circumstances in the post-Afghanistan period.
Technology Transfer Analyses. The question of technology transfer
associated with providing US NSS equipment for use at stations in the
USSR was examined on an interagency basis in 1977,3 in 1978,4 and
again in 19795 (in preparation for the visit of Soviet experts to the US).
In each instance, the responsible agencies determined that the NSS
equipment could be transferred to the Soviet Union for use in moni-
toring a CTB treaty. In its review of this matter in 1978,6 the DOD cited
the following grounds for concurring in the transfer:
—It is not practical to “reverse engineer” the critical components
and produce them in quantity.
—The number of NSS is small enough so that diversion to other
applications would be no threat.
—Since the equipment would be provided in connection with an
international treaty, it would not set a precedent for approval of export
of system components alone.
Two conditions were imposed by the DOD:
—The Soviets should not be given manuals or data on how to
build critical elements of the NSS (or any embargoed items).
—DOD should be consulted in connection with any Soviet request
to be present when the NSS equipment is being manufactured.
On June 30, 1978, the Department of Commerce authorized the
transfer of NSS technical data and hardware to the USSR.7 Consistent
with the DOD recommendations cited above, Commerce specifically
excluded from its authorization any technical data relating to produc-
tion of NSS components. The 1979 review, completed just before Soviet
experts visited the US, approved transfer of the equipment on the same
basis as the 1978 authorization (outlined above).
US Prototype Proposal. It was decided that the US would offer to
transfer one NSS to the USSR. The US CTB Delegation was instructed in
3 Not found.
4 The 1978 Interagency Study of NSS technology transfer to the Soviet Union is
available in Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, 1978.
5 Not found.
6 Not found.
7 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
early December 1979—at the end of the last round—to offer the USSR,
on a loan basis, a prototype NSS unit for joint testing by US, UK and
USSR experts at a site in the USSR.8 The Soviets were also invited to
participate in NSS test activities at a site in Alaska. The US proposal for
joint testing of NSS equipment was portrayed to the Soviets as our re-
sponse to earlier Soviet requests for two complete sets of US NSS equip-
ment and five specific components. The Soviets have not yet responded
to the December proposal.
Post-Afghanistan Restrictions. It was decided on January 2, in re-
sponse to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, that the US would tighten
controls on US exports to the USSR on a case-by-case basis. Specific
technology transfer cases are currently being reviewed. Factors being
considered in these reviews include whether the equipment is “space
qualified” (as some parts of the NSS equipment are).
B. Discussion
There is agreement that this is primarily a political issue. It re-
quires weighing one set of US objectives against another: On the one
hand, there are the US objectives in relation to the CTB negotiations
and the NSC Action Plan that led us to make the proposal in the first
place. On the other hand, there is the need to take into account the
present policy of restrictiveness towards exports to the USSR.
A question has been raised as to whether the earlier determina-
tions that the NSS equipment could be transferred to the USSR for use
in monitoring a CTB treaty are also valid for the proposed joint proto-
type test and evaluation effort in light of post-Afghanistan guidance.
—One factor to be considered is whether the interaction between
US and Soviet technicians in such a joint effort could result in the
sharing of information on manufacturing processes that we would not
want transferred.
—If so, then we should work out modalities for the proposed joint
effort to try to ensure that the type and level of interaction would not
permit the exchange of more information than we considered
appropriate.
At present, before the Soviets have responded to our proposed
joint prototype testing effort, the Delegation does not require further
guidance on the specific features of the US-proposed joint program; if
necessary, the Delegation can take questions and report them to Wash-
ington. The nature of the Soviet response will provide the terms of ref-
erence for additional decisions that may have to be taken at a later date.
8 The US NSS joint cooperative development proposal is in telegram 19581 from

Comprehensive Test Ban
Some possible Soviet reactions to our proposal are as follows:
—They may not respond at all for some time, or they may respond
negatively.
—They may renew their proposal for two sets of NSS equipment
and the five components.
—They may react positively in principle but have specific ideas re-
garding the features of the joint effort.
In any event, if the Soviets are receptive to the idea of a joint pro-
gram, it will take considerable time to work out its main features, and
we will have time to develop our specific approach in response to So-
viet reactions to our loan offer. If further study of the technology
transfer issue is deemed appropriate, this should provide time for such
a study to be undertaken and to be factored in as we plan our specific
approach. It would be desirable for internal US planning purposes,
however, to proceed to work out the details of our proposal for a joint
NSS test effort as we see it.
C. Issue for Decision
For now, the issue for decision is whether to withdraw our proto-
type NSS loan offer or to let it stand; and if we let it stand, how the Del-
egation should deal with it in the February round. There are three basic
options:
Option 1. Withdraw the NSS prototype loan offer.
—Would reinforce general post-Afghanistan technology transfer
policy.
—Would send a clear signal to the Soviets regarding the negative
consequences for a CTB (and arms control generally) of their invasion
of Afghanistan.
—Would constitute a setback to CTB negotiations, probably pre-
cluding further progress on verification issues for some time. Could
lead to collapse of the negotiations.
—Could precipitate public charges by the Soviets that the US had
undermined the CTB negotiations.
—Could jeopardize long-term US objective of having our equip-
ment used at NSS in the USSR, since Soviets could claim that US refusal
to transfer US equipment left them no alternative but to use their own
equipment.
—Could deny us information from prototype testing that might be
useful in relation to estimating yields of Soviet high yield tests.
Option 2. Let prototype loan offer stand but do not press for Soviet
response.
—Would neither promote progress in the negotiations nor consti-
tute a setback.
—Would facilitate Soviets resisting progress on joint program
pending resolution of other issues such as UK NSS question.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Option 3. Let prototype loan offer stand and press Soviets for response.
—Would signal US interest in making progress on NSS issues.
—Would keep pressure on Soviets to move forward with NSS
technical issues.
—Would forego opportunity to use withdrawal of NSS loan offer
to reinforce post-Afghanistan technology transfer policy.
II. UK Funding Issue
Should the US offer to fund equipment for three UK NSS in the
Southern Hemisphere, in the context of the UK shifting its negotiating
position from one NSS to four?
A. Background
For well over a year, negotiation of NSS issues in Geneva has been
deadlocked over the question of the number of UK NSS sites.9 The So-
viets have taken the position that the UK should have ten NSS (one in
the UK proper and nine in dependent territories around the world) if
the US and USSR are to have ten. The UK has offered one NSS in Scot-
land and has strenuously resisted moving to a larger number, citing
technical and budgetary considerations. We have supported the UK on
this in Geneva, particularly in the last round, although advising them
privately that we thought they would eventually have to move to a
larger number in order to resolve the impasse.
During Prime Minister Thatcher’s December 1979 visit to Wash-
ington,10 the President suggested that the UK consider offering three
additional NSS sites, for a total of four, and it was agreed between For-
eign Secretary Carrington and Secretary Vance11 that the UK would
consider the possibility of three additional locations for installing NSS
while the US would look into the possibility of funding the equipment
for those stations. During discussions on January 10 with a US team vi-
siting London,12 UK spokesmen presented a staff-level technical review
of NSS siting issues, but said the UK did not intend to initiate a policy-
level review of this matter until they have received a specific US
funding proposal.
What is needed, therefore, is a decision on the next step with re-
gard to making a specific funding proposal to the UK; if the UK then
decided to shift from one NSS to four, we could consider with them
questions of timing and tactics for presenting the new UK position to
the Soviets in Geneva. A new UK NSS position need not be presented to
the Soviets early in the February round, and perhaps not until we have
heard from the Soviets again on this issue.
10 See Document 242.
11 Ibid.
12 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
B. Discussion
Although we are insisting on the use of US equipment at NSS in
the USSR, we do not yet know whether the Soviets will ask that their
equipment be used at sites in the US and UK. Thus, to relieve the UK of
the financial burden of acquiring equipment for three additional NSS
sites, a US funding offer must apply regardless of whether the UK ulti-
mately uses US or Soviet equipment. The cost of US equipment and re-
lated assistance to the UK for three NSS is estimated at $6–8 million;
there is no reason why the cost should be higher for Soviet equipment.
What would be involved at present is a commitment in principle to
seek this funding at an appropriate time in the future; no specific bud-
getary actions need be undertaken at present.
Following are factors bearing on this issue:
—US offer to fund equipment for three additional UK NSS could
lead to UK to shift to four-site NSS position.
—UK will be concerned that any movement beyond one station
could result in pressures in the future for them accept a number larger
than four.
—We should assure the UK that if they shift to four stations we
will stand firmly with them in trying to resolve the UK NSS issue on
this basis.
—Nevertheless, the UK probably will seek assurances that our
offer to fund equipment would apply for additional NSS if they eventu-
ally moved beyond four stations.
—We would make clear to the UK that the Executive Branch can
only make a commitment to request funds for UK NSS from the
Congress at an appropriate time. The UK would have to take into ac-
count the possibility that the Congress might not approve these funds.
—There are differing views regarding the relationship of US assist-
ance to the UK and overall US–USSR funding arrangements:
—Some are concerned that an offer of US funding of equip-
ment for UK stations would complicate working out funding ar-
rangements with the USSR in the future, and they argue that the
basic ground rules for financing NSS in all three countries should
be negotiated before the US makes any commitments to the UK.
—Others feel that these overall arrangements cannot be nego-
tiated until the Soviets agree to use US equipment, and that we will
never reach that stage of the negotiating process until the impasse
over UK NSS is broken.
—Contribution of three additional UK NSS to monitoring UK
compliance with CTBT would be marginal.
—Three additional UK NSS in Southern Hemisphere could make
some limited contribution to NPT monitoring (as discussed in attached
CIA paper):13
—These NSS probably would not improve detection capabil-
ities, due to high noise environment of island locations.
13 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—They could be helpful, however, in identifying as earth-
quakes or explosions nearby seismic events detected by other
seismic stations.
—In terms of NPT and LTBT monitoring, the US and UK could
both benefit by installing (on a bilateral basis) other sensors at nearby
sites to help monitor atmospheric and underground explosions in the
Southern Hemisphere.
—Co-locating these sensors with NSS sites would permit use of
UK diplomatic leverage in areas where direct US access may be limited.
Could also take advantage of presence of UK personnel and secure
communications facilities.
—Additional costs would be involved, and detailed analysis of the
costs and benefits of such additional sensors could be investigated—
taking into account planned AEDS improvements and other alterna-
tives—after specific locations are identified by the UK.
III. UK Prototype Issue
Finally, there is the issue of whether we should offer to lend
the UK an NSS unit for joint testing at a UK site in the Southern
Hemisphere.
This would involve the loan of an NSS unit to the UK on the same
basis as the offer already made to the USSR. Offering an NSS to the UK
for joint testing would not be appropriate unless we are continuing
with our overall NSS approach in relation to the USSR. If this is the
case, some factors bearing on the decision are as follows. Setting up a
prototype test facility in the Southern Hemisphere:
—would broaden UK participation and reinforce the US prototype
test proposal made to the USSR;
—could make some limited contribution to NPT monitoring, de-
pending on location;
—could enable us, in NPT Review Conference, to point to coopera-
tive efforts at UK site as evidence of ongoing activities;
—would offer opportunity to further demonstrate utility of satel-
lite communication for NSS data transmission from remote sites;
—could involve trade-offs between providing USSR or UK an NSS
unit, due to limited number of NSS units available prior to March 1981.
Considerations will also vary somewhat depending on our deci-
sion regarding funding equipment for three additional UK NSS.
—If we decide not to fund equipment for three additional UK NSS
sites, offering the prototype could still keep a little pressure on UK to
move off its one-station position in the future.
—If we decide to defer the UK equipment funding decision, but
offer to lend the UK a prototype unit, this would give them an opportu-
nity to signal some flexibility if they wanted to do so.
—If we decide to fund the equipment, and this leads the UK to shift
to a four-station position, they might be interested in the prototype loan
as a way to gain wider participation in the NSS program at an earlier
date.

Comprehensive Test Ban
The UK, however, may see in the offer of a prototype NSS unit an
opportunity to defer changing its NSS position, since by accepting the
prototype and thus signalling the possibility of a future change of posi-
tion, they could hope to ease the pressures somewhat.
246.
Editorial Note
The issues of funding of National Seismic Stations (NSS) for the
United Kingdom and the potential transfer of NSS equipment to the
USSR continued during the spring of 1980. The Special Coordination
Committee (SCC) scheduled a meeting for March 12, 1980, to discuss
these issues.
Regarding the funding issue, an agenda for the SCC meeting pre-
pared by the National Security Council (NSC) identified three options:
The United States could (1) “inform the UK that we are willing to make
a commitment to seek appropriate funding from Congress if they are
willing to locate three NSS in their dependent territories in the
Southern Hemisphere;” (2) “Defer decision and inform UK that this
possibility remains under serious review;” (3) “Inform UK that we have
decided not to fund NSS equipment for UK stations.” Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance endorsed Option 1. No record of Vance’s recommenda-
tion has been found.
As for the technology transfer, an ad hoc group of the NSS SCC
Working Group had begun to review “prototype equipment in order to
identify elements of that equipment that could raise technology
transfer questions. The group will then assess options for replacing
those elements with others involving less advanced technology, taking
into account any degradation of NSS performance, delays in the NSS
program schedule, and implications for the CTB negotiating process.”
Once this assessment had been completed, the SCC would decide
“whether we should reconsider our willingness to transfer US NSS
technology to the Soviet Union to gain information for CTB moni-
toring, and in particular, whether we should withdraw our offer to loan
them an NSS prototype for joint testing and operation.” (Agenda: SCC
Meeting on BW and CTB, March 12; Carter Library, National Security
On March 13, NSC staff members John Marcum, Ben Huberman,
and Jasper Welch informed the President’s Assistant for National Secu-
rity Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, that “we think funding of the UK
equipment would be an acceptable outcome once we are prepared to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
move the talks ahead. It would help us achieve our NSS verification ob-
jectives and the Southern Hemisphere sites, although not contributing
to CTB monitoring per se, would augment our NPT monitoring capa-
bility. Nevertheless, moving ahead with Cy’s proposal now might be
viewed on the Hill as inconsistent with our general post-Afghanistan
policy and belt-tightening on government expenditures.” Marcum, Ha-
berman, and Welch recommended that the United States “defer Cy’s
proposal at present.” They also contended that given “Thatcher’s per-
sonal opposition to CTB and our shared post-Afghanistan concerns,
they would probably be amazed if we tried to close the deal at this
time.” (Memorandum from Marcum, Huberman, and Welch, March
A March 13, 1980, memorandum from the Nuclear Test Moni-
toring Working Group to Stansfield Turner, the Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, restated the issues that would be discussed at the
SCC meeting, which had been rescheduled for March 14. An unknown
hand, however, twice changed the date for the SCC meeting, first to
March 26, and then to April 1. No summary of conclusions or minutes
of the SCC meeting, which likely occurred on April 3, has been found.
247.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
5176. USCTB. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Assessment of Round
Ten. Ref: Interim Assessment, CTB 548.2
CTB message no. 575
(S—Entire text)
Summary. Although tempo increased somewhat in recent weeks,
negotiations this round proceeded at a very slow pace and little
progress was made on substantive matters. The ad hoc working group
provided the principal negotiating forum, reaching agreement re-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.
round of the CTB negotiations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Comprehensive Test Ban
garding the three technical characteristics of borehole seismic equip-
ment deferred from last round.3 OSI working group also met fre-
quently. The outlook for the next round is for further lack of progress,
unless the general political climate improves so as to allow a concerted
effort to reinvigorate negotiations. End summary.
1980 round of CTB negotiations.
tions moved forward somewhat. Nonetheless, negotiations during the
round as a whole proceeded at a very slow pace and little progress was
made on substantive matters.
3. Ad hoc working group: The major negotiating activity was con-
ducted in the reconstituted ad hoc working group on NSS technical
characteristics, which met between March 19 and March 26. The U.S.
and UK Dels had repeatedly urged that the Delegations address the
three technical characteristics deferred in the group’s report to the
heads of Del last round (CTB 499).4 During this round, the group essen-
tially completed consideration of all the technical characteristics pro-
posed by U.S. Del concerning the seismic component of NSS borehole
equipment. U.S. Del has also urged that reports of this group be
promptly converted into composite ad referendum text of Article I of
the technical annex to the separate verification agreement, and that the
Dels begin negotiation of other outstanding NSS technical matters. Del
notes that the group became somewhat less “ad hoc” in nature this
round. This round, participants of all three Dels were led by spokes-
men who have been on Dels for some time, instead of by special experts
brought in from capitals. This trend is in U.S. interests. Soviet Del has,
however, been unwilling to go so far as to call this group the NSS
working group, in line with its policy that it will not institute NSS
working group discussions until UK NSS issue is resolved.
4. OSI working group: The OSI working group continued to meet,
addressing two topics. Bulk of time was devoted to consideration of
text regarding technical characteristics of basic equipment to be used
on an OSI. At Soviet suggestion, group also took up questions of local
orientation of designated personnel within inspection area, particularly
those concerning scale and stereoscopic nature of aerial photographs;
these topics will be addressed further next round. Soviets continue to
profess to want progress in OSI area, but have not put forward new ne-
3 Equipment that drills hole into the earth where seismometers are installed to
measure seismic activity.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gotiating positions. No substantive progress was recorded in the OSI
working group this round.
5. Report to CD: U.S. and UK Dels prepared draft of trilateral re-
port to be delivered sometime during next round to committee on dis-
armament. Report, with certain additions, was cleared by U.S. and UK
guidance from Washington,7 we informed Soviet Del that a draft would
be provided to them via diplomatic channels during the recess. It is ex-
pected that the process of obtaining trilateral agreement on this report
will be a major activity in the next round.
6. Other CD activities: Throughout round Del consulted with U.S.
CD Del in order to monitor CTB-related activities in CD. Proposals for
CTB working group in CD and for other potentially harmful CTB-
related activities have thus far been quashed. The CTB Del strongly
supports U.S. CD Del’s efforts in this regard.
7. Negotiating issues: Question of numbers and locations of UK
NSS was discussed infrequently, although Soviets insist it remains
largest immediate hurdle in negotiations. At final plenary, Soviets re-
peated that solutions to other NSS technical matters would depend on
progress on the UK NSS question and that the U.S. and UK desire to
achieve a treaty would be judged by movement on this issue. No Del
UK draft text of a trilateral report on the CTB negotiations to be delivered to the Com-
mittee on Disarmament in June. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
vised US/UK draft of the trilateral CTB report after the UK government suggested
7 Not found.
Earle and Helman had met with Petrosyants on March 13 to discuss the UK NSS issue.
after Edmonds “called for work on NSS technical matters,” Petrosyants said “the U.S.
and UK Dels should reciprocate for past Soviet flexibility and abandon their unrealistic
position on UK NSS. This would create the conditions necessary for progress on a broad
text of two USSR plenary statements by Petrosyants. The first, made at the opening of the
plenary, said that “the Soviet Delegation is prepared to continue in a constructive manner
to seek possibilities for moving ahead along all the basic lines of the negotiations.” In the
second, delivered after the U.S. statement, Petrosyants said “we expected much more
from the U.S. and UK Delegations regarding the substance of the specific questions facing
us,” in particular the issue of UK NSS. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800024–0168)

Comprehensive Test Ban
erative development program12 was carefully avoided by both sides in
formal statements and informal discussion by Heads of Del, although it
was raised several times informally by one member of Soviet Del. (Evi-
dently, Moscow instructions to Soviet Del to avoid raising this topic are
as firm and as explicit as ours. Del believes we cannot expect Soviets to
address this issue until we explicitly raise the subject again.) We stated
that all our proposals remain on the table and that the Delegations
8. Soviet positions and attitudes: Soviets were cautious and low-
key throughout the round. They negotiated in a businesslike fashion,
but did not put forward any new positions. They appeared to expect
the U.S. and UK Dels to follow a similar course. They apparently be-
lieve that the negotiations will proceed at about the present pace until
the overall political situation is altered. Soviets observe that negotia-
tions are blocked in political and NSS working groups, and have in-
creasingly urged progress in OSI working group, but have shown no
sign of flexibility.
9. UK positions and attitudes: The UK Del gave no indication of
any change in its position regarding UK NSS. They conveyed strong
disappointment over inability to deliver draft of CD report to Soviet
Del this round.
closing plenary, the “heads of Del formally accepted second report of ad hoc working
group on NSS technical characteristics, calling it a useful contribution.” Nevertheless, “all
three Dels expressed dissatisfaction with lack of progress this round, with U.S. and UK
Dels criticizing Soviet position regarding technical characteristics of OSI basic equip-
ment. Soviets described NSS question as all-important to conduct of negotiations, stating
that U.S. and UK movement on this issue would demonstrate our desire to achieve a
all three Delegations “made brief statements concerning the need for progress in our ne-
expansion of the report” concerning the December 15, 1979, US proposal for an NSS joint
cooperative program. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800073–
0784)
Petrosyants “said that further progress on NSS questions would be impossible until the
U.S. and UK move ahead on the question of NSS numbers and locations.” (National Ar-
heads of all three Delegations “welcomed the reconvening of the ad hoc working group
to deal with the three technical characteristics of the NSS downhole seismic equipment
that had been deferred in report completed last round.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D800138–0985)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
10. Prospects: We believe the Soviets are not likely to initiate any
significant new proposals on the major outstanding negotiating issues,
especially those concerning verification, until they judge the overall po-
litical climate has improved and the chances are good that the U.S. and
UK would reciprocate.
York
248.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 11, 1980
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on CTB (U)
The SCC met on April 3 to review the UK national seismic stations
(NSS) issue in the CTB negotiations.2 As a follow-up to his discussions
with Lord Carrington during the Thatcher visit in December,3 Cy wants
authorization to commit us to provide, at no cost to the UK, equipment
for three additional NSS stations in exchange for the British finding
suitable sites in the Southern Hemisphere and agreeing to offer four
sites, vice one, on UK territory.4 You will recall that the Soviets have
said they refuse to pursue further negotiations on NSS until the UK
falls off its position. OSD and ACDA strongly supported this approach,
but JCS and DOE opposed the proposal. (S)
DOE’s concern was that although the total cost of the added UK
stations (about $8 million) is small, it would be difficult to defend on
the Hill since they would contribute little to CTB monitoring. However,
as Frank Press pointed out, these Southern Hemisphere stations would
augment our NPT monitoring capability for events such as the Sep-
2 No record of this meeting has been found.
3 See Document 242.
agreed that “USG would consider problem of financing additional UK NSS while UK
would consider additional locations, FCO was beginning to look again at various sites.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) No other record
of this meeting has been found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
tember 22 possible nuclear explosion in the South Atlantic,5 particu-
larly if other nonseismic detection equipment could also be installed at
these sites. (S)
Dave Jones expressed more fundamental concerns. He stated that
CTB is the most difficult arms control issue for the Chiefs, since they do
not believe it is in our national security interest. As a result of recent
verification concerns, such as possible Soviet testing above 150 KT
and the suspect biological weapons incident at Sverdlovsk,6 he recom-
mended a comprehensive review of CTB and other arms control issues
before proceeding further. (S)
A comprehensive arms control review is clearly not a good idea in
this election year. The UK NSS issue has stalemated the CTB negotia-
tions for nearly a year and we need to show at least some progress be-
fore the NPT Review Conference. I believe Cy’s approach is the best bet
for getting the British to agree to the four NSS that you have twice
urged Thatcher to accept. This is unlikely to over-accelerate the negoti-
ations but would enable us, if appropriate, to move to a more defen-
sible position when the negotiations resume in mid-June. (S)
OMB noted correctly that the British were hiding behind the finan-
cial issue and warned that even this small expenditure could be viewed
on the Hill as inconsistent with your budgetary constraints. To mini-
mize these political disadvantages, I suggested that we explore funding
offsets in other areas where we help the British, such as testing their
warheads and providing fuel for their nuclear submarines. Chris
thought this might be possible but wanted to close the deal with the UK
on going to four NSS before engaging them in an offset discussion. (S)
On balance, I believe we should tell the British that we will need a
pro forma UK payment for the three NSS, but that we will offset these
costs in future US billings to the UK on other projects by the amount of
the NSS cost. This approach will avoid a line item in the DOE budget,
but will meet Cy’s desire to give the three additional sets of NSS equip-
ment to the UK cost-free. If you agree, I will explore this possibility
with UK Deputy Cabinet Secretary Robert Wade-Gery. If a satisfactory
agreement is reached on this offset approach, we can then coordinate a
message for Cy to send to Carrington. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you authorize us to proceed on this basis. (U)
APPROVE
OTHER
122.
7 Carter checked the “other” option and wrote “I see no justification for a monetary
grant of $8 million to U.K. However, I think they should accept the 4 stations. J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
249.
Report Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology1
Washington, April 25, 1980
[Omitted here is Section I: an introductory paragraph about the
Augmented Nuclear Test Program.]
II. General Impact and Scope of ATP
The Panel agrees that the ATP as proposed would make an impor-
tant contribution to increased confidence in the reliability of the U.S.
nuclear weapon stockpile under a CTB. The ATP cannot, however,
eliminate all concerns about stockpile reliability especially under a pro-
tracted CTB. The most important contribution of the program with re-
spect to improving CTB readiness is to make available redundant war-
heads for the important strategic systems.
Also of importance is the renewed effort to better understand
weapon design questions. Such effort will provide the laboratories with
a better data base with which to analyze and deal with future weapon
problems. Even in the absence of a CTB, the ATP, particularly its in-
creased support for weapons physics would be of value. The nuclear
weapons program has suffered in the immediate past because of dwin-
dling budgets and accelerated Phase III testing to meet current needs
and a potential CTB deadline.
Of concern is the decrease in the number of experienced, innova-
tive designers. The Panel is worried that the scope of the proposed pro-
gram is so ambitious that it might overwhelm the laboratories. In par-
ticular, acceleration of testing as proposed in the ATP would require a
sharp increase at the outset in the number of specialists in the program.
It would surely require inducing some experienced personnel who
have left the program in the recent past to return to it.
We note that the proposed ATP covers a five-year span, although
only the first two years are explicitly discussed. That part of the pro-
gram that contributes to the availability of tested warheads for U.S.
strategic systems is planned to be finished by the end of fiscal year
1980. Thus, a CTB could be undertaken after 1980 without impacting on
the availability of tested warheads for U.S. strategic systems. While the
remaining portion of the program seems clearly very useful, it is harder
to quantify its direct contribution to stockpile reliability and longevity
or to other factors that bear on readiness for a CTB. The weapon physics
tests could continue profitably for a very long time, indeed. However,
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. The report was attached to a May 16 covering memorandum from
Brzezinski to Brown and Duncan.

Comprehensive Test Ban
since each such test provides some additional understanding of design
physics even partial completion of the program will be useful.
[Omitted here are the specifics of the Augmented Nuclear Test
Program.]
250.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
119590. Exdis, USNATO for PM Director Bartholomew. Subject:
CTB: Approach to UK on NSS Numbers.
1. Secret—Entire text
2. As prelude to visit of Lord Carrington, PM Director Bartho-
lomew called in British DCM Fretwell May 2 to inform the UK officially
of the President’s decision on UK NSS issue.
—Fretwell was accompanied by UK Embassy POL/MIL Coun-
selor Weston. Bartholomew delivered points in paragraph 3.
3. Begin text:
A. The President believes that as we move together to meet the
challenge posed by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,2 we should con-
tinue to pursue Western security interests through balanced and verifi-
able arms control agreements, including CTB.
—It is clear that the trilateral CTB negotiations have been bogged
down for well over a year.
—We have received some indications that the Soviets might make
the case to other States, in connection with the upcoming NPT review
conference, that the US and UK are responsible for the continuing stale-
mate in the talks.
—While we do not accept the Soviet contention, we must naturally
try to ensure that the two Western partners are seen in the most advan-
tageous possible light at the review conference in order to protect our
mutual non-proliferation objectives.
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Moscow, the Mission in Ge-
neva, and USNATO. Drafted by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Robert Einhorn
(ACDA), John Marcum (NSC), Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), and Jane Becker (S/S–O); and
approved by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B. You will recall that both in Washington in December3 and earlier
in Tokyo,4 the President asked the Prime Minister—as a means of doing
our part on the Western side to facilitate progress in CTB—to consider
accepting four NSS in the UK and its dependent territories.
—We have looked at various ways together as to how this might
be done. One possibility, for example, was reflected in the idea which
Secretary Vance and Lord Carrington discussed on a contingency basis
in December5 that if you would look into the possibility of locating
three stations in Southern Hemisphere territories, we would examine
whether it might be possible to fund the equipment for those three
stations.
—The President has concluded after examining this idea that it
would not be appropriate for US to finance those stations. We remain
prepared, however, to explore other possibilities of mutual cooperation
with you.
C. We continue to believe that our key objective should be to nail
down Soviet acceptance of 10 NSS on their territory. And we should
avoid giving the Soviets any basis for charging that we are obstructing
the CTB.
—The President therefore hopes you will be able to accept three
stations in the Southern Hemisphere. In our view, such stations would
serve our mutual interests in both CTB and non-proliferation moni-
toring, and give us a much firmer basis for continuing to oppose the un-
justified Soviet demand that the UK accept ten NSS.
—On this basis, and after consulting with you on tactics and
timing, we would make it clear to the Soviets that the Western side had
now done all it can to resolve this question, and we therefore fully ex-
pect them to accept the new position. While it’s highly unlikely that the
Soviets would promptly accept the offer, it would put US in a good po-
sition to demand that the Soviets drop their linkages and negotiate seri-
ously on the many difficult and time-consuming verification and other
issues which would still remain unresolved.
—If the UK agrees in principle to accept four NSS, we would con-
sult closely with you on how and when to play this in Geneva in order
to put the strongest possible pressure on the Soviets. Needless to say,
we would stand solidly with you in advancing such a position to the
Soviets.
D. Let me stress, finally, that we value the close and cooperative
US/UK relationship on CTB policy. We naturally want to continue this,
and look forward to working closely with you in coming months on all
CTB-related issues, including the question of how to handle CTB both
in the CD and at the NPT review conference in August. End text.
3 See Document 242.
5 No record of this meeting has been found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
4. Fretwell responded by noting that UK experts felt there would
be little monitoring value in locating seismic stations in the Southern
Hemisphere. Bartholomew replied that our own experts did see at least
some such value in Southern Hemisphere sites, especially if other types
of sensors were also located there, and noted that this would be of ben-
efit to our mutual non-proliferation interests as well as to CTB.
5. Fretwell then asked how we view near-term prospects in CTB.
Bartholomew replied that we’re realistic in this regard, but we none-
theless face international pressures on CTB and at least need to be polit-
ically positioned to deal with such pressures. We believe NSS question
is of particular importance due to the long lead time required to nego-
tiate verification issues in way that meets western interests. Thus, we
believe it’s worth looking now at the question of UK NSS numbers.
Fretwell commented that UK did have this in mind, but were hoping
that US would pay for additional stations.
6. Weston asked US view of other pending CTB issues and said “it
would help in London” on NSS issue if US were to show movement on
its December NSS prototype proposal6 and on preamble language. Bar-
tholomew replied that our emphasis now is on verification because this
will be by far the most time-consuming area to negotiate, and added
that we do not consider other questions to be of the political or substan-
tive magnitude of the NSS issue.
7. Pursuing this, Fretwell asked how US would react “if UK
thought it would make sense” to link question of a move on NSS with
US movement on other issues. Bartholomew replied that it might not
be tactically wise for the Western parties to move on several issues at
once, and that we should therefore place emphasis on verification
areas, as these have the greatest impact on Western interests. He
pointed out that the technology transfer issue is already under active
review in the USG, and that the preamble question is also likely to be
reviewed.
8. Weston asked at the end of the meeting whether US would be
prepared to have a bilateral before beginning of next round. Bartho-
lomew replied that we would be happy to do so if UK wished.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
251.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
140484. Subject: CTB—UK Response to US Approach on NSS
Numbers. Reference: State 119590.2
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. In response to May 2 approach by PM Director Bartholomew on
UK NSS numbers, UK Embassy provided following “speaking notes”
to Department on May 23.
3. Begin text.
Ministers have noted the President’s decision that it would not be
appropriate for the US to fund equipment for additional UK NSS and
have given careful consideration to his hope that we would nonetheless
be able to agree to three stations in the Southern Hemisphere.
We agree that we should continue to pursue a CTB: That the joint
UK/US negotiating position should be as defensible as possible: and
that a key objective should be to clinch Soviet acceptance of 10 NSS on
their territory. However we are mindful of the President’s earlier deci-
sion that the CTB negotiations should continue ‘at a slow pace’,3 re-
flecting the view, with which we agree, that there is now no prospect of
bringing the CTB to fruition this year. This leads us to a different con-
clusion about the desirability of our agreeing to accept three additional
NSS at this juncture:
(A) Our overall conclusion in the technical study we handed to the
US team in London on 10 January4 was that the gains in verification ca-
pability of NSS in dependent territory sites in the Southern Hemisphere
would be marginal, whether for monitoring NWS or NNWS.
(B) In addition to the technical objections there are political, secu-
rity and logistical difficulties in finding suitable sites. The Falkland
Islands, which appears to be technically the best site, would present US
with a serious political problem with Argentina. There would be no site
in the Indian Ocean if Diego Garcia is ruled out on security grounds.
This would leave only Pitcairn in the Pacific and islands in the South
Eastern Atlantic.
cret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow. Drafted
by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Robert Einhorn (ACDA), John Marcum (NSC),
Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), and William Butcher (S/S–O); and approved by Palmer.
2 See Document 250.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
(C) It is increasingly widely recognized, especially by our allies,
that the stalemate in the negotiations derives principally from wider
difficulties in East/West relations, including particularly the postpone-
ment of SALT ratification.5 Pending a change in the current political at-
mosphere, real progress on key issues seems unlikely. We have ac-
cepted that some of the most difficult, requiring US decisions, may
have to wait until after the presidential election. An isolated concession
on UK NSS will not lead to progress on a broad front.
(D) We are not convinced that an increased UK offer would im-
prove our chances of inducing the Russians to drop their linkages and
negotiate seriously on other unresolved issues. Their refusal to do so is
already one of the most indefensible aspects of their position. Recog-
nizing, as we do, that the negotiations cannot be concluded this year,
they may well pocket any concession over NSS and press for a further
increase in 1981. However strongly the Americans supported us, there
would be no guarantee that a further concession would not be required
in order to achieve agreement.
In short we consider that any such difficult decision, involving our
departure from the only strongly defensible technical position, should
be contemplated only when it is likely to achieve a positive result in the
form of a complete treaty. Meanwhile our tactic should be to continue
to press the Russians to leave numbers of UK NSS aside.
We are however concerned to find suitable subjects to occupy the
negotiations. Without additional negotiating substance the coming
round will be even more strained than the last. At the same time, with
the approach of the NPT review conference, outside critical attention
will concentrate increasingly on the unresolved issues. The combina-
tion of these two factors might lead the Russians to assume that we
have totally lost interest in a CTB and tempt them into breaking ranks.
We believe therefore that we should concentrate on areas of work
which do not involve major controversial decisions on the part of the
US and the UK but which will maintain some forward momentum. In
our view, negotiation of the preamble would fill this role admirably.
This issue, as Mr. Bartholomew acknowledged, is not of the same polit-
ical or substantive magnitude as the question of NSS. Precisely for that
reason, we think it offers an attractive basis for keeping the negotia-
tions going. The Soviet Union table a draft on 26 July 19786 which they
5 On January 3, Carter requested that the Senate delay consideration of the SALT II

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
19788 which conformed to the well established pattern for arms control
and disarmament agreements. In view of the many precedents, we do
not regard discussion of the preamble as in any way prejudicial to
Western interests.
The approaching NPT review conference makes it highly desirable
that we should be closely in step. Quite apart from the points more par-
ticularly bearing upon strategy for the next negotiating round of CTB,
we think it would be useful if we could compare notes on the wider
context of how to approach the NPT review conference, in particular
Article VI of the treaty9 and how the CD should be involved. If you
thought it worthwhile, Patrick Moberly’s presence in Washington on
other business during the week beginning 9 June might provide an ap-
propriate opportunity, for example Thursday 12 June.
British Embassy, Washington, 23 May 1980.
End text.
Muskie
Foreign Policy File, D790268–0209)
8 Not found.

Comprehensive Test Ban
252.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on CTB
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Deputy Secretary Warren
Director Ralph Earle
Christopher
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Reginald Bartholomew, Director
Energy
Bureau of Politico-Military
Under Secretary Worth Bateman
Affairs
Julio Torres, Special Assistant
Defense
OSTP
Walter Slocombe, Deputy Under
Director Frank Press
Secretary for Policy Planning
John Marcum, Senior Policy
JCS
Analyst
General David Jones
White House
Lt. General John Pustay
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
[name not declassified] Deputy
NSC
Director for Scientific
General Jasper Welch
Weapons Research
Benjamin Huberman
At the SCC Meeting on CTB today, a consensus was reached on
four issues which do not involve significant changes in your current in-
structions but taken together will move us into a more defensible posi-
tion for the upcoming CD and NPT Review Conferences. They will also
enable us to seek some limited progress on verification consistent with
your post-Afghanistan decision that CTB should continue at a slow
The first issue involved a long-standing dispute with JCS over
whether the US should table a draft preamble text as have the UK and
Soviets referring to the objective of halting testing “for all time” as well
as other objectives from preambles of treaties to which we are party.
The Chiefs were concerned that this could be inconsistent with the
limited-duration treaty we are pursuing. We pointed out that our
Brzezinski forwarded the Summary to Carter under cover of a July 3 memorandum.
(Ibid.) The Department of Defense’s version of the meeting is in Memorandum For the
Record, July 3; Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
CTB: Negotiation Issues 1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
policy is protected fully by the operative duration and review confer-
ence provisions we are negotiating, and in the end, they agreed to ta-
bling a slightly modified text referring to this as a long-term goal.2 (S)
There was also agreement on three related national seismic station
(NSS) issues. Based on an interagency review of NSS technology trans-
fer,3 it was agreed that a high-capacity tape recorder and a bubble
memory should be replaced with less sensitive components. This will
reinforce our tightened post-Afghanistan export controls and will in-
volve only minimal impact on NSS availability and capability. Pending
completion of this review, we had deferred any followup to the pro-
posal we made last December to lend the Soviets an NSS prototype for
joint testing and evaluation.4 Since this issue is now resolved, there was
agreement that we should reaffirm this proposal as a means of keeping
the pressure on the Russians for some progress on verification.5 (S)
The final point concerned continued UK intransigence in refusing
your urging that they accept four NSSs (with three in the Southern
Hemisphere), vice the one in Scotland they have agreed to. In an effort
to make some progress on this issue, there was agreement that we
should broaden the prototype offer to include loan of an NSS to the UK
on the same basis as the USSR. As part of this offer, we should suggest
that the UK install the NSS prototype in the Southern Hemisphere,
thereby enabling them to show some flexibility in Geneva. We should
continue to maintain as our eventual objective that they should accept
four NSSs.6 (S)
2 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “ok.”
3 See Document 246.
5 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “ok.”
6 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “ok.”

Comprehensive Test Ban
253.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, September 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Soviet High-Yield Nuclear Test
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Director Ralph Earle
Under Secretary David Newsom
OSTP
George Vest, Assistant Secretary
John Marcum, Senior Adviser for
for European Affairs
Technology & Arms Control
Defense
White House
Deputy Secretary W. Graham
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Claytor, Jr.
David Aaron
David McGiffert, Assistant
NSC
Secretary, International
Marshall Brement
Security Affairs
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant
to the Chairman
Director Stansfield Turner
[name not declassified] Deputy
Director, Office of Scientific
Weapons Research
At the end of the PRC meeting on Afghanistan today, an SCC was
convened to discuss briefly the high-yield nuclear test which the So-
viets conducted on Saturday.2 [11½ lines not declassified]
Following a brief discussion, it was agreed that David Newsom
would raise the issue immediately in a meeting he had scheduled on
other business with Dobrynin this afternoon. After some revisions, a
State-proposed de´marche3 was approved which would note that the
test appeared to have [less than 1 line not declassified] reaffirm the impor-
tance of strict observance of [less than 1 line not declassified], and call for
place in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed the upper right-hand corner of
the memorandum.
2 September 13.
3 Under Secretary of State David Newsom handed Dobrynin the de´marche on Sep-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
technical consultations on the basis of the proposal we made last De-
cember following several earlier Soviet high-yield tests.4 (At that time,
they rejected the proposal arguing that we should first ratify the TTBT).
It was also agreed that the SCC would meet next week to review avail-
able evidence and consider next steps. [3 lines not declassified] We de-
ferred this contingency step last fall5 out of concern that it could be
overly provocative to the Soviets.6
4 See Document 243.
5 Not found.
6 In the left-hand margin, Carter wrote “clear with me first.”
254.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT:
Soviet High-Yield Nuclear Testing
PARTICIPANTS:
State
Energy
Deputy Secretary Warren
Duane Sewell, Assistant Secretary
Christopher
for Defense Programs
Jerome Kahan, Deputy Director
ACDA
Bureau of Politico Military
Director Ralph Earle
Affairs
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Defense
OSTP
Deputy Secretary W. Graham
John Marcum, Senior Adviser for
Claytor, Jr.
Technology & Arms Control
Deputy Under Secretary Walter
White House
Slocombe
David Aaron
JCS
NSC
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant
Marshall Brement
to the Chairman
Ray McCrory, Chief, Arms
Control Intelligence Staff
[name not declassified] Chief,
Nuclear & Test Monitoring
Branch
tion Room. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig. J.”

Comprehensive Test Ban
The SCC met today to continue its review of the September 14 So-
viet high-yield nuclear test.2 [12 lines not declassified] After some discus-
sion, there was agreement that to reduce these uncertainties we should
have another round of technical consultations with the British, and that
OSTP should reconvene its outside panel to review the yield assess-
ment problem. (S)
The SCC also reviewed a State draft of what Ed Muskie should say
on this issue in his meeting with Gromyko tomorrow.3 In view of the
uncertainties in our assessment and earlier Soviet rejection of our re-
quests for consultations,4 there was general agreement with David
Aaron’s suggestion that we should be assertive, but careful, and ensure
that the Soviets understand the implications of this issue for SALT.
Consequently, agreement was reached on a modified approach which
would reinforce our earlier de´marche, express your personal concern,
press for a positive response to our proposal for technical consulta-
tions, and note that failure to resolve the issue could constitute a severe
blow to our SALT ratification efforts. (S)
The question of whether DOE should be authorized to drill a deep
test hole was then discussed. State, Defense and ACDA opposed this
step in view of its arms control implications and our uncertainties. De-
fense noted we should first decide whether we actually needed to test
above 150 KT and which warhead should be tested. DOE favored the
drilling step and noted it should be authorized soon to provide the op-
tion for a test by late October. JCS also supported the step but urged
that a new hole be funded and drilled, to avoid delaying planned nu-
clear tests. A consensus was reached that the Working Group should
prepare a study of US requirements and costs for testing above 150 KT
which with the Soviet response and our continuing technical review
would provide a better basis for decision on the drilling issue.5 (S)
As a final point, David Aaron noted increasing concern over
DOE’s delay in modifying the NSS as you directed this Summer,6 and
their general unresponsiveness in managing the NSS development pro-
gram. DOE responded that the problem was partly money and partly
September 14 nuclear test. (Ibid.)
3 The undated proposed talking points for Muskie are ibid. Muskie and Gromyko
met for three hours on September 25; the subject of the Soviet test did not come up. (Tele-
gram Secto 8020 from the Secretary’s Delegation, September 26; National Archives, RG
5 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “Do not do anything re >150 KT test unless
I am convinced a) That we really need one and b) We’re ready to abandon Limited Test
Ban agreement. J.”
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
difficulty in locating modified components with adequate capabilities.
It was then agreed that ACDA with DOE and OMB would draft an ana-
lytical paper discussing the reasons for delay and providing options
for faster development including their costs and the possibility of ac-
cepting some loss in capacity. (S)
255.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, October 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Soviet High-Yield Nuclear Testing (U)
The President has reviewed the conclusions from the September 24
SCC Meeting on Soviet High-Yield Nuclear Testing2 and has directed
that the following tasks be undertaken:
—OSTP should reconstitute its outside panel of experts to review
the yield assessment problem. (C)
—There should be a second round of bilateral consultations with
the UK on this issue. (S)
—ACDA with DOE should prepare a study by October 20 of the
NSS development program, identifying reasons for delay and pro-
viding options for faster development, including their costs and the
possibility of accepting some loss in system capability. The paper
should be reviewed on an interagency basis by the Working Group, in-
cluding OMB, prior to SCC consideration. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski3
Press, Jones, and Turner.
2 See Document 254.
3 Aaron signed the memorandum on Brzezinski’s behalf.

Comprehensive Test Ban
256.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Director of the Office
of Science and Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, October 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Augmented Nuclear Test Program (U)
Earlier this year, you authorized us to develop an Augmented Nu-
clear Test Program (ATP)2 aimed at improving the basic research con-
tent of our test program and enhancing our readiness for CTB. The
initial submission by the weapons laboratories3 was insufficiently re-
sponsive to these objectives and we convened an OSTP panel to review
the draft ATP. The Panel produced a useful and interesting report (Tab
C)4 and most of its recommendations were incorporated in the final
ATP (Tab D),5 which is supported strongly by Harold Brown and
Charles Duncan (Tab E).6 (S)
The ATP consists of a detailed two year test plan under which our
year (the current Soviet rate is about 25–30 per year). Also, although not
requested, the ATP includes an out-year program for an additional
three year effort in which testing would be increased to about 25 per
year. Consistent with the OSTP Panel recommendations, the program:
(1) emphasizes R&D tests aimed at reducing weapons physics uncer-
tainties such as boosting which are important to stockpile reliability;
(2) includes so-called stockpile confidence tests of production-line war-
heads and alternate warheads for key weapons systems (these were not
done in the past); and (3) provides for more thorough documentation of
warhead design and components and other measures to improve our
ability to maintain the stockpile without testing. Brief summary chart
on the status of the warhead development effort and R&D objectives of
the ATP are included at Tab B.7 (S)
On the whole, we are well-satisfied with the final draft of the ATP
and believe that it merits your endorsement. We feel that your concern
that an increased test program not subvert effort toward a CTB has
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote
“C.”
2 Not found.
3 Not found.
4 Document 249.
5 Not attached.
6 Not attached.
7 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
been met by keying the ATP priorities to CTB readiness and by explic-
itly requiring the laboratories to be prepared to halt testing in the event
We have, in addition, been sensitive to your earlier concern with
the level of laboratory manpower in addressing the buildup of the
testing level. (S)
A buildup to about 20 tests in FY 1982 is appropriate since there
are a number of important stockpile confidence tests which can be car-
ried out without elaborate preparations. However, we do not need to
decide on whether to increase the level further to 25 until the specific
tests involved in shifting the program emphasis towards basic research
are identified and reviewed. Consequently, we recommend that the
testing rate be limited for now to about 20 per year. (S)
To accomplish this reduced goal, some increase in manpower is
necessary (but less than the buildup from the current 7400 to 8100 by
the end of FY 84, envisioned by the proposed ATP). Accordingly, with
OMB, we will stress efficiencies to minimize the infrastructure buildup
associated with the added testing. OMB concurs in this approach and
believes that an FY 81 supplemental of less than 50 million dollars is
enough to begin the effort (this could raise the FY 81 test level to as
an FY 82 increment of about 100 million dollars would be sufficient to
accomplish this goal. We will ask DOE/DOD to address subsequent
long-term testing needs following your review of the detailed FY 1981
test program, GUARDIAN, which will be forwarded to you shortly. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
We believe that the revised ATP would restore some needed re-
search to the test program, would enhance our readiness for CTB, and
would be responsive to Congressional concerns about the current
asymmetry in US and Soviet test rates. Consequently, we recommend
that you authorize Zbig to sign the directive at Tab A which would
year; (3) stress the priority of initiatives related to enhancing CTB read-
iness, with adjustments to systems priorities to reflect recent DOD deci-
funding needs for the ATP be determined in the context of the FY 82
DOE budget review. (S)
Approve
Disapprove
Other
Jim McIntyre concurs.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” at the bottom of the page.
Brzezinski signed the directive at Tab A, a November 12 memorandum to Brown and
Duncan.

Comprehensive Test Ban
257.
Editorial Note
The final negotiating session among the United States, the United
Kingdom, and the Soviet Union on a comprehensive test ban during
the administration of President Jimmy Carter lasted from October 6
to November 14, 1980. Department of State negotiators noted the
“progress” that had been made over the previous 42 months, but ac-
knowledged that issues such as the duration of a CTB treaty, the issue
of National Seismic Stations, and on-site inspections still needed to
be resolved. (Telegram 14496 from the Mission in Geneva, November
0447)
The Department of Defense’s Representative to the negotiations,
Dr. Warren Heckrotte, however, argued that the discussions had re-
sulted in “very little substantive negotiations,” and found “very little
reason why” the talks should continue as presently constituted. The So-
viets, he contended, had taken an increasingly “harsh” tone, not only in
the Geneva talks, which he believed reflected the fact that “a more con-
servative element” of military personnel had begun to outnumber dip-
lomats in the Soviet Delegation, but also in the Soviet press and other
official organs. Carter’s loss in the 1980 presidential election, the U.S.
Senate’s failure to ratify the Strategic Arms Limitations Talks II Treaty,
and Moscow’s inherent mistrust of an on-site inspection regime, he
warned, had contributed to the current atmosphere. (Telegram 319
from Heckrotte to Brown, McGiffert, and Slocombe, November 12; Li-
brary of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
CTB: Negotiation Issues 1979)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
258.
Editorial Note
In his memoirs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs, recalled that upon taking office,
he and his staff quickly set a number of foreign policy goals that the
Carter administration should pursue. One was the restriction of “the
level of global armaments, unilaterally and through international
agreements. We were determined to reduce by 15 percent, with the ex-
clusion of transfers to NATO, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, the
dollar value of transfers from the 1976 totals.” (Power and Principle,
p. 55) In his first National Security Council meeting, President Carter
“directed that all requests for arms sales come to him” for approval.
(Summary of Conclusions, January 22, 1977; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Meetings File, Box 1, NSC
In a January 23, 1977, interview, Carter said that while he did not
want to institute a “moratorium” on arms sales “because that is an
abrupt and total termination of all ownership,” he noted that his ad-
visers, “in I think unanimity,” supported “the necessity for reducing
arms sales or having very tight restraints on future commitments to
minimize the efforts by arms manufacturers to initiate sales early in the
process. The Secretary of State will be much more hesitant in the future
to recommend to the Defense Department the culmination of arms
sales agreements. I have asked that all approvals of arms sales, for a
change, be submitted to me directly before the recommendations go to
Congress. We also have asked Vice President [Walter] Mondale in his
early trip among our own allies and friends, some of whom are heavy
arms exporters, to join with us on a multilateral basis. We will also be
talking to some of the primary arms purchasers, particularly the
Middle East when Secretary Vance goes there very shortly, to hold
down their purchases of arms from us and other countries. This will
be a continuing effort on my part.” (Documents on Disarmament, 1977,
p. 20)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
259.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–121
Washington, January 26, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Arms Transfer Policy Review
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee,
under the chairmanship of the Department of State, review our policy
with regard to the international transfer of conventional arms.
The review should be completed by March 15, 1977, and should:
1. Examine the role of arms transfers in the conduct of U.S. foreign
policy, identifying the benefits and disadvantages of arms transfers as a
policy tool, and their dominant or subordinate position relative to U.S.
political, economic, and military interests. This examination should
include:
(a) the feasibility and desirability of various unilateral and multi-
lateral initiatives to restrict arms transfers on a national, regional, and
global basis;
(b) consideration of such factors as: the type of weapon, equip-
ment, or service being transferred; the role and activities abroad of
commercial arms suppliers; third country transfers; transfer of high
technology and sensitive items; co-production; employment of U.S. cit-
izens on defense contracts abroad; and international standards of
human rights; and
(c) the feasibility and desirability of restricting all U.S. arms trans-
fers to government-to-government transactions.
2. Identify and analyze basic policy options, on the basis of the
foregoing examination. Consider the impact of each option on the U.S.
Mathews Subject File, Box 3, Arms Sales: Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–12:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
economy, on defense readiness and procurement, and on U.S. relation-
ships with both recipient and supplier states.
3. Review the current organizational structure for departmental
and interagency consideration of arms transfer requests, and develop
options for mechanisms and procedures to provide systematic policy
guidance in the future.
4. Assess the current relationship between the executive and legis-
lative branches in this area, and propose guidelines and changes neces-
sary for an optimum relationship.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
260.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfers
You have directed a PRM on arms transfers due March 15.2 Even as
this is being done and without prejudice to the decisions you will make
at that time, the State Department will have to deal with immediate
problems. These include presentation on the FY–78 budget, the backlog
of pending decisions, and questions from Congress and press. This
memorandum describes:
—Steps we have initiated in the State Department to deal with
arms transfer issues that are currently on our agenda, and
—Planning in progress to bring greater coherence and increased
control to the world arms trade in the longer run.
BACKGROUND
The term arms transfers is a rubric for three forms of military ex-
ports: (1) those paid for by the US as grant aid under the Military As-
sistance Program (MAP); (2) those paid for by the recipient under the
Foreign Military Sales Program (FMS) using US Government credits or
2 See Document 259.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
loan guarantees and/or the US military logistics system; and (3) those
conducted as straight commercial sales. Each type of arms transfer re-
quires a different form of government involvement.
(1) MAP
The Military Assistance Program is included each year in the an-
nual budget as a foreign assistance item. The questions to whom and
how much are decided by a State-Defense-ACDA-OMB review process,
which is coordinated through the Security Assistance Program Review
Committee, chaired by the Under Secretary of State for Security Assist-
ance. Congress makes the final determination when the budget is
submitted.
(2) FMS
Foreign Military Sales are the largest portion of total US arms ex-
ports. FMS requiring US Government direct loans or credit guarantees
are included in the annual budget by country and dollar amount. FMS
cash sales, however, do not appear in the budget and Congress has no
formal opportunity to make its views known until it is notified of in-
dividual proposed sales. The attachment is a description of how the
decision-making process operates in a typical FMS case.
The International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control
Act of 1976 requires that the Executive Branch must give the Congress
thirty days prior notification of any FMS transaction in excess of $25
million and any FMS sale of major defense equipment in excess of $7
million. Within this thirty days Congress may vote to veto the transac-
tion. The thirty calendar day formula was reached on the basis of assur-
ances from the Executive Branch that the concerned committees would
receive twenty days’ informal prenotification of the formal notifica-
tion. In effect, therefore, Congress has fifty calendar days in which to
consider a pending Letter of Offer for a proposed significant FMS
transaction.
(3) Commercial Sales
All commercial sales of military services and equipment must be
licensed by the US Government. This function is performed by the Mu-
nitions Control Office of the State Department. Legislation requires that
licenses for commercial military deliveries be notified to Congress ac-
cording to the formula used for FMS cases.
Additional facts that help clarify discussions about the compli-
cated subject of arms transfers are:
—Most dollar figures cited for government-to-government (FMS)
sales represent orders taken in a given year, not deliveries. Some years,
total orders have topped $10 billion, but annual deliveries have never
reached $5 billion.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—On the average, about 40% of US Government orders or deliv-
eries are weapons systems. The balance is vehicles, transport aircraft,
construction, training and miscellaneous services.
STEPS NOW BEING TAKEN
1. The Pipeline. Over $32 billion in defense goods and services, or-
dered by foreign governments (mainly in the Middle East), are under
contract and scheduled for delivery over the next eight years. We are
putting together a list and timetable of what is to be delivered to whom.
We will assess the immediate impact and use this information in evalu-
ating future requests for sales.
2. Pending Sales. We are now reviewing 17 proposed Foreign Mili-
tary Sales (FMS) cases worth $2.3 billion which we inherited from the
last Administration. We are screening these very carefully and will
send to you separately a list of those items which we believe should be
considered by you prior to being sent forward for Congressional re-
view. At that time, we will also propose procedures for obtaining your
views on future cases. Among the most pressing issues are a number of
large proposed sales to the Persian Gulf area. Those requiring notifica-
tion to the Congress cannot be processed until we have satisfied the
SFRC’s resolution requiring an Executive Branch statement of Persian
Gulf policy.3
3. Fiscal 1978 Security Assistance Programs. Together with OMB and
DOD we have reviewed the past Administration’s proposed request to
Congress for FY 1978 funds for grant aid, FMS financing and military
training. These are for the most part reasonable and defensible, al-
though we would have formulated it somewhat differently. Given the
short time available, we have been able to make only limited changes,
and these have centered principally on our human rights concerns. To
show that we intend to follow a different policy on this issue, we have
proposed to OMB that the grant aid program in Ethiopia be eliminated,
that the FMS financing program in Uruguay be eliminated and that the
FMS financial program in Argentina be cut.
4. Congress. Members of my staff and I have begun an active cam-
paign to build confidence with members and key staff on the Hill. We
will institute a new procedure with respect to Congressional notifica-
tions of proposed arms transfers—namely, including a policy justifica-
tion with each new FMS case. Current practice on these notifications is
to report formally only the name of the buyer, the content and price of
tion “opposing further arms sales to Persian Gulf states pending completion of an overall
National Security Council study.” (“Arms Sales to Saudis Set Back,” Washington Post,

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
the proposed sale and the military department handling the contract.
Policy explanations are not among the items required by the law and
usually are given only selectively and informally.
5. Controlling Promotion of Arms Sales. We are planning to publish
shortly in the Federal Register a notice of a proposed regulation which
would require State Department approval before an arms manufac-
turer may undertake efforts to promote the sale of major military hard-
ware overseas. Such a regulation should inhibit efforts by private firms
to create appetites for arms in foreign governments.
PLANNING IN PROGRESS
In the context of the PRM which you have ordered we are exam-
ining ways of bringing tighter control over US arms exports and en-
couraging multilateral restraints on the arms trade. Here are some of
the ideas under consideration in both areas:
A. Control Over US Arms Exports
(1) We need to increase the flow of early information about pro-
posed sales to all interested agencies and to regularize the criteria for
evaluating all major FMS cases. We want to assure that arms control
and human rights considerations receive proper early attention on each
proposed transaction.
(2) We need to develop better control at the critical points leading
to formal arms transfer decisions. Too often decisions are “created” by
the activities of arms salesmen, the excesses of some zealous military
advisory personnel, and the appetites of foreign leaders, combined
with inertia on the part of the Executive in bringing policy consider-
ations to bear at an early stage.
(3) Sales of high technology, sensitive weapons, co-production
projects and equipment requiring large numbers of supporting Amer-
ican technicians should receive a more rigorous screening than has
been the case in the past.
(4) It is essential to develop good working relations with Congress
on these issues, over the longer term, to avoid arbitrary efforts at con-
trol, such as moratoria and dollar ceilings. Such approaches tend to ap-
pear punitive and could severely harm other US foreign policy interests
in some countries or regions.4
(5) We need to take action promptly to establish an interagency
mechanism to coordinate security assistance and arms export control
activities and to bring the expertise of all concerned agencies to bear on
the basic policy decisions.
4 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “We might meet w/
key Congress leaders before final decision.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B. Efforts to Encourage Multilateral Restraint
(1) Unilateral Restraints. We believe our objective must be to reduce
the international traffic in arms, not simply to reduce the US role in that
traffic. As we gain credibility through improved policy and procedural
control over our own arms exports, we can begin to elicit the coopera-
tion of other nations. This could be a long-term process, because arms
exports have great commercial and political importance to our friends.
(2) Informal Multilateral Restraint. When we disapprove a proposed
sale because we wish to avoid introducing a new capability or level of
technology into a particular region, we can let other suppliers know the
reason for our decision and encourage comparable restraint on their
part (e.g., intermediate range missiles in the Middle East). In addition,
we can use available international fora (CCD, NATO, UN, OAS, etc.) to
urge restraint by other suppliers and by recipients. We can also try to
identify particular regions where opportunities exist for mutual re-
straint among arms importing countries and seek to encourage such re-
straint through diplomatic efforts with those countries. NATO stand-
ardization and offsetting procurements by the US from our European
allies may be useful incentives in discouraging sales efforts in other
regions.
(3) A Conference of Arms Suppliers. With the benefit of experience
gained from the Nuclear Suppliers’ Conference,5 we may be able to ini-
tiate a similar dialogue among suppliers of conventional arms. Al-
though arms suppliers are a more diverse group with more widely di-
vergent interests, we should make an effort to see what can be achieved
by a suppliers’ conference. As first steps, we are identifying the sales
practices of various suppliers and considering what issues could use-
fully be discussed by those participants whose attendance would be re-
quired. We shall also have to take into account the predictable resist-
ance from recipients and consider means of involving them in the
process.
(4) A Dialogue with the USSR. Requests by foreign countries for
sales from the US are often a response to military supply relations be-
tween the requesting country’s neighbor and the Soviet Union. The So-
viets have experienced difficulties in their arms sales activities which
are similar to some of our own problems and it would seem that bilat-
eral discussions could produce worthwhile results on a number of
issues (e.g., sales to African countries which might fuel an arms race or
5 The Nuclear Supplier Group, founded in 1974 after India’s successful nuclear test,
included the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, France, and Japan. It met several times from 1974–1977 to set
guidelines for the export of nuclear material to states which did not possess nuclear
weapons.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
produce instability not desired by either side). Yet, we have not previ-
ously engaged the Soviets in a dialogue on this subject. We are begin-
ning to plan how bilateral talks could be proposed, the subjects we
would like to discuss, and how a US/USSR dialogue could relate to an
arms suppliers’ conference. Moving towards discussions with the So-
viets will, of course, require careful preparation not only in Wash-
ington, but in the capitals of our friends.6
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
CASE STUDY OF A FOREIGN MILITARY SALE7
This paper describes the procedures involved in a hypothetical for-
eign military sales (FMS) case from its inception to its being reported to
Congress. There is no typical FMS case; actual cases arise in a variety of
ways. For purposes of illustration, therefore, we will follow a hypothet-
ical sale to Iran of the Maverick missile under FMS cash procedures.
Iran possesses a Maverick capable aircraft and is interested in
Maverick. This interest is derived from its perceptions of the threat. In-
terest, however, is stimulated by a representative of a commercial firm
and a description of the system in one of the aerospace publications.
Initial discussions are carried out with the MAAG and a DOD survey
group is sent with State concurrence to review the threat and to deter-
mine the feasibility of introducing the new system in the country.
During this period the defense manufacturer will seek to maintain in-
terest in the system.
The request for Maverick planning data is received in Washington
simultaneously by Defense and State. The US Air Force takes the
survey team results, reviews the military justification, and determines
whether the sale will impact on US military requirements. Air Force
will then consult with the US supplier to determine when the items can
6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Explore in Cy’s visit
to Moscow. Earlier w/Dobrynin.” In an earlier interview, Vance said that “I do believe
that the area of disarmament or arms reduction in the conventional arms area is of critical
importance. It is the area where the largest amount of money is spent, and is a very se-
rious and substantial problem. I would expect the discussion of reduction of conven-
tional arms to be on the agenda of items that we might discuss when I go to Moscow at
that I’m consulted early in this process.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
be scheduled for production and the cost. It will also review related
costs of training and support of the system.
In State, the Maverick request is reviewed by the Politico-Military
Affairs and the Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Bureaus (PM and
NEA) to determine whether sale is consistent with our foreign policy,
particularly in the country and region. PM will also obtain the views of
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) regarding the
arms control implications of the sale. If existing guidance is inadequate,
policy level approval is sought. If there are no policy objections, Iran
would receive the information requested.
Assuming Iran is satisfied with the information received, the next
step is to request a Letter of Offer, which is a contract outlining the pre-
cise terms and conditions of sale including prices and delivery times. It
normally takes Defense 60–90 days to prepare an LOA. As soon as rea-
sonable estimates are available, Defense requests State approval to
issue an advance notification to Congress. This request is reviewed in
State by PM, NEA, ACDA and the Congressional Relations Bureau as
well as by the NSC staff. If approved, Defense sends a classified letter to
the staff of the House International Relations Committee and Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, which has 20 days to review the case.
The purpose of this step is to give Congress sufficient time to review
major transactions.
If there are no objections to the proposed Maverick sale, State will
authorize Defense to proceed with the formal 30 day notification pur-
suant to Section 36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act and to give an
unsigned copy of the LOA to Iran. The LOA cannot be issued by the
USG if Congress within 30 days adopts a concurrent resolution stating
that it objects to the proposed sale, unless the President states in his cer-
tification that an emergency exists which requires such a sale in the na-
tional security interests of the US. Congress has never adopted such a
resolution. An objection to the Maverick sale would most likely be the
subject of negotiations between the Executive and Legislative branches
and a compromise reached (as in the case of the actual sale of Mav-
ericks to Saudi Arabia).
After the 30 day review period, the LOA is signed by repre-
sentatives of Iran and the USG. The case is implemented by the Air
Force.
The foregoing process is described in schematic form in the at-
tached chart.8
8 Attached but not printed.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
261.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State Designate
(Christopher) to President Carter1
Washington, February 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Regulation to Control Arms Sales Promotion by U.S. Firms
This memorandum describes a regulation under consideration
within the Department of State to require U.S. firms promoting interna-
tional arms sales to obtain our approval before making significant sales
proposals. Your approval is requested for the publication of a notice in-
viting public comment on the proposed regulation.
Present Controls
U.S. arms transfers take place through two main channels—
government-to-government sales and direct commercial sales by
United States firms. Government-to-government foreign military sales
(FMS) are made in response to requests received from a foreign gov-
ernment. The FMS program is administered by the Department of De-
fense under the direction and supervision of the Department of State. A
license from the Department of State is required for the export of mili-
tary equipment or technology which is sold commercially.
U.S. firms engaged in the manufacture and sale of military equip-
ment are involved in widespread marketing efforts to sell their prod-
ucts abroad. These marketing efforts are subject to U.S. Government
control only to the extent they include the export of demonstration
models or of military technology for which an export license is re-
quired. Companies frequently consult with the Departments of State
and Defense to ensure against conflict with United States policy and to
avoid the expense of promoting sales which will ultimately be disap-
proved. However, we have no assured involvement in an arms sale
until the foreign government makes a request under the government-
to-government FMS program or we receive a license application for the
export of items for which a commercial sales contract has been signed.
At that point, where the foreign purchaser has already been persuaded
that it needs the items in question, it is often more difficult to achieve
restraint. Refusal to sell under FMS or denial of an export license to
marking. Brzezinski informed Christopher in a February 24 memorandum that he had
forwarded the memorandum and the proposed regulation to Carter and said “I agree
that publishing the proposed regulation at this time would be beneficial.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
carry out a commercial sale can give offense to a friendly foreign gov-
ernment and may result in a sale of comparable items by some alterna-
tive supplier.
Under the present regulations, a U.S. firm has the option of seeking
our advice before it begins an effort to market its product in a given
country or of proceeding without consultation in the hope that the ex-
pressed desires of the purchasing country will help to secure the re-
quired U.S. approval.
Proposed Controls
The new regulation we are considering would require the Depart-
ment of State’s approval before a proposal, recommendation or presen-
tation is made which is designed to induce a decision to purchase sig-
nificant combat equipment valued at $7 million or more. The regulation
would describe the kinds of activity that would require such approval.
(The items which constitute significant combat equipment are identi-
fied in the present regulations.) A similar prior approval requirement
would be established for proposed agreements to produce, assemble
or maintain significant combat equipment in a foreign country. This
would formalize and make mandatory the informal consultation that
now precedes many, but by no means all, major arms sales promotion
initiatives.
Procedures
A preliminary draft of the proposed regulation was circulated to
the directly affected companies and to industry associations in De-
cember. The text has been substantially revised to take into account the
initial industry reactions. The next step in the rulemaking procedure
would be to publish the revised draft in the Federal Register with an in-
vitation for public comment. The published notice would also an-
nounce a public meeting, following a thirty-day period for written
comments, at which members of the public could express their views
orally to the responsible officials of the Departments of State and
Defense.
In light of the comments received from the public, we could adopt
the regulation, with or without change; we could begin again with a
new text if it appeared substantial revision was required; or we could
abandon the proposal.
A notice of proposed rulemaking has been prepared for publica-
tion in the Federal Register. A copy is attached.2 I favor proceeding
with this proposal because it could provide a valuable tool for the en-
forcement of policies developed to restrain the further proliferation of
2 Attached but not printed.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
conventional arms. The Department of Defense and the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency also support the adoption of a regulation
along these lines. The staffs of the concerned Congressional committees
have told us they believe the regulation would be well received in
Congress.
Other Pending Actions
Two other regulatory amendments are pending. One, designed to
change the definition of significant combat equipment with respect to
military electronics, has been published as a proposed rule. Written
comments have been received and a public meeting was held on Feb-
ruary 4. The other, which would institute a system of civil penalties and
administrative remedies for export control violations, is ready for in-
formal distribution to industry in advance of publication. Both of these
amendments implement legislation enacted last year and are relatively
uncontroversial.
Recommendation
That you authorize publication of the attached notice in the Fed-
eral Register.
262.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfers
At Tab A is a memorandum from Secretary Vance2 on the subject
of conventional arms transfers.
I must point out that many of the issues addressed in the Secre-
tary’s memorandum, particularly those mentioned on pages 5 through
7, are currently under consideration in the context of the PRM/NSC–12
action. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum, Carter wrote
“Let me have orig draft of regulation before it was modified by munitions manufacturers.
JC.”
2 See Document 260.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
review of conventional arms transfers. The comments in the attached
memorandum, therefore, represent only the views of the Dept. of State;
the positions of other agencies will be contained in the PRM response
due March 15.
On pages 3 and 4 of his memorandum, Secretary Vance mentions
17 pending Foreign Military Sales cases currently under review. I
strongly believe that we should not transmit any cases to Congress
prior to evaluation of and decision on the PRM–12 response. A one-
month delay would not seriously affect either contract prices or de-
livery dates, although there may be short-term dissatisfaction and a de-
gree of uncertainty in some recipient states. This rather minimal nega-
tive aspect is greatly outweighed by the fact that delaying the
transmittals would permit evaluation of the cases, under new policy
guidelines, by an interagency group specifically designed to conduct
such an evaluation. I will discuss this issue with Secretary Vance and
will advise you of the result of our conversation.
On page 4, Secretary Vance also mentions a proposed regulation
which is designed to moderate the overseas sales efforts of U.S. arms
manufacturers by providing for State Department approval earlier in
the sales process. The proposed regulation and an explanatory memo-
randum are at Tab B.3 If you approve, the proposed regulation will be
published in the Federal Register, followed by a 30-day period for public
comment and a public meeting. Initiating this action now will permit
integration of its findings into the PRM review, and I therefore recom-
mend that you approve publication of the proposed regulation.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve publication in the Federal Register of the pro-
posed regulation at Tab B.4
3 The explanatory memorandum is Document 261; the proposed regulation is at-
tached but not printed.
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. The
proposed new regulation was not codified pending further review of the issue of arms
transfers.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
263.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, March 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Notification of Pending Conventional Arms Transfer Cases
In my memorandum of February 8,2 I reported that we had several
billion dollars worth of pending Foreign Military Sales cases which we
inherited from the previous Administration, as well as requests pend-
ing for Munitions Control export licenses to fulfill signed commercial
contracts. Both require notification to Congress pursuant to Section 36
of the Arms Export Control Act of 1976. Zbig has suggested to you3 that
we not send any of these cases to Congress prior to your decisions on
the PRM–12 response on arms transfer policy. I do not agree that we
should delay on all of these cases, and am recommending an alterna-
tive method of proceeding.
Discussion
We transfer defense articles and services through several channels.
The largest volume is through government-to-government agreements
under Foreign Military Sales (FMS) procedures. Straight commercial
transactions must be licensed by the State Department’s Office of Mu-
nitions Control at the time the goods or services are ready for export.
The process through which major FMS and commercial cases are re-
ported to Congress is described at Attachment 2.4
We are now holding for Congressional notification 49 FMS and
commercial cases totalling approximately $5 billion in defense goods
and services. Ideally, the decision to send these cases to Congress
should await the completion of our arms transfer policy review under
PRM/NSC–12, as suggested by Zbig Brzezinski in his memorandum
to you of February 23 but deferral of all cases raises some serious
problems.
—Almost all of these cases are non-controversial and raise no se-
rious policy problems for us.
—Our contacts with Congressmen strongly indicate that Congress
is ready to accept most of the cases without debate. The main problem
2 See Document 260.
3 See Document 262.
4 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
for many legislators is the Persian Gulf. Here, we will hold some cases
for your review and for completion of the policy review.
—It will be almost six weeks before you make decisions on a new
overall policy. By that time the backlog of cases could total $7 billion. If
we wait to send these cases to Congress until your overall policy is set,
the very magnitude of the submissions is likely to overshadow the new
approach you will be enunciating.
—Such a moratorium would, in general, create expectations about
our future arms policy that cannot be met. We are not intending to for-
sake arms transfers as a part of our foreign policy. Whatever controls
you do institute will not produce overnight results and will require co-
operative efforts if they are to be effectively implemented. A morato-
rium of even a month will cause panic among those it affects and will
tend to galvanize opposition before policy decisions have been made.
—Bilateral political problems will result. Seven of these cases in-
volve NATO countries. It is inconsistent for us to press NATO coun-
tries to do more on defense, while at the same time denying them items
they have ordered. Both the Dutch and the British have made this point
to us. With respect to other friendly countries, 33 of the 49 cases involve
logistics support (without which equipment will be inoperable), annual
ammunition procurement, and ancillary equipment for or small addi-
tions to stocks of weapons we have already agreed to provide.
—Delay will mean price increases and production problems. The
majority of current cases (23 of the 36 FMS cases) are not new and many
have been pending since last November. Specific practical problems
have already developed, or will soon develop, including:
Delivery delays and price increases (for Israel and Greece)
Logistic problems (for Iran, Taiwan, and Korea)
Disruption of signed commercial contracts (10 of the 13 pending
export license cases)
Possible breaks in production lines.
Pending Cases
The growing list of pending cases (see Attachment 1)5 fall into sev-
eral categories described below. I am recommending that you submit to
Cases
Value (Mil)
Category I: Construction and follow-on
support for systems already in country
$1,185
Category II: Follow-on Ammunition
supplies
5 Attached but not printed.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Category III: Systems to Supplement ex-
isting in country inventories or to com-
plement weapons received or on order
Category IV: Major new Equipment
transfer and force expansion
A. Approval Recommended
1,568
B. Deferral Recommended
1,368
TOTALS
$5,032
Of the cases in Categories I–III, there is only one which raises pol-
icy questions: ammunition for Ethiopia. The Ethiopian case relates to
our policy in this part of Africa. It should be deferred until we have
completed our African policy review, which is now underway. The
consequence of deferral is likely to be that the Ethiopians will interpret
deferral as denial. The ammunition was requested sometime ago and
additional delay in a decision will further strain our bilateral relations.
Ethiopia may well turn to other suppliers. Nevertheless, deferral is
warranted.6
There are several cases in Category IV that I would recommend for
deferral:
Jordan—9 AH–1 Cobra Helicopters
($19 million)
The sale of helicopter gunships to Jordan was approved in prin-
ciple some time ago, but was not completed because of Jordan’s fi-
nancial problems. Notification of this case to Congress is likely to
attract Israel’s attention. Because further delay on this case does
not pose foreseeable consequences, it should be deferred until the
policy review has been completed.7
Iran—7 E–3 Aircraft (AWACs)
Iran has received two proposals for an early warning and control
system, of which the AWACs (airborne warning and control
system) is one. Iran has commissioned a comparative study to de-
termine which of these systems will be chosen. Under these cir-
cumstances, further delay will not cause inconvenience. The size
and sophistication of this system, on the other hand, would un-
doubtedly draw Congressional criticism, particularly in view of
the general concern about US sales to the Persian Gulf.8
6 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
7 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
8 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Pakistan—155mm Self-Propelled Howitzers
($35 million)
Pakistan is very anxious to receive this equipment, but we have
been withholding approval pending satisfactory agreement on the
nuclear reprocessing issue.9 We should therefore continue to defer
action on this case.10
Peru—140 Armored Personnel Carriers
($16 million)
The buildup in Peruvian military forces has created great uneas-
iness in the region. For the US to contribute to this buildup at this
time would only add to this uneasiness. This is clearly a case that
should be deferred for reassessment in light of new policy.11
Sudan—6 C–130 Transport Aircraft
($74 million)
The previous administration committed the USG to supply these
transport aircraft to Sudan, as a significant step to improve rela-
tions with this strategically-placed country. We have already sup-
plied C–130’s to other countries in the area (Israel, Egypt, and
Saudi Arabia). This would be the first US military sale to the Sudan
in a long time. Deferral of this case would interrupt the trend of
improvement in our relations with the Sudanese and strengthen
the hand of those in the Sudanese Government who question the
value of reliance on the US, which President Nimeiri has espoused.
Deferral is nevertheless warranted because of the broader implica-
tions of establishing a new military supply relationship without
first establishing a policy for the area. Sudan has already requested
the purchase of F–5E aircraft and other major items.12
Iran—73 ALQ–119 ECM Pods
($24 million)
The proposed sale of this electronic countermeasures system
(ECM) raises a technology question and should await the outcome
of the arms transfer review. Although it is not our most advanced
ECM system, it will add to the electronic countermeasures capa-
bility of the Iranian Air Force. We have been told by Westinghouse
that the consequence of delaying this case would be plant layoffs,
beginning in January 1977. Nevertheless deferral is warranted.13
9 For more on the issue of nuclear processing and Pakistan, see Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
10 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
11 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
12 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Might be OK to
deliver.”
13 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
The rest of the cases in Category IV either involve NATO countries
or raise significant problems if they are deferred. In addition to the
British and Dutch cases, we have:
Saudi Arabia—Improved HAWK Program
This case is a commercial contract for the expansion of the Saudi
I–HAWK air defense system and represents the largest segment of
a package. Most of this package consists of commercial contracts,
licensed by State Department’s Munitions Control, and requiring
Congressional notification because of dollar value. There is a small
portion of the package that is an FMS case. Because of its size ($8
million), Congressional notification is not required. However, we
intend to report this portion to Congress, as supplementary infor-
mation to the Munitions Control notification. The contract for this
deal was signed last June and the equipment is now ready to
ship.14 It will attract Congressional criticism. The case has already
been discussed informally with some Congressmen and staff. Al-
though they understand that it was initiated during the last ad-
ministration and that our ability to make adjustments is limited,
they look to the administration to review the matter. Delay will
subject the contractor to late delivery penalties.
Iran—TOW Missiles Launcher Kits
($40 million)
The previous Administration approved a proposal to permit Iran
to assemble TOW anti-tank missile launchers. A $40 million con-
tract was signed by the US company in January 1976 and a license
was issued to ship $9 million in equipment the first year. The cur-
rent export license request involves the second shipment of the
contract and is valued at approximately $12 million. The purpose
of this system is to improve Iran’s defense capability against the
large force of Soviet-supplied tanks concentrated in Iraq. Deferral
would involved disruption of an on-going assembly line.15
Singapore—Armored Personnel Carriers
($40 million)
The previous Administration approved the sale to Singapore of
246 armored personnel carriers (APC) and related vehicles. The
contract was signed in March 1976 and deliveries are scheduled to
begin in April. These vehicles will be used to modernize Singa-
pore’s Army by replacing the existing fleet of Cadillac Gage Com-
mando vehicles. We previously provided Singapore with 220
14 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “?”
15 In the last sentence of this paragraph, Carter lined through the “d” in “involved.”
His written comment in the right-hand margin is illegible.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
APC’s and related vehicles. Deferral would be very disruptive be-
cause shipment is about to begin.
Israel—126 M–60 tanks
($85 million)
94 155 mm Self-Propelled Howitzers
($52 million)
These are two of the Israeli requests approved by President Ford in
October 1976. The tanks will be used to create a new mechanized
brigade. The howitzers will be used to expand divisional artillery
support.16 Approval of these cases is important as an indication of
US support for Israeli security, particularly after the negative deci-
sion on the concussion bombs (CBU–72).17 Your decision to ap-
prove these items was announced by the White House Press
Spokesman on February 18.
Jordan—16 8′′ Self-Propelled Howitzers
($12 million)
These are part of a multi-year force modernization program for the
mechanization of brigade artillery. The US has already furnished
howitzers.
Iran—Airborne Segment of IBEX Intelligence
Collection System
($30 million)
The IBEX system is a multi-million dollar program to provide Iran
with a sophisticated intelligence collection capability. The original
Rockwell contract was signed in March 1975. The current license
involves only the airborne segment of the program.
Greece—TOW Anti-Tank Missiles
($15 million)
CH–47 Cargo Helicopters
($60 million)
These cases represent the sale of items not now in the Greek inven-
tory. The purpose of providing the TOWs and helicopters is to im-
prove Greece’s capabilities to meet its NATO obligations.18
Congressional Consultation
When we receive your decision, I intend that we provide the re-
sponsible Congressional committees with brief statements of justifica-
16 In the right-hand margin next to the second and third sentences in this para-
graph, Carter wrote “OK.”
17 On February 17, White House Press Secretary Jody Powell announced that Carter
had reversed Ford’s October 8, 1976 decision approving the sale of concussion bombs to
Israel and banned their sale to other nations. Carter’s “decision to cancel the sale was ‘re-
lated to a general desire to limit and reduce the sales of sophisticated and highly destruc-
tive weapons worldwide,’ Powell said.” (“Concussion Bomb Sale Off; Panel on Appeals
18 Carter’s written comment in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph is
illegible.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
tion for all cases which are submitted. We are already talking with in-
terested members and staffers about our arms transfer dilemmas. They
appreciate that the backlog results from commitments inherited from
the previous administration.
We expect the greatest number of questions about sales to the Per-
sian Gulf. Senator Humphrey, however, believes that the problem will
be manageable in view of the intent of the new administration to
change policy and provided we do not propose at this time the sale of
lethal, offensive weapons. None of the pending cases for Persian Gulf
countries fall into this latter category. Humphrey added, however, that
we should proceed on sales of defensive systems to this region only
after extensive congressional consultations.
Recommendations:
That you authorize me to initiate Congressional notifications on
the commercial export licenses and FMS cases now pending, except
those I have recommended for deferral.19
Future Procedures:
In your January 23 interview with AP and UPI, you said that you
have asked that all approvals of arms sales be submitted to you directly
before recommendations go to Congress. The attachment to this memo-
randum illustrates the range of goods and services on order, and dem-
onstrates how relatively few are major controversial orders for sophis-
ticated lethal weapons.
As you pointed out in the same interview, I will be much more
hesitant in the future to recommend new arms sales agreements. Many
sizeable FMS and commercial cases, however, involve noncontrover-
sial items ($18 million radar for Tunisia) or sales to our NATO allies
(e.g. $119 million sale of Sidewinder air-to-air missiles to the UK). Such
routine cases do not seem to require your personal attention. If you
agree, I will submit recommendations to you only on those cases which
I believe may be politically sensitive or controversial. We will continue
to consult the National Security Council Staff on all FMS and commer-
cial cases requiring Congressional notification and work out proce-
dures to insure that Dr. Brzezinski is appropriately informed prior to
any notification to the Congress.
Recommendation:
That I submit to you for your personal review only those FMS sales
and commercial export licenses of major weapons systems requiring
19 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Congressional notification which I believe are likely to be politically
sensitive or controversial.20
Alternatively, that I submit to you my recommendations on all FMS
and commercial arms sales cases requiring Congressional notification,
pending completion of PRM–12.21
Attachments:
1. List of Pending Cases22
2. Congressional Notification Process
20 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
21 Carter checked the “Approve” option and underneath wrote “J.C.”
22 Attached but not printed.
264.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, March 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Legislation on Conventional Arms Transfer
This memorandum proposes an Administration initiative to seek
deferral of significant changes in the legislation presently governing
United States arms transfers. In essence, we would undertake, in ex-
change for Congressional restraint at this time, to involve Congress di-
rectly in a joint deliberative process, following your decisions on the re-
sponse to PRM/NSC–12,2 designed to formulate legislation that takes
into account the objectives and concerns of both Branches.
Background
Work is progressing on the study of conventional arms transfers
which you have directed by PRM/NSC–12, and we should be ready to
present options and recommendations to you in the latter part of
March. This study will also provide the basis for the studies and reports
to Congress mandated by last year’s Arms Export Control Act.
2 See Document 259.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
There is a substantial risk that Congress will not await the formu-
lation of the Administration’s specific arms transfer policies, or the
studies and reports it has requested, but will instead seek to attach a va-
riety of amendments to the FY 1978 security assistance authorization
bill. A number of amendments to the legislation presently governing
arms transfers have already been introduced. These amendments
would impose new restrictions on your authority and would further
complicate the Congressional review procedures for Executive Branch
decisions.
Present Situation
We have begun a broad-ranging consultation to inform members
of Congress of the restraint-oriented objectives you have already
stated, to explain to them our current efforts to achieve better control
and greater restraint with respect to arms transfers, and to elicit their
ideas. In the course of these consultations, we are urging members to
refrain from pressing for substantial changes in existing law until the
Administration has had an opportunity to develop and begin to imple-
ment its policies. Most members are sympathetic but cannot assure us
that Congress will not try to preempt your decisions.
The FY 1978 security assistance authorization bill must be consid-
ered within a very brief time span. The Administration’s request will
have to be submitted early in March and the bill must be reported out
of committee by May 15. This schedule will not permit a considered ex-
amination of existing law and a thoughtful statutory revision that will
complement your policies. Either the Congress will confine itself to au-
thorizing necessary appropriations and enacting only needed statutory
authority or it will attach to the bill a number of hastily considered
piecemeal modifications of existing authorities and procedures.
A Plan for Avoiding Harmful Legislation
The content of the FY 1978 authorization bill will be determined to
a considerable extent by how Congress perceives the Administration’s
commitment to reducing the proliferation of conventional arms, and
how it perceives the Administration’s willingness to involve Congress
in the process.
Our ongoing consultations are a step in the right direction, but are
not likely to be sufficient, in themselves, in gaining the time we need for
constructive legislative revision. We may, however, be able to achieve
the cooperation of Congress by offering it a significant participatory
role in framing the legislation that will be needed after you have de-
cided on the options that will be presented to you in response to PRM/
NSC–12.
Specifically, I suggest that you authorize me to explore with Con-
gressional leaders the possibility of convening a joint Executive/Legis-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
lative Branch working group which would meet after enactment of the
FY 1978 security assistance authorization bill. This working group
would consider changes in the basic authorizing legislation desired by
either Branch, and would prepare a draft bill reflecting agreements
reached in their deliberations that would be formally considered in the
FY 1979 authorization cycle. The draft bill, apart from substantive revi-
sions, could reorganize the legislation into a more simple and intelli-
gible format that would facilitate its implementation.
The Executive Branch participants in the working group would be
drawn from the several agencies concerned, and would work under the
supervision of the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance.
Their principal source of guidance would be your decisions resulting
from the PRM–12 study. The results of their deliberations with Con-
gressional participants (concentrating on, but not limited to, the foreign
affairs committees) would be presented to you for approval.
Disagreements that could not be resolved by the working group
would be referred for resolution by senior Administration officials and
the Congressional leadership. Even if complete agreement could not be
reached, the experience would be mutually instructive and conducive
to a more harmonious working relationship between the two Branches.
Better legislation would probably emerge from such a collaborative ef-
fort than from the more traditional process of recent years in which
both Branches have independently proposed legislation to which they
were publicly committed.
If you approve the concept described above, and if key members of
Congress are receptive, you could then publicly urge Congress to defer
legislative revision at this time, and propose a collaborative effort later
this year within a comprehensive policy framework. Such a proposal
could be made in a meeting with Congressional leaders or in your mes-
sage to Congress next week transmitting the FY 1978 security assist-
ance authorization bill.
Recommendation
That you authorize me to discuss with Congressional leaders the
proposal described above, and to indicate that it has your support.3
3 Carter did not indicate whether he authorized Vance to discuss the proposal with
Congressional leaders.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
265.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Notification of Pending Conventional Arms Transfer Cases
Secretary Vance recommends that selected arms sales be trans-
mitted to Congress prior to completion of the PRM/NSC–12 review on
this subject (Tab A).2 In addition, he recommends that he determine
which cases you should review in the future.
I agree with Secretary Vance that there are sound reasons to trans-
mit selected cases at this time. In my view, however, the only clearly
uncontroversial cases are those in the Secretary’s categories I and II
(construction and follow-on support, and follow-on ammunition sup-
plies), and recommended NATO, Israel and Jordan cases in categories
III and IV (supplements to existing inventories, and major new equip-
ment). Their transmittal would have the least adverse effect on the
PRM review and should generate little or no opposition in Congress.
The other category III and IV sales, however, are precisely those which
must come under closer scrutiny if we are to restrain the sale of arms.
For this reason, I recommend deferral of all the other category III and
IV transmittals until the PRM review is completed in the first week in
April.
Concerning which cases you should review, you have stated pub-
licly that all arms sales are to come to you directly before submission to
Congress. In addition, I believe it would be premature to decide what
future cases you will or will not see before you have reviewed the re-
sults of PRM–12. If, after reviewing the PRM–12 response, you decide
to delegate to the Secretary of State the authority to determine which
cases will be forwarded to you, no agency could maintain that such a
decision was made without consideration of its views on the subject.
tion. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum, Carter wrote
“Zbig—see me. J.C.” At the bottom of the first page, an unknown hand wrote “Closed
2 See Document 263.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve transmittal to Congress at this time of all cate-
gory I and II arms sales cases, and the recommended NATO, Israel and
Jordan cases only in categories III and IV.3
That you defer a decision on which future cases should be for-
warded to you for review.4
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
266.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Latin America
PARTICIPANTS
State
Treasury
Warren Christopher
Anthony Solomon
Terence Todman
Edward Bittner
William Luers
Arms Control and Disarmament
Defense
Agency
Charles Duncan
Leon Sloss
Major Gen. Richard E. Cavazos
Commerce
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Frank Weil
General George S. Brown
NSC
Lt. General William Smith
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
CIA
David Aaron
Deputy Director Enno Knoche
Thomas Thornton
Robert Hopkins
Robert A. Pastor
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
Room. The minutes are scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XXIV, South America; Latin America Regional.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Arms Transfers
Christopher asked whether the United States, as a declining source
of arms to Latin America, is justified in adopting a special policy on
arms transfers to Latin America.2
General Brown reminded everyone that in the early Kennedy
years we tried to get Latin American governments to shift defense ex-
penditures to nation-building, but as sovereign states, they just turned
to other sources to buy arms. As long as they are going to buy, he pre-
ferred that they buy from us rather than the Russians.
Sloss from ACDA said that we must approach this problem glo-
bally at both ends. Discuss it with the Soviets and with other suppliers,
and at the same time urge restraint by purchasers. If this does not work,
he is inclined to agree with George Brown.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms transfers.]
2 In undated talking points for a March 15 PRC meeting sent under cover of a March
12 briefing memorandum for Vance, the Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs,
Terence Todman, and the Director of Policy Planning, Anthony Lake, suggested that
Vance note that U.S. options in terms of regional arms control were limited given its de-
clining role in providing arms to Latin America. (National Archives, RG 59, Records of
Anthony Lake, Policy Planning Staff, Office of the Director, Entry P–9, Regular Subject

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
267.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Middle East, Arms Control
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary Arthur
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M.
Hartman
Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. Leslie Gelb
Notetaker—Name Unknown
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
ARMS TRANSFERS
The Secretary suggested they now take up the question of arms
transfers to third world countries. He said that we were concerned that
arms transfers by the US and USSR to other countries, into the third
world, could in the long run only lead to misunderstandings and diffi-
culties. In our judgement, we had to find a way to exercise restraint in
transferring arms to third world countries. Our restraint would depend
on restraint by the Soviet Union, and it seemed to us that we should
also enlist the cooperation of other sellers of weapons. As President
Carter had said, we would be prepared to take unilateral steps in this
direction. But in the long run, unilateral action could not succeed
without the cooperation of other countries supplying arms. He pro-
posed to use a specific example. In our judgement, providing arms to
countries in southern Africa would fuel the flames and possibly lead to
a broad conflict. We believed that this was not in the interest of either
our two countries nor in the interest of people in the area. We believed
that such actions could only strain relations between our two countries,
which was not in our mutual interest. Therefore, we wanted to get the
in draft by Hyland; and approved by Twadell on May 9. The meeting took place at the
Kremlin. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, So-
viet Union, Document 20.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
situation under control, either on a multilateral or bilateral basis. The
United States would like to begin a serious dialogue on the question of
arms transfers. He would appreciate learning Gromyko’s thoughts on
how we could exchange views on this subject. We would emphasize
our interest in how one might reach a multilateral agreement among
arms suppliers, and how one might best proceed to organize such an
accord. We had already raised our concerns with the Federal Republic
of Germany, Great Britain and France.
Gromyko acknowledged that the problem did exist. No one could
deny that. Much weaponry was supplied to many countries. The big-
gest arms supplier, as President Carter has said on various occasions,
was the United States, and had been for some time. In this connection,
he would ask a specific question by way of example. Who was it that
forced the United States to supply billions of dollars worth of arma-
ments to Iran—was it any action on the part of the Soviet Union or
some other country? Was this really indicative of any desire to exercise
restraint? The Soviet leadership had been surprised and concerned
when it learned of these massive arms sales. In effect, these sales had
aggravated the problem. That was his first remark. Secondly, it was ob-
vious that this question should be posed within the context of the mili-
tary clashes that were taking place in the world. There were some coun-
tries that, whether we wanted it or not, were involved in military
conflicts, and this fact was greatly related to the question of arms
transfers. Only on paper could these two questions be separated. In any
case, very frequently this linkage was obvious. Thirdly, the Soviet
Union would be prepared to consider any concrete proposal the US
Government wanted to table with a view to resolving this problem.
Whenever the United States was ready, the USSR would be happy to
take a look at it. The more specific, the better. Before involving others, it
would perhaps be better to talk between our two countries; otherwise,
third parties might ask for our own joint views, which might not exist.
The Secretary said that one of the problems one faces in the area of
arms transfers was that it was often said that should we not sell arms to
some country or another, the Soviet Union, or France, or Germany,
would certainly jump in and do so. As a result, arms sales continued.
One simply had to find a way to cut the Gordian Knot.
Gromyko said he realized the problem did exist and it was neces-
sary to take a look at it.
The Secretary asked if it might be looked at in the context of the
Middle East, perhaps.
Gromyko said that if it were done in the context of a peaceful settle-
ment in that area, the Soviet Union would be in favor of it.
The Secretary asked: “Why not before?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Gromyko said that it could not be done before, simply because it
would be wrong from a political, factual, or any other aspect now. For
example, on February 18, 1977, Reuters reported a statement by Prime
Minister Rabin of Israel that Israel had received 1½ billion dollars
worth of weapons since the 1973 war, as against 300 million before that.
Gromyko thought the Secretary would agree that arms transfers and
conflicts were interrelated.
The Secretary pointed out that this was certainly not a one-sided
issue. The Minister would know that the Soviet Union had supplied
massive arms to Middle East countries.
Gromyko said he would not deny that, and suggested our two
countries find ways to do something about it.
The Secretary asked: “What about Africa?”
Gromyko said the same thing applied there, except that in that
whole area there were 100 times more American weapons than Soviet.
The Secretary suggested that was something that we must jointly
examine in the future.
268.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on PRM–12—Conventional Arms Control
Yesterday the PRC met on the subject of conventional arms con-
trol. Attached you will find the following:
—At Tab A:
A decision memorandum covering the five major
issues on which there was disagreement. In each case
the options chosen and arguments for and against
are presented on the facing page.
—At Tab B:
For your information—to be initialed if approved—
a summary of the PRM’s conclusions on which there
tendees attached to the Summary of Minutes at Tab C, but not printed, indicates that the
PRC meeting occurred on April 12. (Ibid.)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
was consensus. These are presented as modified by
the PRC discussion.
—At Tab C:
For your information only (Tab A contains the rele-
vant portions needed for decision), a summary of the
minutes of the meeting, and a list of attendees.
The major issue remains whether or not to impose a dollar volume
ceiling. In my view, the implicit message of those who argued against
imposing a ceiling was the feeling—or the fear—that we would not stay
under it. This goes right to the heart of the question of whether you are
determined to achieve real reductions in the volume of arms trans-
ferred overseas. If you are, then nearly everyone would agree that the
only way to do so is to set a specific ceiling.
The fear that we might not meet a ceiling is quite justified. The FY
1976 FMS total, excluding NATO, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand,
decisions you made earlier this week) is $8.25 billion. Possible addi-
tional major cases of which State is already aware are:
Possible Major Cases
Low
High
Iran
Iran
Saudi Arabia
Israel
Spain
Pakistan
.6
.6
Korea
Israel
Miscellaneous
.3
.3
Egypt
.7
.7
Thus we are already more than a billion dollars over last fiscal
year. A lot more is pending, and we have 5 months left to go of FY 1977.
On the other hand, if we look at the calendar year—for which this
Administration is responsible—the picture is much brighter, in fact a
significant cut appears possible. My point is simply that a strict disci-
pline is going to be needed to just avoid surpassing last year—let alone
cutting back.
At this time, your choice is among: a specific ceiling; an unspeci-
fied reduction; or, relying on other types of controls to achieve re-
straint. The decision of exactly what a ceiling should cover, exactly
what level should be adopted, and which year it should be applied to,
can be addressed in a follow-on paper if you decide on the ceiling
option.
In my opinion there are three compelling reasons for a ceiling:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Political necessity. Neither Congress nor the press will let you get
away with saying “we will sell less” as was suggested yesterday. Con-
ventional arms control was a major focus of your campaign.
—International necessity. The U.S., as the world’s leading supplier,
will have to make clear its intent to exercise restraint if we are to create
any international momentum toward joint supplier restraint. Tougher
management guidelines will not be sufficient.
—Management realities. A ceiling is probably the only way to force
the hard choices necessary to actually cut the volume of arms transfers.
Tab A
Major Issues of Disagreement2
Washington, undated
DOLLAR VOLUME CEILINGS
Vance recommends Control 3(b). He believes there is a need for a
ceiling in the early years of the new arms sales policy, because it would
help us discipline ourselves and manage the program more effectively
than would a general statement on reduction. Also, it would force us to
consider more explicitly the trade-offs between and among arms sales.
Brown recommends Control 2. He believes that establishing a ceil-
ing would: 1) reduce our flexibility; 2) encourage purchasers to cluster
their orders early in the fiscal year; 3) result in the ceiling being used as
a floor; 4) lead to enormous accounting problems; 5) spur Congress to
put ceilings or subceilings into law. He notes, however, that a ceiling is
politically attractive and the only sure way to meet our goal of restraint
in the conventional arms area.
Warnke recommends Control 2, agreeing that the ceiling cuts into
our flexibility and may become a target. He would recommend, how-
ever, using the term “significant reduction.”
Smith (JCS) recommends Control 1.
Benson (Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance) recom-
mends Control 2, believing that reductions in arms sales can be
achieved without an inflexible ceiling.
Lance recommends Control 2, but would also use the term “signifi-
cant reduction.”
2 Secret.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Aaron recommends Control 3(b). He believes that, given your
statements on this subject, defense of a new policy of restraint would be
a political impossibility without a quantified percentage reduction or
ceiling. He stated that this would be the first question asked of Jody
Powell and our witnesses on the Hill.
Brzezinski recommends Control 3(b), believing that only a ceiling
will allow you to fulfill your pledge to reduce the transfer of arms. Es-
tablishment of a ceiling would tell the U.S. public and the world that we
intend to scale down our arms transfers, thus indicating our sincerity to
the French, British, and other suppliers.
DOLLAR VOLUME CEILINGS
Issue: Should there be a fixed ceiling on the dollar volume of U.S.
arms transfers?
Controls:
1. Utilize ceilings for planning purposes only, relying on other spe-
cific controls to achieve greater restraint in arms transfers.
2. State that the dollar volume of arms transfers in FY 1977 will be
reduced from the FY 76 total, and that the volume of FY 1978 transfers
will likewise be reduced from the FY 1977 total.3
3. For FY 1977, impose a ceiling on total U.S. arms transfers at a
percent4 from the FY 1976 total. The ceiling could be applied:
a. Across the board to all types of transfers: weapons, ammuni-
tions, supporting equipment, spare parts, training, and construction.
b. Only to weapons and weapons-related items, exempting those
sales which clearly can be classified as services.
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
3a.
3b.
3 Carter bracketed the phrase that begins with “the dollar volume” and ends with
“transfers will likewise”, drew a line through “likewise”, and wrote a comment in the
right-hand margin that is illegible.
4 Carter underlined “10 percent” and wrote a comment in the right-hand margin
that is illegible.
tions or # limits [that] will be set by me with Cy + Harold—J” in the right-hand margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
LIMITS ON TRANSFERS OF NEW SYSTEMS
is at the heart of the arms sale problem, and strict controls need to be
established.
Brown recommends Control 1, and if dollar volume ceilings are not
imposed, he recommends Control 4 also. He does not recommend Con-
trol 2, because of our Latin American experience which has demon-
strated that unilateral restraint on our part does not reduce the flow of
weapons to a region.
issue is central to the arms sale problem, and that strict control is thus a
necessity. He notes that Controls 2 and 4 are inextricably bound, that
applying Control 4 without Control 2 would be of little use.
Smith recommends Control 4.
Brzezinski recommends Control 1, assuming dollar volume ceilings
are established. He notes that while Control 2 appears reasonable in the
abstract, it might unduly limit our flexibility in future situations, where
transfer of limited amounts of high-technology equipment may ad-
vance our interests.
LIMITS ON TRANSFER OF SIGNIFICANT NEW SYSTEMS
Issue: The issue is the extent to which we should limit the transfer,
or production abroad, of significant, newly-developed weapons sys-
tems. The transfer of advanced systems raises concern about destabi-
lizing effects in the region involved, the financial burdens involved for
recipients, and the compromise of new technology.
Controls:
1. Establish more extensive guidelines for assessing requests for
equipment sales, including requirements 1) that supplying the system
would uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military
functions which serve U.S. security interests, and 2) that less-advanced
existing systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable
from the United States.6
2. Enunciate the principle that the United States will not be the first
supplier to introduce into a region an advanced weapon that creates a
new or significantly higher combat capability.7
6 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph, and a comment
beneath it that is illegible.
7 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
3. Compile a list of all major advanced systems which we will not
release overseas for sale, cooperative R&D, or coproduction.
4. Prohibit the commitment for sale, cooperative R&D, or copro-
duction of newly-developed, major weapons systems at least until the
systems are operationally deployed with U.S. forces.8
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
3.
4.
LIMITS ON NEW TECHNOLOGY
EXPLICITLY DEVELOPED FOR EXPORT
Vance recommends Control 3.
Brown recommends Control 2. He is against U.S. manufacturers
becoming so involved in a foreign market as to have a vested interest.
Warnke recommends Control 2, but would support Control 3.
Benson recommends Control 3, but would support Control 2.
Brzezinski recommends Control 1.
LIMITS ON NEW TECHNOLOGY
EXPLICITLY DEVELOPED FOR EXPORT
Issue: Should the United States permit the sale abroad of systems
which represent advanced U.S. weapons technology, but which are de-
veloped or modified especially for the foreign market?
Controls:
1. Establish more extensive guidelines for assessing requests for
equipment sales, including requirements 1) that supplying the system
would uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military
functions which serve U.S. security interests; 2) that after a specified pe-
riod, the requestor must have the ability to maintain the system with
minimal U.S. assistance; and 3) that less-advanced, existing systems
with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable from the United
States or friendly suppliers.
2. Permit the export of unique systems or major modifications of
U.S. systems on a case-by-case basis if the recipient validates a require-
ment for a specific weapon system to fulfill a specific mission, but nor-
8 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
mally prohibit sales if roughly comparable capabilities could be pro-
vided by existing or planned systems.10
3. Permit export of unique advanced weapons systems or major
modifications only11 to key treaty allies (NATO, Japan, Australia, and
New Zealand). Prohibit in all other cases.
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
3.
LIMITS ON COPRODUCTION
Vance recommends Control 1.
Brown recommends Control 1, but would not object to imposition
of Control 2.
Warnke recommends Control 1, but would not object to imposition
of Control 2.
Smith recommends Control 1.
Lance recommends Control 2.
Brzezinski recommends Control 2, noting that it would be inconsis-
tent to approve significant numbers of coproduction agreements while
restricting U.S. exports of high-technology items.
LIMITS ON COPRODUCTION
Issue: The development of indigenous military industries is a pri-
ority objective of an increasing number of countries. Responding to re-
quests for assistance in establishing production capabilities is a
growing policy issue for the United States. There are two interrelated
concerns: (1) Should the United States limit the number of significant
coproduction agreements; and (2) How might we restrict the prolifera-
tion of arms we do approve for coproduction.
Controls:
1. Subject all requests to review under guidelines applied globally.
In reviewing requests, analyze closely whether or not the proposed co-
production project would over time provide equipment in excess of
10 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph.
11 Carter underlined “only”, drew a line to the word “modifications”, and wrote
“unless special circumstances [illegible] by president—” in the space above this
paragraph.
12 Carter checked option 3, and wrote “Does this change present policy toward Is-
rael? J” in the margin.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
local needs. Stipulate in each approved agreement the terms under
which exports will be permitted, if at all, emphasizing the principle that
coproduction is intended for the co-producers’ requirements and not
for export.
2. Prohibit all new coproduction agreements of significant
weapons, equipment, or major components, beyond assembly of sub-
components and the fabrication of high-turnover spare parts, except
with key allies and where the President determines that such agree-
ment is justified by extraordinary circumstances. Subject requests for
any other items (e.g., major overhaul facilities) to review under guide-
lines applied globally. Apply to all agreements the export restrictions
specified in Control 1.
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
SENSITIVE WEAPONS
Vance recommends Control 3.
Brown recommends Control 3.
Warnke recommends Control 1, believing that a list is unnecessary
if we establish a policy presumption against sales. If a list were ap-
proved, he has no opinion on whether it should be public or private.
Smith recommends Control 3.
Benson recommends either Control 2 or Control 3.
Lance recommends Control 1, with the President approving
exceptions.
Brzezinski recommends Control 3.
SENSITIVE WEAPONS
Issue: Certain weapons are considered sensitive from a political or
a security point of view, because they are particularly deadly, or are
particularly susceptible to use by terrorists. Should there be a public
listing of sensitive weapons which the United States will not transfer to
foreign countries?
Controls:
1. Continue the current system of informal, unpublished guidelines.
2. Establish a public list of sensitive items which the United States
will not transfer abroad.
13 Carter checked option 2 and wrote “Explain consequences to me” in the right-
hand margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Establish a list of sensitive items which the United States will not
transfer abroad, but do not make it public.14
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
3.
Tab B
Areas of Consensus16
Washington, undated
1. Management
RECOMMENDATION:
1. Maintain essentially the present system, but improve proce-
dures by means of more explicit guidelines drawn from the policy con-
trols chosen.
2. Additionally, approve in principle the establishment of an inter-
agency Arms Export Control Board, advisory to the Secretary of State
and chaired by the Under Secretary for Security Assistance, with the
Director of State’s Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs as Vice Chairman.
Terms of reference for the Board would be determined later.17
2. Multilateral Restraint
RECOMMENDATION: On the basis of the President’s decisions
that define U.S. policy, State and ACDA will develop a plan to promote
international cooperation in restraint of arms transfers.
3. Control of U.S. Government Financing: MAP
RECOMMENDATION: Continue to use grant MAP as an element
of base agreement quid pro quo, and in special cases on a temporary
basis for specific political and military purposes (e.g., Jordan).
4. Control of U.S. Financing: FMS Credits
RECOMMENDATION: Continue to provide FMS financing at
levels determined essentially by U.S. political and military objectives.
14 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph.
15 Carter checked option 3 and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
16 Secret.
17 Carter wrote a comment beneath this paragraph that is illegible.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
5. Employment of U.S. Citizens on Overseas Defense Contracts
RECOMMENDATION: The question of the extensive use of U.S.
citizens to support overseas military projects will be a factor in arms
transfer decisions.
6. Third Party Transfers
RECOMMENDATION: That a policy recommendation be made to
terminate assistance in cases of substantial violations;
Additionally, as a condition of sale for certain categories of equip-
ment and certain countries, require agreement between the United
States and the recipient that the equipment will not be transferred.
Additionally, in cases where there is a serious risk of future unau-
thorized third party transfer or the quantity of items appears to exceed
military needs, deny the original sales request or reduce the quantity
requested.
7. Arms Transfers to Low-Income Countries
RECOMMENDATION: Obtain an interagency assessment of the
economic impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to
those LDCs receiving United States economic assistance. Consider de-
nying arms requests when the economic impact is substantial.
8. Restricting Arms Transfers to Government-to-Government Transactions
RECOMMENDATION: Maintain a mix of government-to-gov-
ernment and commercial sales. Review present categories of commer-
cial transfers to identify those items which might be shifted to gov-
ernment channels. Remove civilian-type items from the Munitions List.
9. Commercial and Government Incentives to Stimulate Arms Transfers
RECOMMENDATION: Policy level approval by the Department
of State is required before authorizing:
(a) licenses for sales promotion or technical data transmission by
private firms;
(b) U.S. military or civilian briefings, site surveys, transmission of
technical information, or any similar activity which might promote the
sale of defense articles or services.
Additionally, U.S. embassies and military elements will not pro-
mote nor assist in the promotion of arms sales without specific
authorization.
Additionally, the Defense Department will continue its review of
Government procedures which may promote sale of arms, reporting
the results of this review to the President within 60 days.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Tab C
Summary Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting18
Washington, undated
SUMMARY MINUTES
POLICY REVIEW COMMITTEE MEETING ON ARMS TRANSFERS
(List of Attendees Attached)19
Dollar Volume Ceilings
Brown argued against dollar volume ceilings, citing the following
reasons: 1) reduces our flexibility; 2) encourages purchasers to cluster
orders early in the fiscal year; 3) encourages use of the ceiling as a floor;
4) would lead to enormous accounting problems; 5) might spur Con-
gress to put ceilings or even subceilings into law. Brown said the argu-
ments for dollar volume ceilings include: 1) the political attractiveness
of ceilings; and 2) the fact that it is the only sure way of doing what we
said we would do in the conventional arms area. Brown, Warnke, and
Benson recommended that instead of imposing a ceiling, we should
state that we will agree to sell less each year, something that has oc-
curred over the past two years anyway, and something which would
indicate our commitment to restraint. Warnke and Lance recommended
further that the President announce that we will have “significant re-
ductions” in arms sales. Smith stated his opposition to a ceiling, main-
taining that we will have trouble with our allies if we set an arbitrary
ceiling at the outset of a fiscal year.
Brzezinski said that he thought ceilings would allow the President
to fulfill his pledge to reduce the transfer of arms, and that ceilings
would tell the U.S. public and the world, especially other suppliers,
that the President intends to scale down the transfer of arms. Brzezinski
stated, however, that he would recommend focusing on weaponry
since that is what contributes most significantly to the arms race. Vance
stated that he believed there was a need for a ceiling in the early years
of the new arms sales policy, because it would help us discipline our-
selves and manage the program more effectively than would a general
statement on reduction. Aaron stated that, given the President’s strong
statements on this subject, defense of the new policy would be a polit-
ical impossibility without a number indicating some percentage reduc-
tion or ceiling. Vance agreed, and Brzezinski stated that, excluding allies
18 Secret.
19 Attached but not printed.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
and focusing on weaponry alone, a 10 percent cut would be an appro-
priate number.
Significant New Systems
Vance and Warnke recommended: adoption of restrictive guide-
lines; enunciation of a principle that we would not be the first to intro-
duce significant systems into a region; and, prohibition of transfer at
least until the system was deployed with U.S. forces. Brown and Smith
supported the prohibition of transfer at least until U.S. operational de-
ployment. Brzezinski and Brown were hesitant about establishing the
principle prohibiting our first introduction of a significant system, be-
cause it might be beneficial in selected instances to introduce limited
quantities of new significant items to preclude proliferation of less-
significant, but still dangerous, weaponry. If dollar volume ceilings
are established, Brzezinski recommended only adopting restrictive
guidelines.
New Technology Developed Solely for Export
Brown, Warnke, and Lance recommended that systems developed or
modified solely for export normally be approved only if a special need
exists and comparable capabilities cannot be provided by an existing
U.S. system. Brown stated that he is against U.S. suppliers becoming so
involved in foreign markets that they develop a vested interest. Vance
recommended an even more restrictive control, allowing transfers of
this type only to key allies. Brzezinski recommended establishment of
extensive guidelines, rather than the other two controls.
Coproduction
Brzezinski and Lance recommended prohibition of coproduction
agreements except in very limited circumstances. Brzezinski noted that
it would be inconsistent to approve coproduction agreements while
restricting U.S. exports of military equipment. All other participants
recommended adoption of restrictive, but not prohibitive, guidelines,
although Brown, Warnke, and Benson stated they could accept the guide-
line calling for prohibition.
Sensitive Weapons
Most of the participants agreed that a list of sensitive weapons
needs to be established. Vance, Brown, Smith, and Brzezinski recom-
mended keeping the list private, Brown asserting that a public list could
be an attractive nuisance. Lance recommended maintaining the current
system of informal, unpublished guidelines, while Warnke said that a
list would be unnecessary if we established a presumption against
sales.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Arms Export Control Board
There was agreement in principle to establish an interagency Arms
Export Control Board, advisory to the Secretary of State, and chaired
by the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance. Terms of refer-
ence will be established in a follow-on memorandum, with special em-
phasis given to ensuring the President is kept apprised of significant
developments.
Multilateral Initiatives
Vance reiterated our commitment to seek multilateral cooperation
after establishing our own policy. He stated that it would be ACDA and
State’s responsibility to develop a proposed program for submission to
the President.
269.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Arms Transfer Policy
PRESENT
The Secretary
Mrs. Lucy Benson, Under Secretary, Security Assistance
Mr. Robert Kimmitt, NSC Staff
Mr. Kempton Jenkins, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Congressional Relations
Senator Sparkman
Senator Baker
Senator Stennis
Senator Percy
Senator Pell
Senator McGovern
Senator Clark
Senator Stone
Senator Sarbanes
Senator Thurmond
Senator Javits
Drafted by Jenkins; cleared by Benson in substance and Kimmitt in draft; and approved
by Twaddell on May 4. The meeting took place at the Capitol. Vance held a similar
meeting with members of the House of Representatives on April 26. (Ibid.)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Senator Glenn
Senator Inouye2
Before the session got underway, Baker raised some questions
about how genuine the consultation was to be. He noted the Gwertz-
man story in the New York Times last Monday3 and wondered whether,
in fact, the President had already made his decisions. The Secretary in-
formed him that the decisions had not been made and regretted the
leak. He pointed out that the Gwertzman story concerned an options
paper4 and what he was discussing today was a Presidential draft
drawn up after considering the options paper.
The Secretary then distributed copies of the draft5 to each Member
and led the Members through a point-by-point consideration of it.
ANNOTATED PD5
After reviewing results of the Policy Review Committee meeting
held on April 12, 1977, to discuss US conventional arms transfer policy,
I have concluded that we must restrain the transfer of conventional
arms by recognizing that arms transfers are an exceptional foreign
policy implement, to be used only in instances where it can be clearly
demonstrated that the transfers contribute to our national security
interests.
In establishing this policy of restraint, the United States will con-
tinue to utilize arms transfers to promote our security and the security
of our allies and close friends.
Recognizing that unilateral restraint can have only limited effec-
tiveness without multilateral cooperation, the United States will con-
tinue its efforts to urge other suppliers to join us in pursuing policies of
restraint. In addition, we believe that regional agreements among pur-
chasers of arms can contribute significantly to curbing the proliferation
of conventional weaponry, and we will assist in whatever way possible
in the conclusion of such agreements.
The United States will give continued emphasis to formulating
and conducting our security assistance programs in a manner which
3 Underneath this sentence, Carter wrote “Let’s do so. J” and drew an arrow to the
word “until.”
4 Secret; Sensitive. All brackets are in the original.
5 Suggested new language is underlined. Existing language to be removed is brack-
eted. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
will promote and advance respect for human rights in recipient
countries.
Further, an assessment will henceforth be made of the economic
impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those less
developed countries which receive US economic assistance.
In recognition of our special treaty obligations with NATO coun-
tries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, these countries will be ex-
empted as appropriate from the dollar volume restraints and other con-
trols established below:
In furtherance of this policy of restraint, and except in extra-
ordinary circumstances personally approved by me, I direct that:
1. The dollar volume (in constant 1976 dollars) of [Transfers of]
new commitments under the Foreign Military Sales and Military
Assistance Programs for weapons and weapons-related items in FY
1978 will be reduced from the FY 1977 total [(exempting transfers to
NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan in both cases)]. It
will be our goal to continue to reduce total dollar volume [s approved]
in each subsequent year.
2. With regard to newly-developed advanced weapons systems:
a. [Except in extraordinary circumstances personally approved by
the President,] The United States will not be the first supplier to intro-
duce into a region an advanced weapons system which creates a new or
significantly higher combat capability.6
b. Commitment for sale [, cooperative research and development,]
or coproduction of newly-developed advanced weapons systems is
prohibited until the systems are operationally deployed with US forces.
c. The Secretary of State will establish more extensive guidelines
for assessing requests for newly-developed advanced weapons sys-
tems, including requirements 1) that supplying the system would
uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military func-
tions which serve US security interests, [and] 2) that less-advanced, ex-
isting systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable
from the United States, and 3) that providing these systems will not re-
quire the presence in country of large numbers of Americans for long
periods of time.7
3. [Unless an exception is personally approved by the President,]
Unique advanced weapons systems developed or significantly modi-
fied solely for export will be transferred only within the treaty relation-
ships referred to above [only to NATO countries, Australia, New Zea-
land, and Japan].8
6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Too tight a restric-
tion—why delete?” and then crossed the phrase out.
7 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”
8 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
4. Agreements for coproduction of significant weapons, equip-
ment, or major components, beyond assembly of subcomponents and
the fabrication of high-turnover spare parts are prohibited, [except
with NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, or where
the President determines that such agreement is justified by extraordi-
nary circumstances.] Requests for any other items (e.g., major overhaul
facilities) will be subject to guidelines applied globally, analyzing
closely whether the proposed coproduction project would over time
provide equipment in excess of local needs. In each approved agree-
ment, terms under which third-country exports will be permitted, if at
all, will be stipulated, emphasizing that coproduction is intended for
the coproducer’s requirements and not for export.
5. [Unless otherwise specified, no significant weapons, equipment,
or major components acquired from the United States will be trans-
ferred to third countries without US permission.] In addition to the re-
quirements of law and existing policies concerning re-transfer assur-
ances, the US, as a condition of sale for certain weapons, equipment, or
major components, may stipulate that the US will not entertain any re-
quests for re-transfers.9
6. Policy level approval by the Department of State will be re-
quired before authorizing 1) licensing for sales promotion or technical
data transmission by private firms, and 2) US military or civilian
briefings, site surveys, transmission of technical information, or any
similar activity which might promote the sale of items of major defense
equipment [defense articles and services]. Further, US embassies and
military elements will not promote or assist in the promotion of arms
sales without specific authorization. Finally, the Secretary of Defense
will continue the review of government procedures which may pro-
mote the sale of arms, reporting the results of this review within 60
days.
9 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
271.
Presidential Directive/NSC–131
Washington, May 13, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer Policy
After reviewing results of the Policy Review Committee meeting
held on April 12, 1977,2 to discuss US conventional arms transfer
policy, I have concluded that we must restrain the transfer of conven-
tional arms by recognizing that arms transfers are an exceptional for-
eign policy implement, to be used only in instances where it can be
clearly demonstrated that the transfers contribute to our national secu-
rity interests.
In establishing this policy of restraint, the United States will con-
tinue to utilize arms transfers to promote our security and the security
of our allies and close friends. Recognizing that unilateral restraint can
have only limited effectiveness without multilateral cooperation, the
United States will continue its efforts to urge other suppliers to join us
in pursuing policies of restraint. In addition, we believe that regional
agreements among purchasers of arms can contribute significantly to
curbing the proliferation of conventional weaponry, and we will assist
in whatever way possible in the conclusion of such agreements.
Secret; Sensitive. Carter signed the top of the first page and initialed the bottom of pages 2
publicly announced and provided guidance for an explanation of the new policy to be
held “at highest appropriate Foreign Ministry level” with each host government. (Tele-
tral Foreign Policy File, D770179–0462)
2 See Tab C, Document 268.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
The United States will give continued emphasis to formulating
and conducting our security assistance programs in a manner which
will promote and advance respect for human rights in recipient
countries.
Further, an assessment will henceforth be made of the economic
impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those less
developed countries which receive US economic assistance.
In recognition of our special treaty obligations with NATO coun-
tries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, these countries will be ex-
empted as appropriate from the dollar volume restraints and other con-
trols established below. The United States will remain faithful to its
treaty obligations, and will also honor its historic responsibilities re-
garding Israel’s security.3
In furtherance of this policy of restraint, and except in extraordi-
nary circumstances personally approved by me or where I determine
that countries friendly to the United States must depend on advanced
weaponry to offset quantitative and other disadvantages in order to
maintain a regional balance, I direct that:
1. The dollar volume (in constant 1976 dollars) of new commit-
ments under the Foreign Military Sales and Military Assistance Pro-
grams for weapons and weapons-related items in FY 1978 will be re-
duced from the FY 1977 total. It will be our goal to continue to reduce
total dollar volume in each subsequent year.
2. With regard to newly-developed advanced weapons systems:
a. The United States will not be the first supplier to introduce into a
region an advanced weapons system which creates a new or signifi-
cantly higher combat capability.
b. Commitment for sale or coproduction of newly-developed ad-
vanced weapons systems is prohibited until the systems are operation-
ally deployed with US forces.
c. The Secretary of State will establish more extensive guidelines
for assessing requests for newly-developed advanced weapons sys-
tems, including requirements 1) that supplying the system would
uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military func-
tions which serve US security interests, 2) that less-advanced, existing
systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable from the
United States, and 3) that providing these systems will not require the
presence in country of large numbers of Americans for long periods of
time.
3 At a May 16 Cabinet meeting, Brzezinski noted that the PRM had been “revised in
accordance with the President’s directive. It now recognizes the special status of Israel.”
White House Counsel Robert “Lipshutz and others have reported that the policy is being
favorably received in the Jewish community.” (Minutes of the Cabinet meeting, May 16;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Unique advanced weapons systems developed or significantly
modified solely for export will be transferred only within the treaty re-
lationships referred to above.
4. Agreements for coproduction of significant weapons, equip-
ment, or major components, beyond assembly of subcomponents and
the fabrication of high-turnover spare parts are prohibited. Requests
for any other items (e.g., major overhaul facilities) will be subject to
guidelines applied globally, analyzing closely whether the proposed
coproduction project would over time provide equipment in excess of
local needs. In each approved agreement, terms under which third-
country exports will be permitted, if at all, will be stipulated, empha-
sizing that coproduction is intended for the coproducer’s requirements
and not for export.
5. In addition to the requirements of law and existing policies con-
cerning re-transfer assurances, the US, as a condition of sale for certain
weapons, equipment, or major components, may stipulate that the US
will not entertain any requests for re-transfers.
6. Policy level approval by the Department of State will be re-
quired before authorizing 1) licensing for sales promotion or technical
data transmission by private firms, and 2) US military or civilian
briefings, site surveys, transmissions of technical information, or any
similar activity which might promote the sale of items of major defense
equipment. Further, US embassies and military elements will not pro-
mote or assist in the promotion of arms sales without specific authori-
zation. Finally, the Secretary of Defense will continue the review of
government procedures which may promote the sale of arms, re-
porting the results of this review within 60 days.
J.C.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
272.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, May 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Fiscal Year 1977 Foreign Military Sales
Because of the President’s interest in monitoring the level of for-
eign military sales, the Department of State, in coordination with the
Department of Defense, should provide the following Foreign Military
rent dollars):
1. Foreign Military Sales agreements signed;
2. Letters of Offer and Acceptance extended, but not signed;
3. Letters of Offer and Acceptance pending (sales finally approved,
but LOA not extended);
4. Letters of Offer and Acceptance projected, but not currently
pending.
Also, on the basis of these figures, please provide a total dollar esti-
mate of Foreign Military Sales agreements which will be signed in
Fiscal Year 1977; i.e., the figure which will be reported in next year’s
Congressional Presentation Document.
A reply is requested by June 10, 1977.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
273.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, June 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Lockheed’s Request for Amendment to the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations Concerning C–130 Aircraft
This memorandum requests your decision on a request by Lock-
heed that the C–130 military transport aircraft manufactured by that
firm be removed from the category of “significant combat equipment”
on the United States Munitions List. This administrative designation
causes the C–130 to be within the definition of “major defense equip-
ment” contained in the Arms Export Control Act. That Act prohibits
commercial sales to non-NATO countries of major defense equipment
under contracts of $25 million or more, thus requiring that foreign sales
of three or more C–130s be handled under the Foreign Military Sales
(FMS) program. Lockheed complains that the FMS procedures are un-
duly protracted and that without commercial sales the production line
may have to close before the company receives sufficient FMS orders to
continue its operation. Also relevant, although not mentioned by Lock-
heed, is the Defense Department’s estimate that Lockheed receives ap-
proximately $500,000 more for a commercially sold C–130 than for one
sold under FMS procedures.
Background:
Since January 1969, most major items on the Munitions List, in-
cluding all listed military aircraft, have been designated as “significant
combat equipment.” The original consequence of designation as “sig-
nificant combat equipment” was that an export license would not be
given for commercial sale of a designated item unless the foreign pur-
chaser had given the Department of State direct assurances against
retransfer.
Last year, the significant combat equipment designation was given
additional legal significance by being made a part of the definition of
“major defense equipment” in the Arms Export Control Act. Munitions
List articles which, like the C–130, fall within the definition of major de-
fense equipment are subject to additional controls under the Arms Ex-
tion markings. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum,
Carter wrote “To Cy. J.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
port Control Act, including the limitation that export licenses may not
be issued for commercial sales of $25 million or more to non-NATO
countries.
Significant combat equipment designation has also been proposed
as a criterion for determining which arms sales proposals by U.S. firms
will require prior State Department approval.
Evaluation of Lockheed’s Request:
Our view, shared by the Department of Defense, is that Lockheed’s
problem is a temporary one and is not as grave as the company de-
scribes it. There is little effective competition for the C–130 and foreign
demand for this versatile, reliable aircraft remains high. The Secretary
of Defense met with the President of Lockheed-Georgia, Mr. Robert
Ormsby, on June 16,2 to discuss ways in which FMS procedures could
be expedited and possibly inequitable features concerning cost reim-
bursements to the manufacturer could be improved. We understand
that steps are being taken by the Department of Defense to offset some
of the present slack and thus enable Lockheed to continue C–130 pro-
duction, even though major foreign sales will have to be through FMS
rather than commercial channels. Accordingly, a change in the Interna-
tional Traffic in Arms Regulations does not seem necessary.
If the regulations were changed as requested by Lockheed, we
would doubtless receive many requests for equal treatment from other
affected companies. Lockheed’s argument that the C–130 is “nonlethal”
would apply equally to many other items of significant combat equip-
ment. With respect to military aircraft alone, we could expect requests
for similar relief from the manufacturers of tanker aircraft, helicopters,
trainers and military aircraft designed for surveillance, reconnaissance,
mapping, etc.
While we have received a number of expressions of Congressional
interest on Lockheed’s behalf, we have not heard from those members
of Congress who have no direct constituent interest in this matter, but
who are advocates of arms transfer restraint and whose cooperation
will be necessary for the successful implementation of your policy.
Some of these members would probably be concerned with a decision
that encouraged the use of the less stringently controlled commercial
channels for sales of military aircraft.
In sum, we believe special relief for Lockheed is not warranted and
would risk creating doubts in industry and Congress regarding the Ad-
ministration’s resolve to control and restrain arms transfers.
2 A record of this conversation has not been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Options:
You could direct amendment of the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations, either by deleting the C–130 from the Munitions List or by
deleting it from the definition of significant combat equipment. For the
reasons set out above, I believe that neither action should be taken at
this time and that we should, instead, seek to remove any legitimate
complaints by Lockheed through improvements in FMS procedures.
Recommendations:
That you authorize the Department of State to inform Lockheed
that the C–130 will continue to be designated as “significant combat
equipment” and that we will seek to improve FMS procedures con-
cerning its sale.3
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option, and wrote underneath “Cy—Let me know
what specifically is done re FMS procedures. It seems to me that a non-weapon configu-
ration would make it possible to sell C–130’s with minimum delay. It’s a good safety
valve to retain friendly relations & not violate offensive weapons constraints. J.C.”
274.
Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence
(Turner) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, June 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Control of Incentives that Stimulate Arms Transfers
dertaken the Presidentially-directed review of policies and procedures
that may promote the sale of arms, insofar as these may relate to Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency responsibilities and operations.
2. As a result of this review, I am satisfied that present Agency pol-
icies and procedures do not serve, directly or indirectly, to stimulate
foreign requests for arms transfers. As you know, under present rules,
Arms Transfer/FMS Policy, 1977. Secret. A stamped notation at the top reads “SEC DEF
all agencies are providing self-serving disclaimer, and many of them may well be correct.
Are we in DOD the only [illegible]? I doubt it. (State for example is worse). HB.”
2 Not found.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
before the Agency could become involved in any paramilitary or intel-
ligence support programs, such programs would have to be submitted
to the NSC/SCC for review and to the President for decision. To the ex-
tent such programs might encompass transfers of military or military-
related equipment, the Agency’s procedures would not, in any event,
involve sales promotional activities, incentives to defense contractors
to promote sales, or other practices that might stimulate foreign re-
quests for arms transfers.
3. I understand that a joint State-Defense cable is being drafted to
provide new policy guidelines on this subject to US foreign service
posts in the field. I propose to send a similar cable through Agency
channels to assure that our field personnel are fully aware of the new
policy thrust.
Stansfield Turner
275.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, July 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Foreign Military Sales Procedures Regarding C–130 Aircraft
When you approved my recommendation of June 212 to continue
designation of the Lockheed C–130 military transport aircraft as “sig-
nificant combat equipment”, you also asked me to inform you what
had been done to improve Foreign Military Sales (FMS) procedures as
they relate to the sale of these aircraft. You also inquired whether a
non-weapon configuration would make it possible to sell these aircraft
with minimum delay.
The C–130 is basically a military transport aircraft. It is not nor-
mally equipped with weapons, and has been sold to many countries.
Thus far you have approved the sale of C–130s without armament con-
figuration to Sudan, the Philippines, Korea, Bolivia and Zaire. The
C–130 may be sold commercially if the total value of the sale is less than
$25 million. Since three C–130s and related equipment cost more than
2 See Document 273.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
this, commercial sales are effectively restricted to no more than two air-
craft. Lockheed also makes a civilian model of the C–130 (the L–100
series) which does not meet some of the military specifications. In any
event, most governments appear to prefer to purchase the military
model on a government-to-government basis under FMS procedures.
The time required to process the government-to-government sale
of a C–130 is divided as follows: 1) USG approval process (i.e., from re-
ceipt of a country request to purchase through completion of the statu-
tory Congressional notification) and 2) the subsequent contracting
process (time required for negotiation and signature of a contract with
Lockheed) after the Congressional review period is completed.
Some delay in the USG approval process is attributable to the
present requirement that, with the exception of NATO countries, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand and Japan, we are required to send all proposed
C–130 sales which require Congressional notification to you for ap-
proval. In order to save processing time, I recommend that you author-
ize me to approve sales of non-weapon configured C–130 aircraft
worldwide, and refer to you only those proposed sales which clearly
involve sensitive political aspects—e.g., for countries like Egypt.
With regard to the time involved in the contracting process, the
Department of Defense informs me that in the past protracted negotia-
tions between the U.S. Air Force and Lockheed appear to have been
caused by Lockheed attempting to obtain the most favorable price in
the knowledge that a government-to-government agreement had al-
ready been reached for a sale. The Department of Defense claims to
have largely resolved with Lockheed the matter of delays in contract
pricing by taking actions to enable Lockheed to continue its C–130 pro-
duction line without interruption. Specifically, once a sale has received
the required Executive and Congressional approvals, DOD now enters
into letter contracts which permit Lockheed to proceed with produc-
tion pending negotiation of a definitized contract. The Department of
Defense informs me that it is also working more closely with Lockheed
to avoid a production gap in the C–130 line due to crew training
problems or delays in providing support equipment from US Govern-
ment sources. We hope these actions will result in the contracting for
sale of C–130 aircraft in a time span consistent with both the US and the
contractor’s interests.
Recommendation:
That you authorize me to approve the sale worldwide of non-
weapon configured C–130 aircraft, including notifications to Congress.3
3 Carter checked the “Disapprove” option and underneath wrote “Send to me for
immediate approval—minimize delays—Indicate time required for each transaction.
J.C.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
276.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Foreign Military Sales Procedures Regarding C–130 Aircraft
The memorandum from Secretary Vance (Tab A)2 recommends
that you authorize the Secretary of State to approve world-wide sales
of nonweapon configured C–130 aircraft in order to reduce the time
required to process government-to-government sales. As indicated
below, I believe delays can be reduced without delegating approval
authority.
On June 28, you delegated approval authority for conventional
arms transfers requiring Congressional notification only to NATO,
Australia, New Zealand and Japan.3 The delegation of authority was
limited to the countries exempted from most of the PD/NSC–13 con-
trols,4 including the FY ’78 dollar volume control, so that the bureauc-
racy would face the tough trade-offs which have to be made knowing
that their recommendations will be personally reviewed by the Presi-
dent. It would be an unfortunate bureaucratic signal to change that de-
cision so soon.
The argument that delegating the approval authority would save
time is not persuasive. The vast majority of the time is consumed in
coordination within the Departments of State and Defense. Therefore, I
recommend that you continue to approve cases which go to Congress, but that
requests to purchase C–130s (and other major systems) be forwarded to you for
a decision as soon as the required staffing and coordination are completed. The
current practice is to hold requests until a sufficient number have accu-
mulated to assemble a decision package.
RECOMMENDATION
That you continue to approve sales of C–130 aircraft which go to
Congress except to NATO, Australia, New Zealand and Japan as previ-
Sent for action.
2 See Document 275.
3 Carter’s decision is recorded in a memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, June 28;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues, Mathews Subject
4 See Document 271.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ously delegated. Cases will be forwarded to you as soon as they are
ready for a decision.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE
OTHER
5 Carter checked the “Approve” option and underneath wrote “JC.”
277.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, September 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Arms Sales Totals
In response to a May 272 request from the President, you reported
on June 13,3 a best estimate of the total dollar volume of FMS agree-
lion for the AWACS sale to Iran. I now understand that current staff es-
timates of the total for this year are $9.9 billion not including AWACS.
Thus the estimate appears to have changed by more than one billion
dollars in the past three months. In order to allow the President to con-
sider the proper disposition of the AWACS sale, please provide by
COB tomorrow, Friday, September 9, your best current estimate of the
dollar total for FY ’77.
In making decisions on the timing and content of arms sales
packages under the ceiling imposed by PD–13, it is essential for the
President to have accurate and timely estimates of the dollars volumes
that have been and are likely to be committed in any given year. There-
fore on September 30, and monthly thereafter, you should provide a re-
port containing the following:
Mathews Subject File, Box
2, Arms
Sales: Dollar
Volume/Ceiling:
Confidential.
2 See Document 272.
3 Not found.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
—The cumulative total of FMS agreements signed since the begin-
ning of the current fiscal year, including a country-by-country listing of
the totals for each of the ten largest recipients in that year.
—A detailed listing and dollar total of letters of offer and accept-
ance extended, but not signed.
—The same for sales that have been approved by the President (or
the Secretary of State) but not yet approved by Congress.
—The same for requests for letters of offer and acceptance in the
clearance process within the bureaucracy including date of receipt.
—The same for serious indications of interest from foreign gov-
ernments for which we have not yet received a formal request.
In each category, totals should be broken down for exempted and
non-exempted countries.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
278.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Arms Control Issues: SALT, ASAT, Conventional Arms No. II of IV
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
The Secretary
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
Marshall D. Shulman
Dobrynin came in Monday afternoon, October 17, at the Secre-
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
by Shulman; and approved by David Anderson (S/S) on October 31. The meeting took
place in the Department of State. The conversation is published in full as Document 53 in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union. Vance informed the Embassy in
Moscow about Dobrynin’s visit in Telegram 251209 to Moscow, October 19; National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Conventional Arms Transfers and Sales—The Secretary noted that
Gelb had raised this point with Bessmertnykh2 and that Bessmertnykh
had said that it might be a long time before a reply was received from
Moscow. The Secretary said the President attaches considerable impor-
tance to this subject and urged Dobrynin to do everything possible to
speed up a reply.3 Dobrynin replied that he would do so, but he went
on to say, in what he described as an unofficial reaction, that the US
was selling more and more arms around the world, including to some
of the neighbors of the Soviet Union. In this connection, he cited sales to
Iran. He noted the Administration’s declared intent to reduce arms
sales and asked why the US had been speeding up the process. The Sec-
retary said that many items had been in the pipeline, but an effort was
being made to hold sales and transfers down. This was reflected in the
fact that the total would come to about $9.8 billion this year, instead of
the $11 billion originally projected. This includes some very expensive
items, such as AWACS. There would be further reductions next year,
he said. Dobrynin asked why not show some restraint as a good will
gesture. The Secretary replied that restraint was being shown and that
AWACS, for example, had a purely defensive function.
2 Not found.
3 In a September 23 meeting with Gromyko, Carter “expressed his concern over
continuing arms sales around the world, and noted that in this respect we were guilty of
excess to some extent, as was the Soviet Union. We were eager to cooperate with the So-
viet Union on this subject and prepared to do so in the UNGA session.” Gromkyo replied
that “both sides had sinned in this respect.” (Memorandum of Conversation, September
23; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Materials, Subject File, Box 35,

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
279.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, November 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Managing the Arms Transfer Program in FY 1978
Because of the President’s commitment to curtail U.S. arms
transfers in FY 1978 by reducing new agreements from the total in FY
1977, and in order to make those transfers which are in the national in-
terest expeditiously and efficiently, the Secretary of State should coor-
dinate the development of options for consideration by the PRC before
gram. In preparation, the Secretary of State in close coordination with
the Secretary of Defense should undertake the following steps on an ur-
gent basis:
1. To assist in identifying existing commitments, prepare a sum-
mary of outstanding arms sales commitments from previous years
including: Letters of Offer and Acceptance extended but not signed;
proposed sales which have completed Congressional review; and pro-
posed sales which are in advanced stages of processing within the Ex-
ecutive Branch.
2. To assist in forecasting FY 1978 support sales, prepare summary
data relating to follow-on support sales made annually since FY 1973,
including ammunition, logistics, and technical assistance.
3. To provide the information required to control future sales, de-
velop a new management information system for arms transfers in-
cluding at a minimum the following characteristics:
• As near as possible to real-time recording of the dollar values of
signed Letters of Offer; but in no case should the delay be longer than
five days.
• Priority tracking, manual if necessary, of large sales (in excess of
$100 million).
• The use of parametric statistical techniques to forecast aggregate
totals of smaller sales establishing explicit confidence intervals.
• The necessary precision to respond to monthly reporting require-
ments during the second half of each fiscal year with accuracies better
than plus or minus five percent.
Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
• The inclusion of scope changes to Letters of Offer as an explicit ele-
ment of Executive Branch reporting on arms transfers. Henceforth,
scope changes should be counted in the fiscal year in which they occur
and be included in all estimates of arms transfer totals.
4. To allow a preliminary allocation of the dollars available under
the ceiling, prepare options taking into account: Letters of Offer already
extended; follow-on support sales; sales to which the United States has
a political commitment; and, sales of high priority to recipient nations.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
280.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, the Director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke), the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones), and the Director of
Central Intelligence (Turner)1
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Arms Transfer Policy Implementation
In the interest of relating the goals and guidelines of PD–132 to our
relationships with key countries and within key regions, the Secretary
of State should coordinate the preparation of interagency arms trans-
fers studies on Africa, Latin America, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the
smaller states of the Persian Gulf. These studies should consider the
purposes and the possible consequences of transferring arms and other
military equipment of varying categories and levels of sophistication to
these particular countries and regions.
The studies should pose options for PRC consideration and subse-
quent Presidential decision regarding both our general arms transfer
posture toward these countries and regions and, to the degree possible,
our disposition concerning major outstanding or anticipated requests.
Comparable interagency studies regarding other regions or major
countries should also be undertaken as determined by the Secretary of
State.
2 See Document 271.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
PRC consideration of each of the five studies mentioned above
should take place before January 1, 1978.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
281.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
US–USSR Conventional Arms Transfer Talks
PARTICIPANTS
State
Dep Sec Warren Christopher
Mr. Leslie Gelb (Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs)
Mr. William Luers (Dep Asst Sec for European Affairs)
Defense
Mr. Walter Slocombe (Prin Dep Asst Sec for International Security Affairs)
JCS
Adm Patrick Hannifin (Director, JCS)
CIA
Adm Stansfield Turner
Mr. George Allen (National Intelligence Officer for Special Studies)
ACDA
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny (Acting Director)
Mr. George Allen (Asst Director)
White House
Mr. David Aaron (Dep Asst to the President for National Security Affairs)
NSC
Reginald Bartholomew
Jessica Tuchman
Leslie Denend
The SCC met to review the proposed strategy for talks with the So-
viets scheduled to begin on December 14. Issues and conclusions that
were reached follow:
White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. The Context: Our Overall Restraint Strategy
The US is pursuing talks in three interdependent forums: US-
European; US–USSR; and, US-recipient. We have met with the Euro-
pean suppliers. They were cautious and skeptical. Their economic
health depends to some extent on their arms industries, and particu-
larly, on arms exports. They consider Soviet cooperation essential. In
our first meeting with the Soviets, we intend to stress the mutual in-
terest we share in arms transfer restraint including: better bilateral rela-
tions, a reduction in the likelihood of US–USSR confrontations, and a
lessening of international tensions. At the UN Special Session on Disar-
mament next spring, we will sound-out recipient country concerns re-
garding arms transfer restraint and present the US case.
2. US Leverage and Soviet Reactions
Because Soviet continued participation is critical to our multilat-
eral efforts, we must succeed in these talks in getting agreement for a
second meeting. We will emphasize the difficulty of sustaining our uni-
lateral restraint for very long if multilateral progress cannot be demon-
strated. There is also the implicit threat of publicly casting the Soviets in
an unfavorable light on an important disarmament issue should they
refuse to continue the talks. We can expect the Soviets to remain cau-
tious and, as they stated, respond to specific US proposals. We are
moderately hopeful that they will at least agree to a second round of
talks.
3. Substance of the US Strategy for These Talks
There was agreement that this first round should be exploratory
and conducted for the most part on an illustrative basis. In reviewing
our restraint policy as well as the guidelines discussed with the Euro-
peans, we would present these as approaches for a discussion of pos-
sible ways to achieve multilateral cooperation. It is important during
this early stage of talks which we believe will be lengthy and complex,
not to raise fears among recipients of a US–USSR condominium.
Regarding the possibility of proposing specific regions of the
world for supplier restraint, we will raise the issue of regions to define
the problem of arms competition, and suggest that different coopera-
tive agreements might well be required in different regions; however,
we will not identify specific regions as candidates for supplier restraint.
Regarding the suggestion of specific weapons systems such as
surface-to-surface missiles (SSMs) and man-portable air defense
systems (MANPADS), we will take the view that outside of NATO and
the major states involved in the East–West confrontation, there are
areas where these types of weapons, because of their destructive power
or susceptibility to terrorist diversion, should not be transferred. We

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
will emphasize our mutual interest in restraining these kinds of arms
transfers. While not amounting to a formal US proposal, these issues
will be raised explicitly enough to give the Soviets something to think
about and to respond to.
282.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Liaison Office
in Peking1
294655. Subject: Briefing the PRC on U.S.-Soviet Talks on Conven-
tional Arms Transfers.
1. U.S. and Soviet officials will meet in Washington on December
14 to discuss prospects for cooperation in limiting conventional arms
transfers. The U.S. side will be represented by PM Director, Leslie Gelb,
and the Soviet side by Ambassador Khlestov, Chief of MFA’s Treaty
and Legal Department. Talks will be taking place at U.S. initiative and
are motivated by our concern that U.S. efforts to limit arms transfers
abroad will be undercut unless the USSR and other major international
suppliers also agree to restrain their transfers. The Soviets appear to ap-
preciate that this question has a bearing on U.S.–Soviet relations, but
they are approaching the subject with great caution and we cannot pre-
dict whether they can be drawn into a constructive dialogue.
2. Given the PRC’s suspicions that the U.S. is all too prone to deal
with the USSR, at the expense of others, we think it important to give
the Chinese advance notice of the talks and their purpose. In particular,
we wish to stress that the talks are an obvious corollary to our own
arms transfer policy and, if successful, would limit the potential for So-
viet opportunism. In addition, we want to make clear that the talks
with the Soviets, and possibly with other powers, will not be used to
pressure the PRC to join an international arms control regime. Obvi-
ously, we would welcome Chinese cooperation, but we do not expect it
at this stage.
cret; Priority; Nodis. Sent for information Priority to the White House. Drafted by Wil-
liam Gleysteen (EA); cleared by Harry Thayer (EA/PRCM), Alan Romberg (S/P), Pris-
cilla Clapp (PM), Shulman (S/MS), William Luers (EUR), and Lowell Fleischer (S/S–O);
and approved by Richard Holbrooke (EA).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Accordingly, USLO should approach the Foreign Ministry at an
appropriate level to make the following points, stressing that we do not
intend any publicity or widespread briefings of other countries:
(A) U.S. and USSR will shortly begin talks in Washington at the as-
sistant secretary-level to determine whether there is any prospect of
complementing U.S. arms transfer guidelines by similar restraints on
the part of other international arms suppliers.
(B) The talks are taking place at U.S. initiative, and the U.S. does
not know whether there is any prospect for Soviet cooperation. The
U.S. will stress, however, that there are limits on our willingness to take
unilateral measures.
(C) If successful, such talks could enhance our prospects for inter-
national restraints on arms transfers, thereby reducing the potential for
Soviet opportunism.
(D) Obviously, we would welcome Chinese cooperation in this
field, but our talks are not conditioned on this. If the Soviets seek to tie
any agreement to Chinese cooperation, we will reject such an effort as
inappropriate.
(E) We will keep the PRC informed of any significant progress in
the talks.
Christopher
283.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
17935. Subject: Soviet Attitudes on Conventional Arms Transfer
Controls. Ref: State 293007.2
Summary and Introduction
The Embassy’s assessment of Soviet attitudes towards the Conven-
tional Arms Transfers (CAT) talks is that the Russians will initially play
a conservative, waiting game. We base this assessment on our evalu-
ation of a variety of factors which we believe contribute to (A) an inhi-
bition on the part of the Soviets to change their current policies in this
area and (B) a desire to explore and assess parameters of U.S. intentions
Confidential; Immediate.
2 On December 8, the Department of State had asked for the Embassy’s “assessment
as to likely tactics Soviet Delegation” to the CAT talks. (Telegram 293007 to Moscow, De-

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
on CAT. As they have told us on several occasions, their line is that
arms transfers result from the political situation in a given area and that
political solutions to existing differences must first be devised before
realistic programs designed to control arms transfers can be imple-
mented. In one sense this “policy” amounts to avoiding a CAT control
policy. Nevertheless, it does not represent a totally negative attitude
toward all aspects of arms transfers controls and thus permits the So-
viets to take positive, if selective, stands towards such controls should
they choose to do so. We feel that the Soviets will speak favorably, but
not very concretely, about the possibilities for CAT controls in this first
round of what they undoubtedly believe will be a long series of negoti-
ations. End summary and introduction.
1. Factors inhibiting change: for the Soviets there are several
factors which will incline them toward great caution in the CAT talks.
Among these are:
—Oft repeated Soviet “principled” commitment to promote the
cause of revolutionary liberation movements and “progressive” states
in the third world. In these areas, the Soviets rely proportionately more
than the U.S. on arms transfers to establish influence. Unlike the West,
the Soviets generally lack the capability to significantly project their in-
fluence through financial, commercial and cultural means, particularly
in comparison with the U.S. The Soviets may therefore feel they have
proportionately more to lose in terms of influence if there is a mutual
reduction in arms transfers.
—Soviets would be concerned about the Chinese (A) filling the
vacuum produced by Soviet reduction in arms transfers to national lib-
eration movements or “progressive” states; (B) denouncing the Soviets
for working with U.S. to seek “super power hegemony.”
—The transfer of Soviet weaponry, even though individual items
are sometimes discounted (e.g., to Peru) or even free (e.g., to Cuba), is a
reliable means of acquiring substantial foreign exchange. To the extent
that Soviet oil exports may decline, the sale of weaponry would assume
a larger importance in this regard.
—Moscow may suspect that the U.S. will be primarily interested in
attempting to concentrate arms transfer limitations on those very hot
spots that the Soviets find the most tempting, i.e., the Middle East and
the Horn of Africa.
2. Factors arguing for controls: we would list the following:
—The failure of past enormous cumulative outlays of military
assistance to third world countries (e.g., Indonesia, Egypt, Somalia) to
provide important and lasting political returns cannot but have had an
impact on the Soviet leadership. This factor alone must have contrib-
uted to the Soviet decision to participate in exploratory talks with the
U.S. Soviet concerns influencing caution or reluctance listed para 2 will,
however, need to be satisfied somewhat if talks are to reach tangible
levels of progress.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Soviet concern that unchecked arms transfers will in the long
run contribute to the modernization of the armed forces of a potentially
dangerous (and eventually menacing) adversary: China.
3. Prospects for the current talks: We believe the Soviets will ap-
proach the current talks with the utmost caution, much in the manner
in which they have examined other arms control proposals which im-
pact on central political-military policies and activities, e.g., CTB and
SALT. These talks will, therefore, be more difficult for the Soviets than
those which have only a peripheral impact on foreign policy, e.g. chem-
ical weapons, Indian Ocean, ENMOD. This caution will be further
reinforced by the fact that the Soviets, to the best of our knowledge,
have not yet developed a cohesive public policy with respect to arms
transfers. Our attempts to draw MFA officials and USA institute
staffers into detailed discussions of possible arms transfers controls
have been unsuccessful. Over the past eight months (since the March
proposal for a working group on this subject),3 we have elicited nothing
more from our Soviet interlocutors than a restatement of the Soviet
policy as outlined in the first paragraph above and the comment that,
since these talks are at U.S. initiative, it is up to the U.S. to take the first
step. Moreover, recent indirect contacts with relevant Soviet officials
have failed to produce any signs of a new policy consensus. Although
Soviets will be primarily interested in exploring U.S. intentions in the
talks, they will not want to be put in a tactical disadvantage of simply
discussing U.S. proposals. Instead, they will probably attempt to move
the discussions along lines more favorable to them without clearly indi-
cating their objectives in the CAT area. They may repeat the few consis-
tent Soviet reactions which we have heard on this subject:
—A critical review of the volume and character of U.S. arms sales
and transfers;
—A charge that U.S. practices set the tone and provide the mo-
mentum for world-wide conventional arms transfers;
—a criticism of the role played by U.S. allies in supplementing U.S.
transfers. (We should of course be aware of the arms transfer role of
such Soviet surrogates as the GDR and Czechoslovakia.)
5. It is possible that the Soviets may attempt to move the conversa-
tions towards discussions focusing on initial measures which would
impact much more severely on the U.S. and its allies. An example of
this might be some type of recommendation that would limit transfers
of arms to Latin America (less Cuba) or to China. Or Soviets could sug-
3 During a March 29 press conference in Moscow, Vance said that he and Gromyko
had agreed to set up bilateral working groups to discuss numerous issues, including con-
ventional arms transfers. The text of the press conference is in telegram 3034 from the Sec-
retary’s Delegation in Moscow, March 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770108–0039.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
gest that limitations apply only to highly sophisticated weapons which
they tend not to supply in any case. The Soviets may be willing to take
the plunge and suggest a discussion of arms limitations in the Persian
Gulf region. They have often, privately and publicly, expressed their
serious concern over U.S. arms sales to Iran and Saudia Arabia (while
ignoring, of course, their own sales to Iran, Iraq—and now Kuwait).
The Gulf is intimately linked to the M.E., a region which the Soviets
would be most wary of discussing. But they may feel that, on balance,
any process which could lead to controls on U.S. sales to Iran and Saudi
Arabia would be manageable in terms of their own relationship to Iraq.
6. The Middle East is, clearly, a special case. Soviet M.E. policy has
been built around the goal of limiting the U.S. military presence and in-
fluence in this region, which lies on the Southern borders of the Soviet
Union, of developing a buffer zone of countries well disposed toward
the Soviet Union, and—at least in the short run—of increasing Soviet
political and military influence in the region. Due to the importance of
Moscow’s arms supply to the Arabs in implementing Soviet policy in
this region, we believe it is unlikely that Moscow would be interested
in any serious limitation on their own arms transfers to the M.E.,
tempting as the prospect of U.S. limitations might be.
7. There might, however, be a possibility of making formal the de
facto qualitative self-limitation which the two super powers already
practice in the region. Contributing to this possibility is the fact that for-
merly greedy customers such as Egypt, Sudan, Somalia and, probably
Jordan, no longer will feed at the Soviet trough. Also, arms shipped to
Libya and other radicals may now constitute a surfeit and therefore the
Soviets may be less reluctant to see some limitations. In this connection
we recall the comment made by Brezhnev in his March 21, 1977 TUC
speech, to wit:
“We already said that in connection with a peace settlement in the
Middle East the relevant states could study the question of facilitating
an ending of the arms race in that area. In general, the problem of inter-
national arms trade seems to merit an exchange of views.”
Brezhnev’s choice of words seemed to leave open the possibility of
engaging in M.E. arms limitation talks prior to the actual achievements
of a comprehensive M.E. peace settlement. Even if our hypothesis is
valid, however, Moscow would almost certainly link such talks to si-
multaneous, serious negotiations on M.E. peace in the Geneva context.
Since the Soviet interpretation of the Cairo meeting4 is that the pros-
been postponed at the Carter administration’s request. For more on this subject, see For-
ument 161.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
pects for Geneva have been seriously set back, we doubt that Brezh-
nev’s words will be given this favorable interpretation by the Soviet
CAT Delegation now.
8. The fact that Ambassador Khlestov will be leading the Soviet
team does not seem to us to indicate either rapid or dramatic move-
ment by the Soviets towards presenting a detailed, specific draft decla-
ration or other substantive proposal. Khlestov, while affable, able, pa-
tient (witness his years in MBFR), is a mechanic, not a policy innovator.
He and his advisors will, we believe, be more interested in determining
the U.S. position and in establishing a positive Soviet posture towards
arms transfers controls without specifically commiting themselves to
practical actions. Since, as we pointed out above, we believe the Soviets
will look upon these talks as almost as important to their current pol-
icies as CTB and SALT, we think that they will prefer to wait for subse-
quent rounds before making any major moves.
Toon
284.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Embassies in
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, and Italy1
308915. Subject: U.S.-Soviet Talks on Conventional Arms Transfer
Issues. Ref: State.
1. The U.S. and the USSR held discussions in Washington, De-
cember 14–19 on conventional arms transfer issues.
2. FYI: FRG, UK and French Ambassadors were debriefed in De-
partment by PM Director Gelb.
3. For NATO: For use as appropriate.
cret; Exdis. Drafted by Robert Mantel (PM/SS); cleared by Thomas Gorman (DOD/ISA),
Barry Blechman (ACDA), Jerome Kahan (PM), and Lowell Fleischer (S/S–O); and ap-
proved by William Luers (EUR). Sent for information to Paris, London, Bonn, and
Moscow. A day later, the Embassy in Moscow relayed its “deep concern and dismay over
receipt of belated and relatively uninformative report” on the CAT talks. (Telegram

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
4. For capitals: You should seek appointment at appropriate level
to provide a general debrief on the talks. You should take any detailed
questions and forward them to Department. Talking points follow:
—The U.S. and the USSR held preliminary discussions in Wash-
ington from December 14–19 on the limitation of conventional arms
transfers; the Soviets preferred to refer to these discussions as “prelimi-
nary” rather than the first meeting of a U.S.-Soviet working group on
this subject. We had no objection to this.
—The talks were part of our efforts to move forward toward the
President’s objective of reducing the volume and sophistication of con-
ventional arms transfers. This requires the cooperation of other sup-
pliers and recipients.
—Because the U.S. and the USSR are the two largest suppliers of
arms to the third world, it is important that the two countries begin to
discuss this issue.
—The discussions were exploratory and general in nature. We did
not seek to reach any agreements.
—The U.S. explained its arms transfer policy at length and identi-
fied what we believe to be common concerns of the two countries. We
pointed out potential dangers that could result from unrestrained
transfers.
—In explaining our policy, we discussed the guidelines that the
U.S. is following, including the following which could form the basis
for a mutual approach:
—No first introduction of advanced equipment that would signifi-
cantly increase the combat capability in a region;
—Restraints on transfers of certain weapons which are particularly
susceptible to misuse by terrorists;
—Restraints on co-production agreements of advanced systems;
and
—Controls on third party transfers.
—The U.S. acknowledged that this is a complex and difficult sub-
ject, and that meaningful progress will take time.
—The U.S. noted that neither we nor the Soviets should be ex-
pected to disadvantage our respective friends and allies or to jeopar-
dize our national security interests. “Legitimate” security needs of
buyers should be met.
—The Soviets asked many questions about U.S. policy and our ap-
proach to the issues of restraint.
—The U.S. indicated that we thought the most useful approach
was to discuss possible harmonization of national guidelines (the
London-Nuclear Suppliers Group Approach) rather than to seek quan-
titative limitations, even though we, for our own purposes, had
adopted a ceiling.
—The Soviets approached the talks with some skepticism; never-
theless, they agreed to assess the results of the Washington talks and to
consult with U.S. as to the next meeting.
—We are optimistic that we can develop an ongoing dialogue that
may enable us, over time, to convince them that cooperative ap-
proaches toward restraint objectives are in their interest as well as our
own.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—The U.S. clearly noted that our ability to sustain our own policy
of restraint was dependent, in part, on achieving the cooperation of
other suppliers and recipients.
5. In view of sensitivity of these talks, please request that confiden-
tiality be protected.
Vance
285.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
310500. For Ambassador from Gelb; White House for Brzezinski.
Subj: “Non-Paper” on US-Soviet Conventional Arms Transfer Talks.
1. Ambassador should seek appointment with Khlestov and trans-
mit to him personally, on behalf of Gelb, text of “Non-Paper” that sum-
marizes US presentation to Soviets during talks.
2. Purpose of “Non-Paper” is to provide on an unofficial but
written basis central thrust of US presentation.
3. Begin text:
US-SOVIET CONSULTATIONS ON LIMITATION OF THE
INTERNATIONAL ARMS TRADE
The United States believes that the preliminary meeting on this
important and useful step toward improving our mutual under-
standing of this complex topic.
MUTUAL INTERESTS
The US and USSR have many parallel if not common interests in
restraining conventional arms transfers. The US has taken the first
steps toward this objective by adopting a policy of restraint in its own
arms sales. This effort has the active support of President Carter. Meas-
ures taken to implement this new policy of restraint were described by
the US representatives at the December meeting.
cret; Nodis. Sent for information to the White House. Drafted by Robert Mantel (PM/
SSP); cleared by Gary Matthews (EUR/SOV) and John Thyden (S/S); and approved by
Gelb.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
As a practical matter, however, the US ability to sustain its re-
straint policy depends, in part, on the demonstration of progress
toward restraint by other suppliers, including the USSR. Without inter-
national cooperation, the prospects for continuing US restraint are
uncertain.
The United States believes that US-Soviet cooperation in restrain-
ing arms transfers is as important as the most important other items on
our arms control agenda; further, that talks on controlling the arms
trade fall within the spirit and context of the mutual obligations we as-
sumed when our two countries signed, at the highest level, the “Basic
Principles of Relations between the US and the USSR,” on May 29,
Our common interest in restraining arms transfers has been dem-
onstrated in the past when situations developed in which our respec-
tive supply of arms to opposing sides in local conflicts led to tensions in
our own relations, and adversely influenced the political climate for
progress in other arms control negotiations. Other important common
stakes in arms transfer restraint include:
—Prevention and/or limitation of regional conflicts: unrestricted
arms transfers could help spark dangerous and destabilizing local con-
flicts, perhaps drawing US inadvertently into unwanted and danger-
ous confrontations.
—Assisting efforts to stem nuclear proliferation: unrestrained
transfers of conventional military technology might gradually under-
mine our cooperative efforts to stem nuclear proliferation, through
states opting for nuclear weapons to offset changes in local balances of
conventional military forces resulting from arms transfers.
—Avoiding manipulation by recipients: the US and USSR should
aim to avoid situations in which recipients of our arms might be
tempted to play us off against one another.
—Reducing supplier uncertainties: future policies of our arms re-
cipients are not predictable, arms supply relationships often prove to
be of only limited political value.
—Reducing costly and unnecessary weapon acquisitions: the US
and USSR should encourage the use of scarce financial resources in the
third world for more constructive purposes than arms acquisitions.
—Encouraging other suppliers to restrain arms exports: any US-
Soviet understandings on restraint cannot be fully effective without
parallel action by other suppliers. Yet, as the two largest suppliers, our
cooperation is necessary as an example to others.
MUTUAL APPROACHES TO RESTRAINT
The United States believes that common acceptance of the fol-
lowing criteria would constitute a first step toward cooperation:
2 For the complete text of the Joint Declaration see Department of State Bulletin, pp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—There should be no advantage for any supplier;
—The fulfillment of recipients’ legitimate security requirements
must not be jeopardized;
—Any steps toward cooperation must be flexible, and reflect both
our common concerns and respective national security requirements.
The London Nuclear Suppliers’ Group may be a relevant prece-
dent. There, the emergence of harmonized national guidelines was the
most useful result. We could strive for similar harmonization in arms
transfer restraint.
Possible forms which such restraint guidelines might take include:
—Advanced systems restraint: introduction of advanced weapon
systems into a region where they have not previously been deployed
could endanger peace and stability by creating a significantly higher
combat capability in the area. Guidelines could be discussed con-
cerning the definition of “advanced systems” in specific regions of the
world.
—Limitations on selected weapons: certain categories of weapons,
for a variety of reasons, are almost always inherently destabilizing, and
susceptible to misuse by criminals and terrorists. Discussions of guide-
lines which would limit the spread of such weapons appears to be in
our mutual interest. Man-portable air defense systems are illustrative
of the type of weapons system that might be limited.
—Co-production restrictions: both the US and USSR have entered
into agreements with third countries for the co-production or licensed
production of some important weapon systems. Problems which arise
in connection with co-production include the transfer of important
technology to the co-producer and the possible export by the co-
producer of surplus production. Consideration might be given to
guidelines which would call for foregoing co-production arrangements
with developing countries for significant weapons or components of
major weapons.
—Retransfer controls: as with nuclear proliferation, failure to
adopt tight retransfer controls could lead to circumvention of arms re-
straint, thereby undermining Soviet–American interest in avoiding the
dangers and destabilizing consequences of particular arms transfers. It
may be in both our interest to assure that weapons either of us might
supply not be retransferred without our approval.
CEILINGS
Although the US would not totally rule out any approach at this
point, it is not our intention to seek agreement on the total amount of
arms each country should sell. The different requirements of friends
and allies of each supplier would make negotiation of overall ceilings
extremely difficult. In our view, the development of common restraint
guidelines for certain kinds of weapons and regions would have a more
direct impact in reducing the risk of regional conflict and the danger of
US-Soviet confrontation.
SPECIAL SESSION ON DISARMAMENT (SSOD)
Our governments have a common interest in the conventional
arms transfer issue at the SSOD because of our responsibilities as major

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
suppliers and our need to respond credibly to critics about our inten-
tion to restrain arms transfers. Although the problem can not be solved
by any single state or group of states, it might be useful for the US and
USSR to consider consultations with regard to this issue prior to the
SSOD.
NEED FOR ONGOING CONSULTATIONS
The great number of mutual interests and problems involved in
the arms transfer restraint issue strongly suggest the need for ongoing
Soviet-American consultations.
Further talks would present an opportunity for both sides to
discuss possible policy guidelines and specific restraint measures in
greater detail. We also anticipate the Soviet Union may wish to discuss
further its policies and practices during future sessions. Finally, a con-
tinuation of this dialogue will provide US with the opportunity to talk
about transfers contemplated by either side which might be subject to
misinterpretation by the other side.
The problem of how to accommodate the legitimate defense needs
of recipients while involving them in the restraint process is also one
which we have not fully addressed. One way to involve recipients
might be through regional approaches to restraint. Additional consul-
tations on this issue would be particularly useful in preparation for the
SSOD.
In summary, the United States believes that future talks on these
questions are very important and would help to make clear our mutual
stakes in cooperation to prevent further escalation of the conventional
arms trade.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
286.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
Washington, January 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Management of Arms Transfers
PARTICIPANTS
State
OMB
Secretary Cyrus Vance
James McIntyre
Lucy Benson, Under Secretary for
Edward Sanders, Deputy
Security Assistance
Associate Director
Leslie Gelb, Director, Office of
International Affairs Division
Politico-Military Affairs
ACDA
Defense
Spurgeon Keeny
David E. McGiffert, Assistant
Barry Blechman, Assistant
Secretary for International
Director, Weapons Evaluation
Security Affairs
and Control
Lynn Davis, Deputy Assistant
White House
Secretary, Policy Plans and
Zbigniew Brzezinski
NSC Affairs
Jessica Tuchman, NSC
JCS
Leslie G. Denend, NSC
General George Brown
Lt. General William Smith
CIA
Sayre Stevens, Deputy Director,
National Foreign Assessment
Center
Dickson Davis, NIO S/S
The PRC met to review the FY 1978 conventional arms sales pro-
gram. The following issues and conclusions were raised.
1. AWACS
There was agreement that the remaining two letters of offer to-
taling less than $300 million will be signed up during FY 1978.
2. Planned Reduction
It was agreed that options would be presented to the President on
the appropriate size of the planned reduction in sales during FY 1978.
There are three options:
White House Situation Room.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Option 1. A five percent reduction during this year recognizing the
importance of achieving and even exceeding the target for the year.
Option 2. An eight percent reduction this year to ensure the credi-
bility of our policy of restraint.
Option 3. At least a five percent reduction this year with the addi-
tional commitment to at least a ten percent reduction by the end of two
years to establish a downward trend over a longer period and facilitate
planning.
3. Ceiling Management
There was agreement on the procedures to be used in managing
the ceiling. The sale of aircraft to the Middle East is likely to account for
a large portion of the ceiling dollars available for new sales commit-
ments this year. The attached listing2 presents other major requests—
excluding the Middle East package—and will be forwarded to the Pres-
ident for his approval as the FY 1978 plan, as part of a flexible predic-
tive approach to managing the ceiling. There will be a monthly review
of the plan to measure progress against the ceiling, incorporate new
information and recommend additional cases. The normal clearance
process during which arms control, human rights, and economic im-
pacts are assessed before forwarding the request for the President’s ap-
proval will be preserved. For large cases or when there is disagreement
on a particular case, it may be necessary to convene the PRC before the
case goes to the President.
4. Congressional and Press Strategy
There was broad agreement that a substantial education program
must be carried out with the Congress and the press. State will prepare
a plan by next Tuesday3 which will identify the members of Congress
whom we must contact and develop a strategy for the Press. State will
also contact the Chairmen of the HIRC and the SFRC in an effort to
head off requests for Administration working papers which might con-
tain lists of possible sales, citing the problems of the list becoming
public and of falsely generating expectations.
2 Not attached.
3 January 31.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
287.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 30, 1978
SUBJECT
PRC Review of FY 1978 Arms Sales
The PRC has met twice2 to consider the FY 1978 arms sales pro-
gram including the ceiling management system, specific requests
which make up the FY 1978 plan, and the reduction in sales to be
achieved in FY 1978. This memorandum requests your approval of the
management system and the plan, and presents options on the reduc-
I. Ceiling Management
The ceiling has been broken down as indicated in the table on the
following page. The allocations for follow-on support, MAP, and small
cases are based on Defense and State estimates of requirements for FY
1978.
The PRC recommends a flexible predictive approach to managing
the ceiling, with a particular focus on management of the ceiling dollars
available for sales of new systems. At the beginning of each year known
and anticipated possible sales for that year and beyond will be com-
piled. The PRC will make an initial assessment of those sales which
should be made during the year and will list them for your consider-
ation in order of priority. The list will subsequently be reviewed and
updated on a monthly basis providing the flexibility to incorporate
new information, and to respond to changing circumstances. This
process does not replace the normal clearance process during which
arms control, human rights and economic impacts are assessed for each
individual sale before it comes to you for final approval. However the
existence of the list, approved by you, will force the bureaucracy to
think in terms of trade-offs when new cases arise, thereby allowing us
to meet our restraint goals. (S)
hand-wrote the date in the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum.
Above the date, Carter wrote “C.”
record of this meeting was found. The second meeting is Document 286.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Recommendation
I recommend that you approve the predictive approach as de-
scribed above for managing the arms transfer ceiling. (S)3
FY 1978 CEILING
(in billions of 1978 dollars)
FY 1978 Ceiling Baseline
(Based on sales of weapons and weapons-related
items to other than NATO, Japan, Australia and
New Zealand in FY 1977.)
Less Commitments
Signed Sales Agreements and Letters of
Officer and Acceptance outstanding.
(Includes the AWACS sale to Iran and other
agreements signed so far this year as well as
LOAs offered but not yet signed by the
foreign government.)
Reserve for follow-on support.
(Includes ammunition, spare parts,
maintenance and technical support for
systems already sold.)
Reserve for MAP.
.1
(Includes weapons and weapons-related
portion of direct military assistance approved
in the budget by Congress.)
Discretionary Balance
Less the Planned Reduction
(Five to eight percent depending on which
option you select.)
Available for Sales of New Systems
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
wrote “This is, I presume, based on past sales—Give firm orders to DOD not to exceed.”
5 Carter circled “.74.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
II. The FY 1978 Plan
A major part of new sales commitments in FY 1978 will be a
package of aircraft sales to the Middle East. The value of LOAs signed
A7 represents priority groupings of other major requests—sales within
groups are listed alphabetically—excluding the Middle East aircraft
package. Based on the allocations in the table on the previous page, we
should be able to conclude agreements on the requests contained in the
first two groups in the listing at Tab A. However, the plan is not static;
it will be updated monthly to reflect new requests and those which
have been withdrawn. The importance of the plan is that it offers a
comprehensive listing and facilitates the necessary trade-offs. It does
not replace your review of individual cases before they are notified to
Congress. (S)
Recommendation
I recommend that you establish the listing at Tab A as the FY 1978
Sales Plan.8
III. Planned Reductions
During the past week there has been considerable negative reac-
tion in the press to the $13.2 billion forecast for total overall sales in FY
1978. Sales are expected to increase because of an increase in NATO
sales and construction activities in Saudi Arabia, both of which are not
included in the ceiling. The press stories argue that the Administration
has either abandoned restraint or is practicing “slight of hand” with the
numbers. In this context, there was disagreement on the appropriate
size of the reduction in sales under the ceiling to be achieved in FY
1978. Opinion was divided among three possible options, all in con-
stant (1977) dollars:
1. A five percent reduction this year. Although it may be viewed by
some as insufficient to show restraint, this is attractive in that we can
meet and probably exceed this target (i.e., promise five percent and de-
liver six–eight percent). Moreover, we can probably maintain that goal
in the future as well. I support this option along with the JCS.
2. An eight percent reduction this year. Those who support this option
believe that in light of the current political climate and the forecast for
the high overall sales total, eight percent is the minimum politically
credible figure. Because inflation is expected to run at approximately
seven percent, a reduction of eight percent will show an absolute de-
7 Tab A was not attached.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
crease from last year without appealing to an adjustment for inflation.
However, your credibility would be at stake if this goal was not met, or
if we feel compelled to reduce it in subsequent years. State and ACDA
support this option.
3. At least a five percent reduction this year with the additional commit-
ment to at least a ten percent reduction by the end of two years. This option
would sustain a five percent annual reduction for two years, thereby
removing uncertainty in the policy. However, it could reduce your flex-
ibility in an area where there are substantial uncertainties. Those who
support this option believe that the longer period will facilitate our
arms sales planning and allow more time for other suppliers to emulate
our restraint. Defense and OMB support this option; it is NSC’s second
Your Decision
Option 1:
Option 2:
Option 3:
9 Carter checked “Option 2” and underneath wrote “JC.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
288.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
International Political Issues: Panama Canal Treaties, Non-Proliferation, Middle
East, Africa, Belize, Nicaragua, and Conventional Arms Restraint
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Viron P. Vaky
Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member
Venezuela
Carlos Andres Perez, President
Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs
Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines
Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency
Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund
Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren
Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute
After exchanging cordialities, President Perez asked about Presi-
dent Carter’s preference with regard to an agenda. President Carter
said that he would like to discuss international political issues today
and economic issues tomorrow.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
Conventional Arms Restraint
Perez raised the issue of the arms race in the Andes. He said that
Venezuela had called a meeting based on the Ayacucho Declaration,2
the Miraflores Palace. Carter was in Caracas on March 28 and 29. In a follow-up meeting
with Perez on April 28, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs Viron
Vaky said the United States supported Perez’s call for “regional restraint, tying this to the
larger US effort to encourage multilateral restraint.” (Telegram 4012 from Caracas, April
2 Declaration signed by Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Panama,
Peru, and Venezuela on December 9, 1974 urging “the creation of a permanent order of
international peace and cooperation and to create conditions that permit the effective lim-
itation of armaments and put an end to their acquisition for offensive warlike ends, in
order to dedicate all possible resources to the economic and social development of each of

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
which is dormant. The problem is that if the U.S. doesn’t sell arms to
the region, the Europeans (and the Soviets, President Carter added) do.
Perez said that “we cannot remain with our arms folded”. In answer to
a question by President Carter on how Ayacucho could be reactivated,
Perez said that they could propose a meeting, but the situation is com-
plicated by the breaking of relations between Bolivia and Chile.3
President Carter said that in the last five years, Latin America has
purchased $7 billion worth of weapons. The U.S. has become a smaller
supplier because of its arms restraint policy, selling less than Britain,
France, or the Soviets. We would like to reduce our arms sales even
more, though there is a limit on how far we can go because of private
interests. We would welcome Perez’ ideas on reviving Ayacucho.
Perez said he would support the President’s policies on arms re-
straint and try to get them adopted by other countries, but he needed
more information.
The President said he would send the U.S. arms sales policy state-
ment,4 and that perhaps it could be used as a model or a voluntary for-
mula. Recently, the U.S. asked Mexico to reassess its defense needs and
President Jose Lopez Portillo withdrew his request. It would be benefi-
cial to pursue this as a prelude to the U.N. Special Session on
Disarmament.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
3 Bolivian President Hugo Banzer broke relations with Chile on March 21.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
289.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
7232. Subject: U.S.-Soviet Talks on Conventional Arms Transfers.
1. The Embassy has the following comments and views on the
coming CAT talks set for Helsinki May 4. Our observations of last De-
cember on the Soviet approach in the first round4 seem in general to re-
main valid for Helsinki. We continue to think that the cautious and con-
servative approach of the Soviets will remain unchanged.
2. The evidence seems to indicate that the Soviets consider the cur-
rent stage of the talks to be only exploratory. To underline this they
have pointedly suggested that the talks be referred to as consultations
and not “working group” discussions. (Mendelevich on April 4 also
questioned the use of the term “working group” for the CAT talks.)
Furthermore, the thrust of Mendelevich’s remarks on April 4 showed
that the Soviets still have doubts that U.S.-Soviet cooperation on CAT
can be fruitful. He claimed that a final decision to continue with the
talks cannot be made until after the conclusion of the next round. We
would estimate, therefore, that although the Soviets will, as Mendele-
vich indicated, take the lead in Helsinki, they will not go so far as to
elaborate a series of specific proposals.
3. Khlestov’s few substantive comments in December and Men-
delevich’s remarks indicate that they will instead press hard on the
question of those political principles which ought, in their view, to gov-
ern the transfer of arms. In this respect we see the “legal” approach of
Khlestov as continuing with Mendelevich. He will likely argue that the
“principles” are paramount and that they must be treated before de-
ciding whether and how to control transfers. While this is very thin
Confidential; Priority; Exdis.
“Embassy assessment of what we might expect from the Soviet side” when the conven-
tional arms transfers talks resumed in Helsinki in May. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780136–1095)
gram 6771, April 5, that Soviet Ambassador-at-Large L.I. Mendelevich “avoided specific
comments” about the conventional arms transfers talks and stuck to “general observa-
tions of U.S. December presentation and Soviet presentation in May in Helsinki. He rec-
ognized that it is Soviet turn to give their views, and claimed his remarks in Helsinki will
be more ‘political/legal’ and less ‘technical’ than U.S. December presentation.” (National
4 See Document 283.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
gruel for the coming session, Mendelevich is capable of spreading it
over the four days of talks with questions and comments on the U.S. ap-
proach completing his contribution to the session. Clearly the Soviets
are not in a great hurry to make progress, although they will make
every effort to avoid appearing to be the brake on the talks.
4. Although the change to Mendelevich from Khlestov will cer-
tainly result in some minor changes in style and substance, we do not
think that the basic approach will be greatly affected in this coming
round. Mendelevich’s designation is probably the result of a combina-
tion of factors. First, the LOS session has just begun in Geneva and
could be crucial to the success of a LOS agreement. Khlestov has been a
senior Soviet participant in the LOS process since its inception. He
headed previous Soviet LOS Delegations and as an MFA department
chief he has chief responsibility for back-stopping the current round.
Thus, substantively and bureaucratically his participation in the CAT
talks at this time may be difficult.
5. Mendelevich, on the other hand, has no line responsibilities
within MFA and his only other responsibility, the Indian Ocean talks,
are not so pressing as to occupy him full time. Finally, MFA USA De-
partment First Secretary Kuznetsov told us that the Soviet side does not
consider that the CAT talks have reached the point where the treaty
and legal expertise which Khlestov has can be fully utilized. This is an-
other way of saying that the talks are too preliminary to warrant his
taking time from his other duties to devote attention to CAT. Whether
Khlestov will return to CAT at a later stage is a question, although
Mendelevich would have US believe he will not, since on April 4 he
characterized his duties in CAT as “permanent.”
6. Mendelevich has virtually assured US that he will continue to
press the “legal” argumentation which Khlestov began last December.
From the Soviet point of view such an approach is most advantageous
because it focuses attention on the question of “who” has a “legitimate”
need for arms and not “what” arms should or should not be supplied.
Khlestov’s reference to “principles” in December clearly indicated that
the “racist” and “aggressor” states should not be “legal” recipients and
that states exercising “legitimate self-defense” and National Liberation
Movements should be. Before moving on to the question of “what”
should be supplied to these latter (i.e., the “technical” issue in the
words of Mendelevich), the Soviets will wish to call into question the
legitimacy of transfers to the former.
7. It is in this area that the Soviets will likely have their sharpest
criticism (polemics are not Mendelevich’s style) of the U.S. for what
Mendelevich referred to on April 4 as “undesirable transfers.” Israel
(“aggressor”), South Africa (“racist”), Iran and Saudi Arabia (“arms in
excess of self-defense needs”) are some of the “bad” examples of U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
arms transfers which are likely to be singled out. (The use of U.S. sup-
plied arms in Lebanon by Israel recently will be particularly attractive
to them as a case in point.)
8. However, Khlestov seemed to indicate in December that a re-
gional approach to arms transfers was not a proper topic for the discus-
sions. Instead he thought the “main topic” was the question of a “gen-
eral limitation of the international arms trade.” Since the logic of the
Soviet position argues that the regional problems are only the reflection
of the global “principles,” we think that they will try to stay away from
a discussion of regional arms transfer restraint in favor of a more gen-
eral discussion of universally applicable “principles.”
9. On what Mendelevich described as the “technical” level, it ap-
pears from what he said that the Soviets will not make a point of differ-
ences with the suggested approaches which the U.S. side outlined in
the December round. Rather, Mendelevich said he would have “ques-
tions” about these approaches. The Soviet tactic might be to claim that
since these are “technical” details, they deserve additional exposition,
not debate, at this stage of the discussions. Such a posture, combined
with a Soviet statement that they agree in principle that these U.S. sug-
gestions are acceptable—although not all inclusive—would assist the
Soviets in focusing the discussion on the “political, legal” issues as they
see them.
10. In sum, we foresee a rather desultory round of talks, not dis-
similar to the December session with the difference that in this one the
Soviet side will be a more active participant.
Toon

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
290.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
Washington, April 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Talks with the Soviets on Arms Transfer Restraint
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Leslie Gelb, Director, Office of
Spurgeon Keeny
Politico-Military Affairs
Barry Blechman, Assistant
Director, Weapons Evaluation
Defense
and Control
David E. McGiffert, Assistant
Secretary for International
White House
Security Affairs
David Aaron
Jessica Tuchman, NSC
JCS
Reginald Bartholomew, NSC
Lt. General William Smith
CIA
George Allen
The PRC met to discuss plans for the next round of talks with the
Soviets on supplier restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. The
following issues were raised and positions taken.
The discussion focused on two issues: What our goals should be
for this round of talks; and, what approach to use in pursuing those
goals. On the first question there were two views. NSC and ACDA ar-
gued that as the Soviets have not yet had their interest engaged in this
process, the purpose of this round must simply be to hook them into it,
and to get their agreement to continuing series of full-fledged working
group meetings. If this proves successful subsequent rounds could ad-
dress specific tough issues. State argued that this round is the time to
begin discussion of the difficult issues because otherwise we would be
offering the Soviets the opportunity to string us along, which they
would be happy to do indefinitely. In so doing, we would lose our slim
remaining chance of engaging British and French cooperation in this ef-
fort. Neither Defense nor JCS took a clear position on this issue.
Regarding the approach to be taken, two approaches—overlap-
ping, but differing significantly in emphasis—were presented.2 The
Room.
2 Tarnoff sent Brzezinski an undated Issues Paper, “Strategy at the Helsinki CAT
Talks,” that discussed the two approaches. (Carter Library, National Security Council, In-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
regional emphasis approach would highlight the need for restraint in
specific regions, and would present these as the focus for future discus-
sions. State, which argued for this approach, proposed that three types
of regions be presented: trouble spots (e.g., the Horn); potential trouble
spots (e.g., Southern Africa); and, relatively quiescent regions (e.g.,
Latin America).
ACDA favored a functional emphasis which would seek to involve
the other suppliers in a multilateral effort to harmonize their respective
national policies along the lines of the guidelines the United States has
adopted unilaterally (e.g., agreement not to be the first to introduce
new, more potent systems into a region; severe limitations on copro-
duction; ban on transfer of particularly sensitive weapons such as
MANPADS, etc.). ACDA argued that in many cases the guidelines are
designed to be applied regionally, and could therefore be used as a ve-
hicle for concrete, tough negotiations.
During the discussion the following positions emerged. State fa-
vored the regional approach, citing such controversial regions as the
Horn and Southern Africa. NSC and ACDA argued that there was
nothing in that presentation to attract the Soviets and that it would seri-
ously diminish our chance of getting them to agree to future meetings
on that basis. Acknowledging this argument, Defense and JCS con-
cluded that we should use the regional approach but cite as examples
only non-controversial regions such as Western Africa, Latin America
and South Asia. State argued that such an approach would destroy the
credibility of the entire supplier restraint effort. NSC noted that if any
type of regional approach were used, the list of examples should in-
clude regions, such as the Middle East, which would be uncomfortable
for us to address, as well as those which would be uncomfortable for
the Soviets.
Finally, NSC and ACDA agreed that in order to maximize our
chances for a continuing process, and since we have not developed any
specific regional proposals to lay on the table, we should adopt the
functional approach in this round, but should make clear to the Soviets
that we would intend at an early stage to address specific regional
problems in that context.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
291.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Talks with the Soviets on Conventional Arms Transfer Restraint
A PRC meeting was held yesterday concerning the approach to be
adopted in next week’s talks with the Soviets on supplier restraint in
arms transfers. The discussion revealed a sharp difference of opinion as
to how we should approach this round of talks. The debate centered on
whether we should raise specific contentious issues in this round, or
whether we should aim only to secure Soviet agreement to participate
in a serious, continuing process. Tab A2 is the Summary of Conclusions
of the meeting which outlines the arguments made.
Subject to your approval, I intend to resolve the issue with the di-
rective at Tab B. Also, in order to demonstrate to the Soviets that this
effort has high level support, I believe it would be helpful for the dele-
gation to have with it a statement from you expressing your personal
commitment to arms transfer restraint and your concern for the success
of these talks. A draft statement is at Tab C for your approval.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the directive and statement at Tab B and C
respectively.
Approve Presidential Directive
As amended
Approve Presidential Statement
As amended
corner of the memorandum.
2 Tab A is printed as Document 290.
3 Carter changed “Approve” to “Disapprove” on this line, underlined it twice, and
checked this option. In the right-hand margin he wrote “We should move quickly &
forcefully to spell out “functional” & “regional” restraint proposals. Give Soviets copy of
our unilateral arms sales policy, & see early if they are serious.”
4 Carter checked the “As amended” option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Tab B
Draft Presidential Directive5
Washington, undated
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
US–USSR Talks on Conventional Arms Restraint
The President has approved the following directive.
The United States Delegation to the US–USSR talks on conven-
tional arms transfer in Helsinki May 4–8 should view its primary objec-
tives in this round to secure Soviet agreement to participate in a contin-
uing and regular series of working group meetings on multilateral
supplier restraint.6
To this end, the Delegation should continue the functional guide-
lines approach in its presentation to the Soviets. The Delegation should
also make clear that we believe that meaningful arms restraint talks
must address specific regional situations in troublesome, potentially
troublesome, and currently calm areas, and that we intend to make spe-
cific proposals in this regard in the next round and thereafter. If the So-
viet delegation cites specific regions where our arms transfer policies
concern them, the U.S. Delegation should cite the Horn and Southern
Africa as regional situations where Soviet arms transfer policies con-
cern us. If the Soviets show inclination to engage at this meeting in
discussion of arms transfer restraint in specific regional situations, the
Delegation is authorized to do so coordinating with Washington as
required.
The Chairman of the Delegation is authorized to make use of the
attached Presidential statement as he deems appropriate, in order to
5 Secret.
6 Carter bracketed this paragraph in the right-hand margin and underlined the
phrase “to secure Soviet agreement to participate in a continuing and regular series of
working group meetings.” In the left-hand margin he wrote “not enough—Let’s get to
the point.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
demonstrate the commitment and support of the highest levels of the
United States Government to this effort.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Tab C7
President Carter has asked me to make this statement on his
behalf:
This is an opportunity to convey my personal concern, and that of
the United States Government, over the growing world trade in con-
ventional arms, and the urgency I attach to international cooperation to
reduce that trade. The unrestrained transfer of conventional weapons
represents a serious and continuing threat to peace, and a diversion of
resources badly needed for economic and social development.
As great powers, and as the world’s leading arms suppliers, the
United States and the Soviet Union have a special responsibility to re-
strain this traffic in armaments. We have distinct but common interests
in doing so. Moreover, without US-Soviet restraint, others will not alter
their arms transfer practices and opportunities for meaningful multi-
lateral restraint will be lost. And without multilateral restraint, no
single supplier could be expected to sustain a policy of restraint for
very long.8
Restraint does not mean an end to arms sales. Obviously, the legiti-
mate defense needs of friends and allies must be fulfilled. Neither of us
would have it otherwise. Restraint does mean that we take steps in
common—in cooperation with suppliers as well as with recipients—to
prevent sales from increasing the risk of war or inflaming regional and
global tensions. Regional conflicts cannot be solved by arms transfer re-
straint alone. But restraint can contribute to the resolution of such prob-
lems and help avoid future conflicts.
To my way of thinking, our common responsibilities in this area
flow naturally from the basic tenets of our relations—from the prin-
ciples agreed to at the highest levels of our governments on May 29,
1972.9 These principles affirm the importance of preventing the devel-
8 Carter crossed out the word “restrain” and substituted “curb” in the first sentence
and added “such” before the words “a policy” and crossed out the words “of restraint” in
the last sentence
9 Carter crossed out “To my way of thinking,” capitalized the letter “O” in “our,”
crossed out the phrase “agreed to at the highest levels,” and substituted “accepted by the
leaders” in the first sentence. For the final text of the “Basic Principles of Relations Be-
tween the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, issued on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
opment of situations which can lead to confrontations or aggravate
problems in our relations. They also affirm our readiness to exchange
views at the highest level when necessary on various problems in our
relations.
I regard progress in this field as one indication of the importance
we each ascribe to these principles. In particular, our governments
must take clear, visible steps now, in Helsinki, to record our mutual de-
termination to restrain arms sales, and to create machinery appropriate
to this purpose.
By enlarging our arms control agenda to include restraint in trans-
fers of conventional arms, we take one more important step away from
conflict and confrontation, and toward more cooperative relations.
292.
Presidential Directive/NSC–361
Washington, April 28, 1978
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
US–USSR Talks on Conventional Arms Restraint (U)
The President directs that the U.S. Delegation to the US–USSR
talks on conventional arms transfer in Helsinki, May 4–8, should move
quickly and forcefully to engage the Soviets in discussions of specific
functional and regional restraint proposals, looking to further develop-
ment of these proposals in subsequent rounds. While the Delegation
should seek to secure Soviet agreement to participate in further
meetings, the primary objective is to determine whether they are se-
rious about this effort.
Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
In this context, the Delegation should reiterate the elements of our
arms restraint policy.
The Chairman of the Delegation is authorized to make use of the
attached Presidential statement as he deems appropriate, in order to
demonstrate the commitment and support of the highest levels of the
United States Government in this effort.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Attachment
Presidential Statement2
Washington, undated
President Carter has asked me to make this statement on his
behalf:
This is an opportunity to convey my personal concern, and that of
the United States Government, over the growing world trade in con-
ventional arms, and the urgency I attach to international cooperation to
reduce that trade. The unrestrained transfer of conventional weapons
represents a serious and continuing threat to peace, and a diversion of
resources badly needed for economic and social development.
As great powers, and as the world’s leading arms suppliers, the
United States and the Soviet Union have a special responsibility to curb
this traffic in armaments. We have distinct but common interests in
doing so. Moreover, without US-Soviet restraint, others will not alter
their arms transfer practices and opportunities for meaningful multi-
lateral restraint will be lost. And without multilateral restraint, no
single supplier could be expected to sustain such a policy for very long.
Restraint does not mean an end to arms sales. Obviously, the legiti-
mate defense needs of friends and allies must be fulfilled. Neither of us
would have it otherwise. Restraint does mean that we take steps in
common—in cooperation with suppliers as well as with recipients—to
prevent sales from increasing the risk of war or inflaming regional and
global tensions. Regional conflicts cannot be solved by arms transfer re-
straint alone. But restraint can contribute to the resolution of such
problems and help avoid future conflicts.
Our common responsibilities in this area flow naturally from the
basic tenets of our relations—from the principles accepted by the
2 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the importance of preventing the development of situations which can
lead to confrontations or aggravate problems in our relations. They also
affirm our readiness to exchange views at the highest level when neces-
sary on various problems in our relations.
I regard progress in this field as one indication of the importance
we each ascribe to these principles. In particular, our governments
must take clear, visible steps now, in Helsinki, to record our mutual de-
termination to restrain arms sales, and to create machinery appropriate
to this purpose.
By enlarging our arms control agenda to include restraint in trans-
fers of conventional arms, we take one more important step away from
conflict and confrontation, and toward more cooperative relations.4
293.
Report Prepared by the Delegation to the US-Soviet Talks on
Conventional Arms Transfers Second Round1
Washington, undated
US-Soviet Talks on Conventional Arms Transfers Second Round,
Delegation Report
Significant progress, more than we expected, was made in the
US-Soviet talks on Conventional Arms Transfers, which took place in
Helsinki from May 4 to 8.
Our net assessment is this: We cannot draw positive conclusions
from this round about Soviet willingness to make restraint agreements
with us or to actually cut back on their arms transfers. The fundamental
Soviet stance remains wary and skeptical.
to a May 10 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
In the judgment of the Delegation, however, the Soviets were se-
rious and, for the most part, practical in their approach to this round.
Most importantly, they are now committed to the process of discussing
restraint. When our joint communique´ stating this is released on
Thursday,2 we will have some basis to ask for more cooperation from
other suppliers and recipients.
It is our strategy to use this process itself as a means of generating
pressures on suppliers to slow down the pace of transfers and to think
twice about how much and what kinds of weapon systems are to be
transferred.
1. Objectives
The US side was charged with (a) assessing the “seriousness” of
Soviet interest in the talks, and (b) securing Soviet agreement to fu-
ture rounds of meetings. The latter proved to be of only minor conse-
quence as the Soviet side clearly was prepared to agree to continue the
discussions, even before the sessions began. With regard to Soviet
“seriousness”:
• They certainly were serious at this round. They came prepared to
present their own approach to conventional arms restraint—one based
on “political and legal principles.” They asked fairly sophisticated
questions about the US functional guidelines which revealed serious
study of the details of US policy.
• The tone throughout was constructive. The Soviets avoided po-
lemics as a rule. Nor did they shrink from discussions of topics on
which they are vulnerable—such as arms transfers to the Horn of
Africa.
• The joint communique´ issued at the conclusion of the round (at-
tached)3 contains significant evidence of “seriousness.” In it, the Soviets
agreed: (a) that the subject was “urgent”; (b) that transfers could affect
US-Soviet relations adversely, as well as international peace; (c) that the
talks are in accord with the 1972 Declaration of Basic Principles of US-
2 May 11. In a joint communique´, the two sides “agreed that the problem of limiting
international transfers of conventional arms is urgent” and called for “solution on a con-
structive basis so as to promote international peace and security and strengthen de´tente.”
Both sides also “stated their belief that effective solution of the problem requires full con-
sideration of the legitimate defense needs of the recipients in accordance with the pur-
poses and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.” (“Joint Communique´ by the
United States and the Soviet Union: Consultation on Limiting International Transfers of
3 The joint communique´ was not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Soviet Relations;4 (d) that the talks would continue on a “regularly
scheduled” basis; and (e) most importantly, that future rounds would
consider “concrete measures” to implement arms restraint. Public ac-
ceptance of each of these points is a first for the Soviets, and was at-
tained only after persistent US efforts. A communique´ of this length
and substance is rare, and should be counted as evidence of their posi-
tive mood.
• We also discovered other points of agreement including, most
importantly, the need to involve other suppliers as well as recipients in
the restraint process.
A more definitive assessment of Soviet seriousness must await
their response to the US proposed agenda for the next round (see
below), and their presentation at that round. Two factors suggest a cau-
tious attitude: (a) the Soviets, despite considerable US pressure, refused
to characterize the next round as “negotiations”—a word, which to
them indicates that formal agreements are to be considered; and (b) the
proposal the Soviets tabled at the Helsinki round (i.e., that we each
agree not to sell “excessive” arms to one another’s neighbors) obvi-
ously was not a serious one.5 With regard to the latter point, however,
they did state that this proposal was “separate” from the rest of the dis-
cussion. In any case, Gelb informed the Soviet chairman, Mendelevich,
privately, that the USG would formally reject the proposal.
2. Respective Positions
The Soviet side presented in some detail, and argued forcefully, for
discussion of “universal political and legal principles.” If, they argued,
the two sides and other suppliers could agree on such abstract prin-
ciples, arms transfer restraint would become an actuality. Essentially,
the Soviet “principles” specify that countries which engage in certain
types of conduct in contravention of international norms could under
no circumstances receive arms from other countries, while other recip-
ients—which engage in conduct considered desirable under these
norms—could receive arms without limitation. The international
norms of conduct would be drawn primarily from Soviet interpreta-
5 On May 17, the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Moscow to “per-
sonally” inform Mendelevich that the United States rejected this proposal because it was
“one-sided and not cast in the spirit of our discussions as focusing on specific regional sit-
uations where arms transfers can harm our bilateral relations, as well as threaten interna-
tional security and stability, and on broad political and military criteria.” (Telegram

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
tions of such ambiguous documents as the UN General Assembly’s
Definition of Aggression6 and Declaration of Friendly Relations.7
The US side argued that while appropriate political and legal prin-
ciples might be developed, it also is necessary to develop functional
guidelines such as those which make up US unilateral arms transfer
policy (The Soviets characterized these as “military/technical guide-
lines”). These rules would provide specific practical guidance for sales
decisions based on the nature of the weapons involved and the local
military situation, and would also deal with specific problems such as
co-production arrangements and re-exports.
By the end of the round, both sides referred to “criteria for arms
sales” which, it was understood, would include both political/legal
and military/technical factors. The US side insisted, however, that
drawing up such a list of criteria—no matter how inclusive—was not
sufficient. To be effective in restraining arms, we argued, these criteria
had to be applied to the situations in specific regions. Consequently,
the agenda proposed by the US side for the next round included the es-
tablishment of working groups on political/legal criteria, military/
technical criteria, and regional situations—specifically, Latin America
and Africa south of the Sahara. The Soviets cautioned us not to expect
their agreement to this complete agenda the next round. They would at
best agree to discuss one region, they said, and only under the rubric of
a general discussion of the “regional approach.”
This will be the next test of Soviet “seriousness.” While we should
not expect them to accept our proposed agenda in toto, there should be
appropriate progress toward regional discussions in the next round.
3. Next Steps
The next round would probably be held in early July, and hence
we need to move quickly to prepare. We also will have to move consid-
erably beyond our previous work into the preparation of specific pro-
posals, rather than general considerations, that can be laid on the table.
gression as “the use of armed force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
or political independence of another State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
states “shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity of any State;” “shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means;” had “a duty not to intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State;” had “a duty to cooperate with one another in accordance with the Charter;” re-
spected the “principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples;” and uphold the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Specifically, we suggest: (a) that the President authorize our partic-
ipation in a third round of talks; (b) that an SCC meeting be held soon
to review progress to date and to formulate, for your approval, draft
general guidance for preparation of the US positions for next round;
and (c) that a second SCC meeting be held in about six weeks to formu-
late, for your approval, draft specific guidance and instructions for the
US side in the third round.
Leslie Gelb, Chairman
Director, Political/Military Affairs
Department of State
Barry Blechman, Deputy
Assistant Director
US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Jessica Mathews
National Security Council Staff
Brigadier General Robert Sennewald
Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
James Michel
Legal Advisor
Department of State
John Rowe
Office of the Secretary of Defense

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
294.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
US-USSR Conventional Arms Transfer
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Warren Christopher
Spurgeon Keeny
Leslie Gelb, Director, Office of
Barry Blechman, Assistant
Politico-Military Affairs
Director, Weapons Evaluation
and Control
Defense
David McGiffert, Assistant
White House
Secretary for International
David Aaron
Security Affairs
Reginald Bartholomew, NSC
Jessica Mathews, NSC
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith
CIA
Dr. Robert Bowie, Director,
National Foreign Intelligence
Assessment Center
George Allen, NIO for Special
Studies
The general statement of objectives for multilateral talks on con-
ventional arms restraint (CAT)2 was agreed to. Concerning the possible
risks inherent in this enterprise, DOD pointed out that what we are
trying to negotiate is a means to an end and not an end in itself. This
lead to a discussion of the necessity for highly specific regional pro-
posals, each to be judged on its own merits for consistency with US na-
tional security interests. State suggested and it was agreed to, that in
presenting each regional proposal the working group should include
an analysis of the US national security interest, analogous to that pre-
pared for a proposed arms sale. It was further agreed that we should
not undertake any de´marche at this time directed at engaging the Euro-
pean suppliers, but rather wait for them to react to the progress made
in the US-Soviet forum. It was agreed that any approaches to arms re-
cipients at this time would be premature, at least until specific regional
proposals had been agreed to and approved.
in the White House Situation Room.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The proposed work program was approved with the following
changes: (1) each regional proposal should include a justification in
terms of US national security interest; (2) the working group should
isolate and analyze “the surrogate problem”—i.e., Cubans and others,
including those supported by Western nations; and, (3) the group
should look at ways and means to improve our data base on arms
transfers. The meeting closed with a strong plea by the Chairman for
the best efforts of all agencies participating in the work program in the
interest of giving this admittedly difficult undertaking a fair try, and of
avoiding serious mistakes. All agencies pledged to cooperate.
295.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer Talks with the USSR and Security Assistance for
Kenya
PARTICIPANTS
State
Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher
William Harrop, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Africa
Leslie Gelb, Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
Defense
David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith, Assistant to the Chairman
CIA
Dr. Sayre Stevens, Deputy Director, National Foreign Assessment Center
George Allen, National Intelligence Officer for Special Studies
ACDA
Deputy Director Spurgeon M. Keeny
Dr. Barry Blechman, Assistant Director, Weapons Evaluation and Control Bureau
OMB
Edward G. Sanders, Deputy Associate Director, International Affairs Division
Brzezinski informed Carter of the results of the meeting in a July 11 memorandum. (Ibid.)

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
White House
David Aaron
NSC
Reginald Bartholomew
Jessica Tuchman Mathews
Leslie G. Denend
The SCC affirmed the continuing objective of these talks to move
the Soviets toward concrete measures of conventional arms transfer re-
straint. Soviet refusal to establish a regional working group, one of
three agreed upon at the last round, before arriving in Helsinki for the
start of this round, has complicated the preparation of a U.S. strategy
for the talks.
It was agreed that a decision on how to respond if the Soviet Dele-
gation proves reluctant to establish the regional group or places unac-
ceptable preconditions on its agenda, could not be made in advance
since it should be based on the tone and substance of the Soviet posture
in Helsinki. It was decided that the delegation should report to Wash-
ington, proposing either to return to Washington, to delay the start of
the talks until agreement is reached, to include regional proposals in
the plenary sessions, or some other possibility. Washington would then
issue instructions. It was further agreed that while each delegation is
always free to discuss whatever it wishes, the U.S. delegation should
not take any action to lend status to the Soviet ‘neighbors’ proposal, in-
cluding agreeing to place it on the agenda of a regional working group.
If the question of the regional group can be resolved satisfactorily
and the talks proceed, it was agreed that the discussion of legal/polit-
ical criteria which have been proposed by the Soviets will move in par-
allel with the discussion of U.S.-sponsored military/technical guide-
lines. The delegation will not agree to political/legal criteria without
Soviet agreement on military/technical guidelines.
It was agreed that in discussing with the Soviets how restraint
might be implemented, the U.S. position will be that suppliers should
seek recipient acceptance of the agreed-upon restraint norms before
implementation, but that recipients would not hold a veto over sup-
plier restraint. In certain circumstances or for particular weapons
systems the U.S. would be prepared to implement strictly supplier
restraint.
On whether or not to inform key African leaders of the talks before
they begin, ACDA expressed the view that given the uncertainties sur-
rounding the talks and the future of the Regional Working Group in
particular, prior consultations could only serve to raise African fears
unnecessarily. State and Defense maintained that prior consultations
are desirable to allay potential African concerns that outsiders are
meeting to decide what is best for Africa. The SCC did not approve con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sultations with the Africans before the talks begin but directed State to
prepare the substance of what we would say to the Africans and circu-
late it for interagency review.
There was disagreement on which African states should be in-
cluded in the U.S. regional proposal for Africa. ACDA felt strongly that
we should stick with sub-Saharan Africa. DOD agreed but noted that
they did not feel strongly on this. State feels that by confining our pro-
posal to sub-Saharan Africa, we are running a high risk of having our
restraint proposal perceived as discriminating between black versus
white African states. All agreed that the introduction of the entire
Middle East issue which would accompany the inclusion of Egypt and
Libya must be avoided. State’s final position was that the delegation at-
tempt to have the Soviets agree to the discussion of all of Africa except
Egypt and Libya. David Aaron suggested that the delegation propose
two regions to the Soviets—sub-Saharan and North West Africa. The
issue was not decided.
It was agreed that Cuba should not be allowed to stand as an ob-
stacle to achieving Soviet agreement to a proposal for restraint in Latin
America. The U.S. delegation will make clear at the beginning of the
talks that our discussion of restraint in Latin America includes all of the
states of Latin America and the Caribbean, but we will not make the in-
clusion of Cuba a precondition for U.S. agreement on a Latin American
regional restraint initiative.
The SCC also discussed possibilities for reprogramming FY 1978
and FY 1979 FMS credit to Kenya to finance an initial U.S. response to
Kenya’s request for assistance in modernizing its military forces. The
discussion pointed out the political difficulties of cutting FMS credits
from any potential donors. The SCC did not reach a decision. Defense
and State were directed to reach agreement on common data for the po-
tential credit donors and develop formal agency positions. The survey
team was directed to identify a less costly initial package which we
might be prepared to offer the Kenyans.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
296.
Telegram From the Department of State to All American
Republic Diplomatic Posts1
216300. Subject: Conventional Arms Transfer Restraint: Debrief on
US-Soviet Talks.
1. Department is briefing selected governments on third round of
US-Soviet Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) talks, held in Helsinki
July 18–28. Action addressees should seek meeting at Senior ForMin
level to brief confidentially on Helsinki talks, drawing on talking points
in paragraph 3 below. If any posts recommend that department con-
duct supplementary debrief of embassies in Washington, please inform
us immediately.
2. Purpose of debriefing is to keep other governments informed of
progress we are making with suppliers on conventional arms restraint.
Host governments would not be wrong to draw conclusions from brief-
ing that we are seriously pursuing a major foreign policy goal and
hence that recipient initiatives to help define restraint measures are
timely and likely to influence supplier actions. But we do not want to
convey impression of US, much less joint US-Soviet, desire to impose
external limitations on Latin America. Further, although we support
current Latin American initiatives toward self-restraint,2 and have been
in touch with both Venezuela and Mexico with regard to their initia-
tives (para 4 below), we do not believe we should either assume too
strong a public stance or too eager a private one. Please report reactions
of host government to US-Soviet CAT talks, including any comments
volunteered on current Latin American restraint initiatives or their re-
lationships to supplier restraint as envisaged in US-Soviet talks.
3. Talking points for CAT III debrief.
A. Background.
—The US and Soviet sides have met three times to discuss conven-
tional arms restraint. At the conclusion of second round of talks last
May, the two sides issued a joint communique´ in which they agreed:3
cret; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Caracas, Mexico City, the Interests
Section in Havana, and the Consulate in Belize. Not sent to Paramaribo. Drafted by Pris-
cilla Clapp (PM); and approved by Jerome Kahan (PM), Luigi Einaudi (ARA), Alan Platt
(ACDA), Lorna Watson (ACDA), and Andrew Thomas (PM/SSP).
mitted a summary of the conference on the “limitation and/or prohibition of certain
types of conventional weapons” held in Mexico City August 21–24. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(1) that the problem of limiting global arms transfers was urgent, and
(2) to hold regularly scheduled meetings to explore concrete measures
to promote Conventional Arms Transfer restraint.
—Events since then have underscored the existence of interna-
tional concern for such measures. In June, the UN Special Session on
Disarmament adopted a program of action4 calling for consultations
among suppliers and recipients on limiting arms transfers. US-Soviet
bilateral meetings are thus consistent with this program and represent
an effort to implement it. (Note: Brasilia may wish to eliminate or
modify this point, since GOB formally disassociated itself from this
part of the program of action.)
—In Latin America the June 22, 1978 declaration by the eight sig-
natories of the 1974 Declaration of Ayacucho calling for regional agree-
ment limiting Conventional Arms Transfers,5 and the diplomatic ef-
forts of Mexico toward the same end at the OASGA and since, have
given new impetus to recipient efforts to restrain arms transfers on a re-
gional basis.
B. The July Meeting: Agreement on Framework.
—In most recent (third) round of talks, the US and Soviet Union
agreed on a three-part framework for future talks, consisting of political-
legal criteria, military technical criteria, and regional application.
—(1) The political-legal criteria (or guidelines) are based on the
UN charter, UN resolutions, and other internationally agreed docu-
ments; and will identify (a) legal constraints on arms transfers; and
(b) relevant political factors to be taken into account in making arms
transfer decisions. Good basis has been established for the elaboration
of mutually acceptable language during the next round.
—(2) The military-technical criteria (or guidelines) will determine
how to regulate both types and quantities of weapons transferred. Both
sides agreed that a comprehensive and effective approach to arms
transfer restraint will require both types of criteria.
—Both sides have agreed to discuss the application of these criteria
in specific regional situations. This will give reality to the criteria,
which would otherwise be general and abstract statements of interest,
and will reduce the chances of future misunderstanding.
—Both sides agreed that any region or sub-region of the world
could be discussed, provided regional groupings were not artifically
contrived.
4 The text of the program is printed in “Final Document of the Tenth Special Session

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
C. Interim Restraint.
—Both sides agreed that, in advance of final agreement on criteria,
it would be possible to reach interim restraint agreements for specific
regions. What form such agreements might take is not yet determined
and will depend in large part on attitudes of recipient countries.
D. Role of Other Suppliers and Recipients.
—Both sides recognize that successful effort to develop arms re-
straint regimes will require the active participation of not only other
suppliers, but also recipients. They are hopeful that suppliers and re-
cipients will find it in their interests to support arms transfer restraint.
—We have made clear to the Soviets that we believe legitimate de-
fense requirements of recipients must continue to be met.
E. Assessment and Future Prospects.
—There was considerable movement toward reaching a common
understanding of the general criteria (or guidelines) for US-Soviet re-
straint in arms transfers.
—The Soviets appear to take these talks seriously.
—The next round—tentatively planned for December to enable
both sides to undertake thorough preparations—will provide the test
of prospects for near-term success.
4. FYI: Venezuela is currently exploring how and when to convene
foreign ministers meeting referred to in June 22, 1978 restatement of
Ayacucho Declaration. Mexico invited all Latin American govern-
ments, except Chile, to a meeting August 21–24 in Mexico City. Mex-
ican objectives in convening meeting were apparently three-fold:
—To gain support for Mexican position on prohibition of certain
types of weapons in UN Geneva Conference on Laws of War;
—To reach agreement on establishment of Latin American com-
mission to make recommendations on guidelines for regional restraint
to a 1979 foreign ministers meeting;
—To make joint appeal to suppliers to abide by regional desire for
restraint.
US position is to support both initiatives on the basis that they
have a common goal, that the process of reaching that goal will be long-
term, and that developing momentum and sustaining that process will
require the active commitment of many. We know that attitudes among
host governments are wide-ranging and hope your debriefing on Hel-
sinki talks will serve indirectly to elicit comments.
End FYI.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
297.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, August 1978
Latin American Arms Market: Changing Patterns of Supply
Key Judgments
Latin American countries, closely tied to the United States after
World War II for military security assistance, began shifting arms pro-
curement to Western Europe in the late 1960s to refurbish their out-
dated arsenals and to adjust to a more restrictive US sales policy.
Latin America, one of the last of the Third World regions to acquire
European suppliers garnered $2.3 billion of this total, or about three
times the US figure. While the United States remained the single largest
supplier, its sales slumped badly toward the end of the period. The
USSR signed major contracts with one client—Peru.
In the past four years, Argentina, Ecuador, and Peru together
placed nearly two-thirds of the equipment orders and Venezuela,
Brazil, and Chile another 30 percent.
We expect a substantial drop in sales in 1978–79, as Latin American
countries absorb deliveries of their recent large purchases and ponder
the requirements of their upcoming new equipment cycles.
Latin America: Arms Suppliers2
Million US $
United
Western
Other Non-
States
Europe
Communist
USSR
Total
1,105
1,035
1,415
1st half, 1978
NA
NA
$4 billion (in 1976 prices), with West European suppliers increasing
Noforn.
2 For more detailed tables, see the appendix. [Footnote is in the original.]

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
their share of the market even further. We expect market developments
in this four-year period to follow this general pattern:
• US sales will be largely made up of spare parts and electronics
equipment.
• France will have excellent prospects for sales of jet aircraft and
air defense systems.
• West Germany should be able to market missiles, ground force
equipment, and submarines.
• Italy should be building new surface combatants for several
Latin American states.
• British sales will tend to lag behind the sales of other West Euro-
pean producers.
• Israel can be expected to replace the United States in a growing
number of technical assistance programs in the region, including the
training of local personnel and sales of certain types of advanced mili-
tary equipment.
• Brazil and Argentina, which are the first arms producers of any
consequence to emerge in the region, should more than double their
• The USSR will continue to play a restricted role in the market.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
298.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, September 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Multilateral Restraint in Conventional Arms Transfers
Over the past year, we have made progress with the Soviets and
with recipients in seeking cooperation on restraint in conventional
arms transfers. However, with the Europeans, we have achieved none
of our objectives, mainly because of the French. It will be difficult to
produce further results without support from the Europeans, because
both the Soviets and recipients will take their cue from European atti-
tudes before committing themselves to real restraint measures. There-
fore, we must now make a concerted effort to bring the Europeans
along.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
French participation is the key: with it, the British and Germans are
likely to be forthcoming. Over the past year, the French have put two
major conditions on their willingness to participate in discussions on
restraint: demonstration of Soviet willingness to cooperate, and the de-
velopment of indigenous regional restraint efforts. Giscard himself has
elaborated these conditions publicly and has indicated the possibility
of a positive French attitude toward restraint should these conditions
be met. We believe there has been progress toward meeting both these
conditions. (Of course, French objections may go deeper—to basic
questions of economic competition—and the French may therefore be
unwilling to take part in arms restraint at this time.)
Having tried to persuade the French at lower levels, we now be-
lieve that any appeal to be effective needs to go to Giscard himself in
order to increase the limited chances of getting a positive response.
This approach may fail. However, the alternative of doing nothing
would definitely be a serious weakening of the whole arms restraint ef-
fort. I therefore recommend that you sign the attached letters, urging
another quadrilateral meeting on conventional arms transfers2 and,
particularly in the case of the French, holding out the option of bilateral
talks as well.
2 Talks between the United States, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of
Germany, and France on conventional arms transfers had been scheduled for June 22–23,

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
299.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
265150. Subject: Conventional Arms Transfer Restraint.
Embassy should deliver, as appropriate, following Presidential
message to President Valery Giscard D’Estaing. (FYI:—There will be no
signed original transmitted. End FYI.)
Dear Valery:
On several occasions during the past year, you and I have ex-
changed views on the international arms trade. I believe we are in
agreement that unrestrained arms transfers—especially to particular
regions—can have serious consequences for regional stability and for
diversion of scarce resources needed for civilian economic needs. We
also agree, I believe, that controlling the arms trade cannot come solely
from efforts by supplier states to impose restraints on recipients, or by
ignoring the legitimate defense needs of individual nations. Instead,
there must be a cooperative approach, including both suppliers and
recipients.
Last year, representatives of our governments met, with their West
German and British counterparts, to compare views concerning the
basic issues involved, and to discuss possible steps to gain some control
over the arms trade. You indicated that France would be ready to take
part in seeking restraint, provided that initiatives came from particu-
lar regions, and provided that the Soviet Union were prepared to
cooperate.
At the UN Special Session on Disarmament, you expanded on the
regional approach, proposing that restraint should develop through
consultations within regions, and indicating that France would be pre-
pared to support such regional agreements. You also suggested that the
most realistic way to achieve restraint would be through joint supplier-
recipient limitations.
I am pleased to note that this approach has begun to materialize.
During the Special Session on Disarmament, eight Latin American
countries signed a declaration reaffirming their intentions to seek a lim-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. The text was received from the White House. Drafted by Priscilla
Clapp (PM); cleared by Tarnoff, Feurth (EUR/RPM), Gary Matthews (EUR/SOV),
Thomas Hirschfeld (ACDA/WEC), William Marsh (T), John Rowe (DOD/ISA), and John
Merrill (JCS); and approved by Jerome Kahan (PM). Carter sent a similar letter to British
Prime Minister James Callaghan in telegram 265150 to London, October 19. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
itation on arms purchases. In August, Mexico hosted a meeting of all
but three Latin American countries to extend this commitment on re-
straint to the entire region and to begin to develop concrete ways to
carry it out.
As you know, we have also been actively pursuing this issue with
the Soviet Union. In our last round of bilateral talks with the Soviets in
July, we made considerable progress in defining a framework for re-
straint in conventional arms transfers, which provides, among other
things, for the development of general criteria that could guide the ac-
tivities of both suppliers and recipients in their arms transfer activities.
The Soviets also indicated that interim restraint arrangements are pos-
sible where regional conditions are favorable. It is my judgment that
this framework, if agreed upon among a number of suppliers and re-
cipient nations, can provide the basis for working toward genuine re-
straint, thus slowing the pace of East-West competition in the arms
trade.
Neither we nor the Soviets, however, contemplate a purely bilat-
eral solution to the problem of arms transfers. Proceeding on the basis
of the UN SSOD program of action, we are exploring ideas for practical
discussions on restraint arrangements between suppliers and recip-
ients. In this regard, the Soviets have also asked US to come to the next
meeting in December prepared to discuss ways of involving other
major suppliers who seek solutions to this problem, as well as means to
achieve practical discussions between suppliers and recipients.
I believe, therefore, that the time is right to try building further
upon the approach which you outlined at the UN Special Session.
Thus, I would like to propose that representatives of our two gov-
ernments undertake further discussions, designed to explore the possi-
bilities of supplier and recipient cooperation in support of efforts for re-
straint. These talks could most usefully take place in concert with the
British and Germans, and I am writing in this vein to Jim Callaghan and
Helmut Schmidt. Of course, I would also welcome separate discussions
with your government, either before or after a four-power meeting.
I am particularly mindful of the practical problems which arms re-
straint would pose for individual supplier nations. The arms trade does
not exist in a vacuum, but is also related to weapons production for
national defense and our common security; to national balances of pay-
ments; to arms trade among nations in the Western Alliance; to fos-
tering national technological bases that will help sustain civilian econ-
omies; and to our common security concerns in the developing world.
At some point, these issues will also need to be considered, if we are to
ensure that no supplier nation is to bear a disproportionate burden.
In view of the complex factors involved, including the differing na-
tional interests and perceptions of suppliers and recipients, it will not
be easy to achieve an international regime for arms restraint, even for a

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
single region. But I believe that we need to begin the patient work that
is essential to progress toward the goal you and I both share.
I would very much welcome your views on this critical issue. And
I hope it will be possible for representatives of our two governments—
along with the British and Germans—to resume discussions in the very
near future.
With warmest regards,
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
Newsom
300.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, October 1978
Arms Sales to the Third World, 1977
Key Judgments
in 1977 as sizable orders by Iran and other Middle East clients reversed
a two-year slump. In terms of constant US dollars (with Soviet sales
being valued on a comparable basis), 1977 sales, although still 10 per-
Billion 1976 US $
Billion US $
Constant Prices
Files, Memoranda to the Secretary, 1977. Secret; Noforn.
2 For the purpose of this report, the Third World refers to the following: (1) all coun-
tries of Africa except South Africa; (2) all countries of East Asia except Hong Kong and
Japan, and Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, which became Communist in 1975; (3) Greece
and Turkey in Europe; (4) all countries in the Middle East and South Asia; and (5) all
countries in Latin America except Cuba. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
On the buyers’ side, Iran and Saudi Arabia continued to dominate
the market in 1977, purchasing about 45 percent of the arms sold to
Third World countries. Algeria, Iraq, Ethiopia, India, and Argentina ac-
counted for another 20 percent.
As for suppliers, the USSR, France, and West Germany substan-
tially increased their Third World arms sales in 1977, in both absolute
and percentage terms. The United States, while retaining its lead as the
single largest supplier, saw its market share decline by 8 percentage
points. US sales are characterized by proportionately larger support
and associated services provided clients. In the support category, US
sales in constant prices surpassed those of the USSR (the second-largest
weapon systems, the spread between US and Soviet sales was nar-
rower, with US sales only 12 percent higher.
Deliveries of military items to the Third World continued their rise
of recent years, in both current prices and constant prices (with Soviet
deliveries valued comparably):
Billion US $
Billion 1976 US $
Once again the USSR responded more quickly than other suppliers
in following up sales with deliveries. At the end of 1977 the backlog of
Soviet orders stood at about $5 billion, while the backlog of other sup-
pliers had mounted to $45 billion, including $30 billion for the United
States (fiscal year data). The five top Third World recipients of foreign
Looking ahead for the next several years, we expect the Third
World arms market to level off and drift downward: (a) the leading
clients have huge backlogs of orders and, in some instances, find it hard
to digest the existing flow of arms; and (b) a number of Third World
countries face increasing financial problems—for example, in man-
aging their debts and marketing their raw materials at good prices. We
note that the USSR and West European suppliers are taking vigorous
steps to maintain sales in what may well prove to be a stagnating
market.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
301.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 6, 1978
SUBJECT
The FY 1979 Arms Transfer Ceiling
We have reached interagency consensus on the FY 1979 arms
transfer ceiling management plan (Tab 1),2 but one issue requires your
decision: the reduction to be made in the ceiling.
I believe that our national security interests and arms restraint ob-
two years.
The ceiling plan is sufficiently flexible so that it can accommodate
potential transfers to the Middle East, should further requests materi-
alize and we decide to respond favorably. All major ceiling cases will
be sent to you for decision prior to Congressional notification in ac-
cordance with the procedures you established.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency agree with me that this FY 1979 ceiling level
would permit us to make those sales important to our national interests
while demonstrating our continuing commitment to arms transfer re-
straint.3
The Joint Chiefs agree that our security interests can be met within
the proposed cut, but believe an 8 percent reduction is inappropriate in
view of the lack of progress of our multilateral restraint initiatives.4
They point out that both the Soviets and the major NATO suppliers
have failed to follow our example by adopting even modest restraints,
or by agreeing to concrete measures during a year and a half of Con-
ventional Arms Transfer (CAT) talks. The OJCS believes that a more
2 Not attached.
3 The OSD and ACDA reports were not found.
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the credibility of our policy and send a more appropriate signal to other
arms suppliers, particularly in view of your statement last February
that “the extent of next year’s reduction will depend upon the world
political situation and upon the degree of cooperation and under-
standing of other nations.”5 The Joint Chiefs believe that a larger re-
duction would suggest that our restraint policies are insensitive to
the actions of others, and would prompt continued intransigence in
negotiations.
I do not agree with this assessment. My concern, which is shared
by OSD and ACDA, is that other suppliers and domestic critics are
more likely to interpret such a modest reduction as lack of Administra-
tion commitment to restraint, particularly since the CAT talks have not
yet had time to produce results. Soundings we have taken with
Congress at the staff level support this conclusion. At the same time, I
believe that progress at CAT is necessary before we make future com-
mitments to reduction, and that other suppliers should not count on
our continuing to make reductions. Therefore, I recommend that you
state in your public announcement that decisions on future arms
transfer levels will depend on the cooperation on restraint we receive in
the coming year from other nations. A proposed draft Presidential
statement is at Tab 2.6
Recommendations:
That you approve an 8 percent reduction for FY 1979 and that you
announce that decisions on future levels will depend on the coopera-
tion of others.7
ALTERNATIVELY, that you approve a more modest reduction of 2
to 5 percent for FY 1979 and that you announce that future levels will
depend on the cooperation of others, expressing disappointment at the
pace of multilateral cooperation thus far.
Approve 5% reduction
Approve 2% reduction
6 Not attached.
7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J. Be very careful. Don’t come
too close to our limit.”

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
302.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 13, 1978
SUBJECT
The FY 1979 Arms Transfer Ceiling
The State memorandum at Tab A2 presents the FY 1979 Conven-
tional Arms Transfer Ceiling Management Plan and recommends that
the eight percent reduction achieved in FY 1978 be repeated in FY 1979.
The ceiling for FY 1979 has been calculated based on the FY 1978
ceiling after adjusting for inflation.
FY 1978 ceiling
$8.551 billion
+.616
FY 1979 ceiling baseline
8% reduction
−.733
FY 1979 ceiling
$8.434 billion
State and Defense have identified a worldwide total of $10.5 billion
in potential sales which might be concluded in FY 1979. However, for a
number of reasons (normal attrition; uncertainties surrounding sales to
Iran; no sale of F–16s to Korea this year; formal requests have not yet
been received for some sales) roughly $2.5 billion of that total is un-
likely to be signed in FY 1979. Therefore, we are faced with a realistic
demand of roughly $8.0 billion which can easily be accommodated
within a ceiling of $8.4 billion.
The announcement of the FY 1979 ceiling will be an important
factor in our efforts to secure multilateral cooperation in restraining
arms transfers. Virtually all agencies believe that FY 1979 will be the
true test of that effort, that our prospects are sufficiently encouraging to
pursue the CAT talks over the next 12 months with real vigor, and that
continuing an eight percent reduction sends the appropriate signal to
the other suppliers and to recipients.
The Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (OJCS) points out that in the
year since we began talking about multilateral restraint no suppliers or
recipient nations have adopted concrete measures of restraint compa-
rable our unilateral ceiling. The OJCS would prefer a smaller reduc-
2 See Document 301.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tion—say two to five percent—in FY 1979 to signal our concern and put
the others on notice that we are not prepared to sustain unilateral re-
straint indefinitely.
While I take the OJCS point that U.S. unilateral restraint may not
be possible to sustain indefinitely, I feel strongly that for an under-
taking of this complexity one year is simply too short a period to expect
measurable results. My recommendation is to repeat the eight percent
reduction of last year: first, because it provides continuity for the CAT
talks, and second because it can be done in FY 1979 without seriously
affecting any of our security assistance plans.
A draft statement at Tab B has been prepared for the public an-
nouncement of the FY 1979 program.3
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve an eight percent reduction in FY 1979 and the
proposed public statement (Tab B).4
3 Not attached. Carter issued a statement on November 29 saying that “Conven-
tional arms restraint is an important objective of this administration and the Congress. To
ensure U.S. leadership and to supplement existing legislation, I established for the first
time a set of quantitative and qualitative standards by which arms transfer requests con-
sidered by this Government would be judged. The principle consideration in the applica-
tion of these standards is whether the transfer in question promotes our security and the
4 After “(Tab B),” Brzezinski wrote “making further reductions also dependent on
the cooperation + restraint of other suppliers.” Carter checked the “Approve” option and
beneath the approval line wrote: “This is not much of a restraint. J”.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
303.
Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfers—Round IV
PARTICIPANTS
State
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. Leslie Gelb, Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
Defense
Secretary Harold Brown
Mr. David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs
JCS
General David C. Jones, Chairman
Rear Admiral James A. Lyons, Jr., Assistant Deputy Director for Politico-Military
Affairs, Plans and Policy Directorate
CIA
Dr. Sayre Stevens, Deputy Director, National Foreign Assessment Center
Mr. Neil Linsenmayer, NIO for Special Studies
ACDA
Deputy Director Spurgeon M. Keeny
Dr. Barry Blechman, Assistant Director, Weapons Evaluation and Control Bureau
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. David Aaron
NSC
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Dr. Jessica T. Mathews
Dr. Leslie G. Denend
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by questioning a basic element
in the approach to the CAT talks presented in the interagency paper.2
He stated that sensitive issues pertaining to our alliance relationships,
which should not be a matter for discussion with the Soviets, were
being proposed for discussion. Focusing on China and the Koreas, he
asked whether the risk of damage by even listening to a presentation on
this area was not too great since listening is also part of negotiations.
In response, Christopher replied that his question goes to the fun-
damental feeling one holds about these negotiations. If that feeling is
place in the White House Situation Room.
2 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
positive—as State’s is—then he believes we should be prepared to
listen to what the Soviets want to talk about so that we can talk to them
about what we want. He therefore recommends that we hear what the
Soviets have to say on Korea, ask whatever questions are necessary to
clarify the proposal, and indicate that we will comment at the next
round. He added that Ambassador Gleysteen had been asked his views
on this. Gleysteen felt that the government of South Korea should be
consulted in advance, and if they did not strongly object, we should
proceed as the State Department proposed.3 Christopher quoted Gley-
steen’s conclusion that: “We—and to a lesser extent the Soviets—play a
crucial role in moderating the North-South Korean arms race, and we
should not close our minds entirely to a rather passive exploration of
the issue.”
Secretary Brown remarked that his view was more negative and he
interpreted Gleysteen’s cable as more negative also. Since the US is the
major arms supplier to South Korea, and the Chinese to North Korea,
mutual US-Soviet restraint would greatly upset the ROKG. He didn’t
know how negative we should be: whether we should walk out, or
listen in silence, or try to agree to an agenda in advance. His inclination
was that we should try to agree with the Soviets on restraint in just one
area—Africa—and if we couldn’t agree there, he asked, how can we
agree anywhere else? He noted that he recognized that the US has the
most to gain from mutual restraint in Africa.
Brzezinski asked what views of the group were on Brown’s sug-
gestion of singling out a single non-aligned region for initial agree-
ment. He stated that he believed that the Soviets found these negotia-
tions very attractive because they hold the promise of establishing a
global US–USSR relationship above established allied or emerging po-
litical relationships—at no cost to the Soviets. We have no interest in
promoting that, and on the other hand, have a great deal to lose. He
sees no conceivable interest to the US in listening to Soviet presenta-
tions on China, Korea and Iran. It would make more sense to isolate a
single region where there is the least amount of conflictual interest. He
also wanted to know how far we can move towards agreement with the
Soviets without the extensive involvement of the British and French.
size one other obvious point about the conventional arms talks. If we are ever going to
talk to the Soviets about any kind of mutual restraint agreements in Korea, I assume we
will have the courtesy and good sense to review what we have in mind with the Koreans
before we start talking to Soviets. If we don’t, we will be in deep trouble.” (National Ar-

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Christopher replied that we cannot reach any form of agreement,
even ad referendum with the Soviets. That would be getting too far out
ahead of our allies. However, he does not think that we can construct
an agenda containing only the things we want to talk about. He also
feels that if we did this the African countries would feel singled out.
Blechman argued that we cannot ignore the history of these negoti-
ations. We had insisted on the regional focus, and we had proposed
Latin America and Africa. We had told the Soviets that any regional
area which possessed geographical coherence and reflected politico-
military realities could be presented as a valid candidate for regional
restraint, though that did not mean we would agree to discuss it. There-
fore, how could we refuse to even hear the Soviet proposals?
Brzezinski replied that listening is a form of negotiating and that
we have to be sensitive to overriding political realities. The very fact
that these negotiations are taking place is sensitive. Keeny remarked
that he does not know of a single case in an arms control negotiation
where we have refused to let another side talk about something rele-
vant to the substance of the talks. Aaron replied that these are not arms
control negotiations—they go to the heart of our relations with other
nations.
Brzezinski then proposed that we let the Soviets make their case on
these regions in the context of arguing over the agenda for the meeting,
while not agreeing to their inclusion on the agreed agenda itself. At
least then we would not just be sitting and listening. Keeny argued that
there might be some real possibilities for restraint in Korea, therefore
let’s listen. Sayre Stevens remarked that advanced weapons for North
Korea can only come from the USSR, not from China, and that the cur-
rent relationship might change and the Soviets might resume arms
shipments to North Korea. Brown said that it was not clear whether
Brzezinski’s clever suggestion would work but it was worth a try.
Brzezinski asked why the delegation had not proposed discussing
arms transfers to Vietnam. Failure to do so appeared to signal an atti-
tude that was not sufficiently sensitive to wider political concerns. Gelb
replied that Vietnam had been considered. He personally had nothing
against raising it—in fact it might be a good idea. However, we could
not talk about transfers to a single country without reference to its
neighbors—that is the essence of the regional approach we are fol-
lowing as directed by the President. In this case the regional experts in
State and the other agencies had strongly opposed having the US raise
the Southeast Asian region. He wanted to make clear that the CAT del-
egation was not trying to prejudice US interests, but was carrying out
an exercise based on Presidential directives.
Gelb stated that if you put the agenda to the test Brzezinski was
suggesting the talks are doomed to failure. He asked whether the CAT

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
negotiations are worth the risk that the Soviets would not agree to such
an agenda. Christopher added that the real question was whether we
were prepared to hear what they had to say and then to reject those
areas we don’t want to talk about. Gelb noted that this was just what
the delegation was proposing should be done, but that the Soviets
would not agree to only address areas that are in the US interest.
Brzezinski then had to leave and wanted to summarize his posi-
tion. He felt that we should first discuss the agenda, letting the Soviets
make their case on Korea, if necessary, in that context. We should then
make our pitch on Soviet transfers to Vietnam and then we should pro-
ceed to discuss Latin America and Africa as roughly symmetrical re-
gional topics. If the Soviets won’t agree to proceed on this basis, then
we will know that the reason they are interested in CAT is to use CAT
to affect our relationships with our allies.
Gelb remarked that from the very beginning, the prospect of the
US and the USSR working together for restraint has been inherent in
this enterprise. There is a risk to our relationships with our friends and
allies, but the question is whether we can accept that risk. Our allies like
Korea are big boys. Why can’t we go to them and tell them that the So-
viets are likely to raise their region and that we will listen in response.
He disagreed with Brown’s earlier remark that the Gleysteen cable was
negative. Our plan was to consult with the Koreans before the round
and if they strongly objected, we would tell the Soviets that Korea was
not an appropriate topic. Brown asked whether we also planned to con-
sult beforehand with Iran. Gelb replied that he had personally briefed
the Shah on CAT about ten months ago.4 The Shah was quite relaxed
about it. Brown replied that that was a different era and the Shah would
not feel the same now, whereas the Koreans may be more relaxed now
than previously. He felt that we had a wider spectrum of alternatives in
dealing with Korea than with the Shah, but that active discussion was
not an option in either case.
Christopher asked what the negotiators felt about having a discus-
sion at the beginning of the talks on what should be discussed. Gelb re-
plied that such a discussion would be fruitless, and would only lead to
a stalemate. In essence to do this would amount to a decision to end the
talks. Blechman agreed, saying that we had thought that Mexico City5
would be a test of the Russians and now we are finding that it is a test of
ourselves. Keeny said that getting other suppliers to cooperate in arms
restraint is the President’s policy. If we don’t want to pursue it, we
should put the issue to him and let him decide. McGiffert noted that
4 Gelb met with the Shah on February 5. No record of their meeting was found.
in Mexico City.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
our unilateral restraint policy was prefaced by the need to protect US
national security interests.
Brown stated that walking out might be the appropriate response
on Iran. Gelb asked Brown what his objective was in that strategy.
Brown replied that progress in this round of CAT was too high a price
to pay if Iran were to be further destabilized, or if we had to go through
another round of reassuring the Koreans, such as he had just been
through in the past year. Gelb asked why he thought that explaining to
the government of Iran what might happen would lead to such destabi-
lization. Brown replied that it was simply the fact that the talks were
going on. Keeny argued that this issue is not related to the current situ-
ation in Iran. Brown agreed but argued that these discussions would
make the situation very much worse. Keeny replied that if that were
true then we should break off the talks, but he was challenging the
basic thesis that the fact of something being brought up would have
such cosmic implications. Aaron asked whether listening to the Soviets
on Iran was more important than making progress on Latin America
and Africa. Blechman answered that in order to make progress we
must be prepared to listen. Secretary Brown then had to leave.
Aaron then said that he would try to frame the issues. First, do we
try to negotiate an agenda at the beginning of the talks. Our position on
Korea and on China is that we would simply not discuss it. On the re-
gion including Iran there are options. We could be prepared to discuss
it. We could listen and then exclude it. Or we could treat it like China as
not being an appropriate matter for discussion. Christopher said that
this position was that Iran belonged in the same category as China.
Blechman said that we should listen to the Soviet proposal and then de-
flect the discussion to a sub-region, namely the Yemens. McGiffert said
that Iran should be treated like China.
Christopher asked what our experience has been. Will the Soviets
persist in pursuing this region, or will they heed our warning? Gelb re-
plied that they will persist. Keeny asked what we would do if they do
persist. McGiffert said the US should walk out. Gelb disagreed with the
State Department’s position on how to treat Iran. He disagreed also
with Brown’s assessment of what will happen in Iran if we consult with
them. These kinds of problems in our bilateral relations can be easily
managed at the stage where we now are with the Soviets which is es-
sentially ground zero. If we stonewall on this region, in his opinion we
put the talks at serious risk. If we want to do that there should be ex-
plicit guidance from the President. Aaron said that we would need an
official State Department position on whether or not we should consult
in advance of the round with the government of Iran. He noted that the
Shah may consider this the last straw and would surely wonder what
our intentions are. We should keep a sense of perspective. We had de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
veloped areas of mutual interest (Latin America and Africa). Now,
when the Soviets were proposing to discuss our vital interests, we are
preparing to talk about them. Gelb and Blechman strongly disagreed
with this analysis.
Aaron said that there were several other areas that needed discus-
sion. If all these issues are resolved, how far can we go in CAT without
our key allies? We have gotten a positive response to the President’s
message from the British, but nothing from the French. Christopher re-
plied that he did not rule out the possibility of another meeting with the
Soviets if progress is made at Round IV. However, he did not feel we
should reach any agreements, even ad referendum. But the delegation
should be authorized to agree in principle to another CAT meeting, if
the date was set far enough in advance so that there would be time for
consultations with our allies. Gelb added that there was also the possi-
bility of scheduling meetings of the Working Groups in between the
formal rounds. General Jones said that there should be no more meet-
ings until we demonstrate progress with the allies. Working Group
meetings on Africa might be all right if we uncover areas of real in-
terest. McGiffert said that any decision on further meetings should be
made in Washington, not by the delegation. Aaron added that today’s
meeting had revealed the great sensitivity that existed over these talks,
so that coming back to Washington for a decision certainly seems war-
ranted. Blechman asked whether that also applied to working group
meetings on the criteria and on Latin America and Africa: areas where
the US wants to press ahead? McGiffert said there was a serious
problem with Latin America because of the MIG–23s in Cuba. Aaron
emphasized that CAT was not the forum in which to discuss MIGs in
Cuba, though Cuba is included in our proposals for regional restraint
in Latin America. Christopher repeated that the Department of State
supported the guidance as drafted in the interagency paper, giving the
delegation authority to schedule additional rounds and meetings based
on its view of progress made in this round. On Africa, State favored a
US proposal covering only sub-Saharan Africa, not the whole conti-
nent. Later the region could be broadened to include all of Africa. He
would like a question to be posed to the President on the fundamental
issue of whether to go forward with CAT. He favored doing so. He then
had to leave the meeting.
Blechman asked whether the decision paper for the President
would be cleared among the agencies. Aaron replied that we would try
to faithfully reflect the discussion. If any agency feels it necessary, it is
free to contribute its own paper.
Aaron then raised the issue posed in the interagency paper of
whether we should table a proposal on Latin America at this round, or
simply explore possible options. McGiffert asked what State felt about

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Mexico’s views on this. Jones added that we must be particularly sensi-
tive about Mexico’s views since the meeting will be in Mexico City. We
have to be careful that the suppliers do not get out in front of the recip-
ients. Gelb answered that the Mexicans have no objection to our tabling
a proposal. What they would object to is any form of agreement on a
proposal. State favored tabling a proposal. Keeny said that ACDA
agreed. McGiffert favored exploring options but making no proposal.
Gelb noted that there are many things about the Mexican proposal with
which we disagree. Aaron asked whether we have consulted with
Brazil on our proposal. Gelb said that we have talked to them about our
general approach but not about the specifics. We have not told any
other government about the specifics, but we have briefed Brazil and
many of the other Latin American countries in some detail on our gen-
eral approach. McGiffert noted that although we had weapons lists for
Latin America it was not clear exactly what proposal the delegation
would be tabling. Aaron directed the Interagency Group to prepare a
specific proposal for approval prior to the talks.
Turning to Africa, Aaron felt that there is a political asymmetry be-
tween Latin America and Africa, and that if the Soviets did not appear
serious about discussing concrete proposals on Africa, that perhaps we
should not make a concrete proposal on Latin America. Since Latin
America is in our backyard it would not make sense to talk in detail
about Latin America, but not about Africa. Gelb responded that any
proposal that the delegation was authorized to make would presum-
ably be approved because it was in our interest. He did not therefore
see the linkage between the two regions that Aaron was suggesting.
Aaron replied that the linkage was there, and was important. On the
scope of the Africa proposal, Gelb explained that Secretary Vance was
afraid that a proposal on all of Africa might affect the current Middle
East talks because of Libya, and so for this round we should stay with
sub-Saharan Africa. In the long run we would hold out the possibility
for expanding the region to all of Africa minus Egypt. All agreed. Gelb
added that since everybody else was doing so, he would also like to
make a statement for the record. The delegation is not proposing things
because the Soviets will like it or not like it. The issue is not how to
make the Soviets happy, but how to frame a proposal which is both ne-
gotiable and in the US interest. Aaron said that the question is what is
in our interest?
Gelb said that on Africa State would like authorization for both
Options 1 and 2. He would not oppose sending this issue back to Wash-
ington during the round, but there is a problem because of the short du-
ration of the round—only seven working days. Stevens asked whether
the first option didn’t mean that the US couldn’t change the existing
arms balance in Africa. Blechman responded that the idea was to make

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
as far reaching a proposal as possible since restraint is clearly in our in-
terest in Africa because the Soviet Union is transferring so much more
than we. McGiffert favored instructing the delegation to have a general
discussion with the Soviets on Africa. If they show interest, the delega-
tion should report back to Washington which will then decide whether
a proposal should be tabled and what it would be. Gelb said that ap-
proach would not work, and that after all this time we ought to be able
to approve or disapprove the options as drafted. Keeny favored ap-
proval of both options, with a preference for Option 1. Aaron agreed
with McGiffert’s view that the delegation should check back with
Washington for approval during the round. Gelb said that objections to
the weapons lists (which had already been cleared by all agencies in-
volved) should be raised here and worked out before the round.
Blechman and Keeny added that the delegation was not asking for au-
thority to make changes in the options, but rather for authority to table
a pre-authorized option. McGiffert said that the delegation should ex-
plore the possibilities for limitations of less sophisticated weapons
systems. If there is interest, report back to Washington. General Jones
agreed. Aaron said that the Interagency Group should prepare precise
formulations of the two options which would then be considered for
approval. Gelb emphasized that State’s position was that the delega-
tion have the power to proceed once the proposal was approved.
On the question of how to approach the control of the transfer of
technology and coproduction in CAT, McGiffert argued that it be
treated only as a means of assuring noncircumvention of agreed re-
straint regimes, and not as a separate criterion. Keeny argued that since
control of coproduction and technology is an important part of our uni-
lateral restraint policy, it makes sense to seek to apply the same limita-
tions to the Soviets. It should therefore be treated as a separate crite-
rion. Jones and Gelb both favored treating coproduction as a non-
circumvention issue. Gelb noted however that he understood ACDA’s
argument and felt that the issue should be posed in that manner for the
President.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
304.
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, undated
CAT IV: GUIDANCE FOR THE US DELEGATION
I. OVERALL GUIDANCE
A. Objectives
We continue to seek concrete steps toward international restraint
in arms transfers. Toward this goal, we must move forward with the
Soviets, with other suppliers, and with recipients simultaneously, but
seek to avoid a lack of movement in one or two of these areas from pre-
cluding progress in the third. We want to avoid consideration of the
sensitive areas of East Asia and West Asia and focus on regions where
our strategic interests in terms of arms transfers are not directly en-
gaged, such as Africa and Latin America.
B. Summary of Our Approach in Mexico City
We will press on two tracks: substantive and procedural. Each
track should be compatible with the other, but capable of independent
results.
1. Substantively, the Delegation should seek detailed exploration
in CAT IV of interim arms transfer restraint measures (IRMs) for Latin
America and Africa. Any interim agreement arrangement would limit
new commitments, be of finite and relatively short duration, and could
be subject to modification as others joined the dialogue. (Detailed guid-
ance contained in regional sections.) [Because limitation on new com-
mitments would permit delivery of pipeline items, the Delegation
should insist that the Soviets advise us of their existing commitments to
these regions.]
We expect Soviet regional proposals to focus initially on East Asia
(PRC, ROK/DPRK) and West Asia (Persian Gulf). [Before the round
begins, the US Head of Delegation should inform the Soviet Head of
Delegation that concrete progress toward restraint in Africa and Latin
America is in our mutual interest. He should also inform him that we
are not prepared to discuss either East Asia or West Asia. He should
state that if the Soviets press us on these two regions, the Head of the
US Delegation will have to seek instructions from Washington before
an attachment to a November 29 memorandum from Brzezinski to Christopher. (Ibid.)
All brackets are in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
proceeding with this round.] (Detailed guidance on dealing with antici-
pated Soviet regional proposals is contained in regional sections.)
We are prepared to put forward a proposal on Africa and Latin
America. We are willing to put forward the former alone but not the
latter.
We also seek continued progress toward agreement on the criteria
to govern arms transfers, which would form the basis of the overall
framework for restraint. We need to ensure in this round that work pro-
ceeds on the military/technical criteria and on political/legal criteria
consistent with our own policies. Also in this round, we should elicit a
Soviet commitment to the establishment of, and detailed discussions of
the nature of, the consultative mechanism through which restraint
would be implemented.
2. Procedurally, we seek, over the long term, a series of supplier/
recipient consultations, each organized for a different region. These
consultations would discuss both the overall framework for restraint
and interim restraint measures. Any US/Soviet IRM which previously
had been agreed upon could be confirmed or modified as a result of
such meetings. These consultations could precede more formal joint
supplier-recipient conferences, and may themselves have to be pre-
ceded by discussions among recipients alone, and among suppliers
alone. The latter could take the form of a series of US-other suppliers bi-
laterals. We will have to probe Soviet views on this question in Mexico
City.
C. Other Suppliers
[It is neither desirable nor necessary to anticipate or plan our spe-
cific approaches to other suppliers until we have a clearer idea as to the
nature and scope of possible US-Soviet agreements. In the discussions,
the Delegation should not take issue with the principle that long-term
comprehensive restraint measures require participation by all major
suppliers. But it should maintain that certain interim US-Soviet re-
straints affecting particular weapons transfers to specific regions or
sub-regions can make sense as bilateral measures and can provide a
basis for broader and more durable arrangements involving other sup-
pliers and recipients. The Delegation should stress that more substan-
tial US-Soviet progress in moving toward concrete restraint arrange-
ments is needed to help bring other suppliers along. If the Soviets press
the argument that certain bilateral restraints could be circumvented by
other suppliers, the Delegation could note that, in such cases, at the
very least, we would seek their agreement to avoid actions that would
upset such interim measures. The Delegation, however, should make
clear to the Soviets in CAT IV that the US will not and cannot speak for
our Allies on questions of arms transfers. If a specific bilateral agree-

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
ment is in sight, the Delegation should report to Washington so that ap-
propriate consultations can be held with the Allies and so that the Dele-
gation can receive instructions on how to relate such an agreement to
the positions of the other suppliers.]
The Delegation should deal with the anticipated Soviet suggestion
of holding a multilateral suppliers meeting by arguing that serious and
systematic bilaterals between the US and the USSR and between each
of us and our major allies would be the best way to proceed in the near
term. These consultations would help ensure that suppliers would
bring a reasonably consistent position into joint supplier-recipient con-
ferences, build suppliers’ support for interim restraint measures, and
develop a comprehensive framework for restraint based upon criteria
and consultative mechanisms. (The Delegation should not rule out the
possibility of a multilateral suppliers’ meeting following intensive bi-
laterals as a prelude to supplier-recipient consultations and a supplier-
recipient conference.)
D. Further Negotiations
[Over the near term, we wish to sustain the momentum of US-
Soviet negotiations during the coming year, so long as CAT is not ex-
ploited by the Soviets to disadvantage our sensitive relationships in
East and West Asia. The Delegation should seek prior Washington ap-
proval before agreeing on a schedule for further negotiations, either at
the Delegation or working level. In determining a future schedule, we
should be mindful of the unique and difficult character of the initiative
and should not establish unreasonable expectations for progress in the
CAT IV round.]
II. REGIONAL GUIDANCE
A. Latin America
1. Objectives. As a general strategy, the Delegation should discuss
with the Soviet Union the emerging regional initiative, including:
(1) Mexico’s key role since the merger of the two initiatives2 and the
apparent development in Latin America of a consensus on the need for
wide regional participation, (2) elements of restraint concepts devel-
Colombia, Quiro´s of Costa Rica, and Pe´rez of Venezuela, the Chief of Government Omar
Torrijos of Panama, and Prime Minister of Jamaica Manley to combine their support for
the Treaty of Tlatelolco with their support for the Ayacucho Declaration to limit the
supply and purchase of conventional arms. (“Joint Statement by the United States and
Latin America: Treaty of Tlatelolco, the Organization of the American states, and Arms
Transfers [Extract],” Documents on Disarmament, 1978, p. 391)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
oped at August Mexico City meeting3 (including both transfer re-
straints and other restraint-related measures), (3) importance of sup-
pliers supporting this initiative and helping to keep momentum,
(4) sensitivity of recipients to appearance of supplier-imposed re-
straints, (5) significance of our showing support for the prospective
supplier-recipient conference as a means of establishing an effective re-
straint regime. The Delegation should be alert to avoid any discussions
which could be understood as narrowing or undermining the 1962 US/
USSR Understandings on offensive weapons in Cuba.4
2. Interim Restraint Measures
(a) Political/Diplomatic Measures
(1) Regarding the second Mexican note,5 the Delegation should
propose that:
—the thrust of this reply should be to support in principle appro-
priate regional arrangements to restrain transfers of conventional
weapons, while reserving the right to consider specific regional proposals
which the Latin Americans may develop.
—replies should emphasize the need for progress on regional ar-
rangements such that Latin American recipients will be ready for con-
sultations in 1979 with suppliers as part of the preparatory work for a
formal supplier-recipient conference.
—replies should mention the recent UN SSOD endorsement of
supplier-recipient coordination of arms transfer restraint6 and indicate
the importance of restraint to be considered in other appropriate re-
gions as part of a global concept.
—replies should be through the vehicle of a private diplomatic
note delivered before March 1979. The Delegation should indicate that
we are prepared to go ahead with our note even if the USSR is un-
willing to do so.
(FYI: Replies should not include endorsement of restraints on use
of conventional weapons. Although a general reference could be given
3 A report on the Latin American and Caribbean Conventional Weapons meeting
held in Mexico City is in telegram 14169 from Mexico City, August 28. (National Ar-
4 The 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis ended when the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw
all offensive nuclear weapons from Cuba. The United States in turn agreed not to invade
Cuba and withdrew offensive nuclear weapons from Turkey.
note to major arms suppliers “would be made available to the U.S. Thursday October 26.”
not found, was sent in August. (Telegram 260203 to Mexico, October 14; National Ar-
6 See Document 299.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
to the Geneva Conference on Special Weapons, that should not be the
first nor the primary forum for issuing statements of support for Latin
American restraint initiatives.)
(2) Regarding public support for Latin American restraint, the Del-
egation should propose language for a joint communique that:
—endorses the Latin American restraint initiative in the context of
the UN SSOD Program of Action, noting the former’s origins in the
Declaration of Ayacucho.
—expresses willingness in principle to honor regional restraint ar-
rangements, in Latin America and in other regions.
(b) Interim Weapons Restraint Proposals
Regarding specific weapons restraint proposals, the Delegation
should explore region-wide restraint possibilities. [After the explora-
tory discussions, the Delegation is authorized to table an ad referendum
proposal, subject to consultations with other major suppliers. The Dele-
gation should seek further guidance as to the content of a specific pro-
posal. In addressing specific proposals, we should take into account the
Mexican initiative for regional restraint.]
(c) Supplier Consultations
Regarding further suppliers’ consultations on Latin America, the
Delegation should stress the need for sustained US-Soviet bilaterals
and suggest that we each hold such bilaterals with our respective allies
as a means of developing a consistent approach toward restraint in
Latin America for discussions at a supplier-recipient conference or in-
formal supplier-recipient consultations which could precede such a
conference. The sensitivity of the region to multilateral suppliers’
meetings should be emphasized, but not so as to rule out the possibility
of a suppliers’ conference.
B. Africa
1. Objectives
Our long-term goal is to see African disputes settled through nego-
tiation and not by force of arms; we believe that the available resources
of Africa and of its friends should be used for economic and social
progress on the continent.
The current and projected levels of arms transfers to Africa work
against these goals, and thus our objective is a meaningful agreement
on arms transfer restraint. Specifically, we want to see a reduction in
the flow of Soviet arms to Africa.
2. Overall Tactics
The Soviets see Africa as a place we want to discuss because the
trend of events is running against us. During Round IV, they will try to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
condition further discussion of restraint in Africa on our agreement to
discuss other areas of interest to them. Indeed, even if the Soviets come
to agree upon meaningful restraint in Africa, they will probably look
for trade-offs from us outside Africa, for the simple reason that our
arms transfers to Africa are minimal.
[Thus, our key tactic at Mexico City must be to make the Soviets
see that a restraint agreement in Africa is in our mutual interest—
whether or not we agree to discuss the areas of primary interest to the
Soviets.]
3. Courses of Action and Proposals
In addition to the general tactics outlined above and assuming that
we are able to bring the Soviets to further discussion of Africa, the Dele-
gation will propose the following courses of action.
(a) The Region Defined: Sub-Saharan Africa
Consistent with guidance for round III, an African proposal
should cover sub-Saharan Africa. The Delegation should, as necessary,
indicate that we would also be willing to discuss northwest Africa, but
under no circumstances Egypt.
(b) Region-wide Interim Weapons Restraint Proposals
[The Delegation is authorized to explore interim restraint possibil-
ities and to make a proposal for Africa. The Delegation should seek fur-
ther guidance on what specific proposal to table. The Delegation
should make clear that the US is prepared to implement such interim
restraint measures bilaterally.]
(c) High Tension Areas
Along with Africa-wide interim restraint, the Delegation should
press for discussion and eventual agreement on additional arms trans-
fer restraint in certain areas of particularly high tension. The region-
wide IRM may be viewed as the preliminary evidence of our mutual in-
tention to restrain arms flows. The discussions on the high tension
areas will give more substance to our region-wide undertakings and
allow all parties to demonstrate that they are striving for meaningful
agreements.
If region-wide restraint is deemed insufficient, our aim will be fur-
ther and more specific arms restraint in certain areas, with the ultimate
aim of reducing tensions and avoiding possible confrontations. The pri-
ority areas for such discussions are Angola/Zaire and Ethiopia/So-
malia and at some point North Africa and Southern Africa. In each of
the priority areas we would point to our own restraint and suggest the
Soviets take reciprocal measures. If the Soviets choose to raise other
countries, we would be prepared to consider them as long as they fit
with our overall objectives.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
(d) Political/Diplomatic Initiatives
The US should not make demarches to African states until we see
the Soviet reaction at Mexico City. However, the Delegation could
agree to the issuance of a joint public statement at the end of the session
that would encourage regional initiatives.
C. Asia
1. East Asia
The Soviets have made it clear they intend to raise the question of
China within the context of their East Asia proposal. [Prior to the offi-
cial start of the round, the head of Delegation should reiterate what we
have told the Soviets informally—namely:
—That as far as we are concerned, East Asia is not an appropriate
topic for the talks, and we will have no comment to make;
—state that to address East Asia in the CAT context would be too
much of a burden for CAT and would doom the talks to failure; and
—firmly refuse to discuss the subject, ask no questions, make no
proposals, and not agree to inclusion of this area on the agenda. Tell
them that if they persist, the US Delegation will have to seek instruc-
tions from Washington prior to proceeding with the formal discussion.]
The same applies to both China and Korea.
2. Southeast Asia
The Soviets have indicated that they will not raise the Southeast
Asian sub-region. However, if they reverse their position and do so, the
Delegation should:
—listen to what the Soviets have to say and ask questions to clarify
the proposal; and
—not offer any US counter-proposals.
3. West Asia
Particularly because of the current delicate internal situation in
Iran, but also due to other factors, it is not in the US interest to raise the
West Asian area at this time. However, we can expect that the Soviet
side will raise the area for discussion.
[Prior to the round, the head of Delegation should inform the So-
viets that it is not appropriate to discuss this region at this time, and
take the same position as on East Asia.]
4. South Asia
The Soviets have indicated they will not raise the South Asian sub-
region. However, if they reverse their position and do so, the Delega-
tion should:
—listen to what the Soviets have to say, ask questions to clarify the
proposal, but not offer any US counter-proposals.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
III. FUNCTIONAL GUIDANCE
A. Military/Technical Criteria
The Soviets have stated that they will table their own military/
technical criteria at Round IV. We should be prepared to discuss these
criteria in conjunction with the eight military/technical criteria which
the US side tabled in Round III, with the aim of reaching agreement.
We should also be prepared to discuss such supporting measures as
controls on retransfers, arms sales promotional activities and physical
security, as appropriate. Controls on the transfer of weapons manufac-
turing technology7 should be sought as necessary to prevent circum-
vention of other agreed restraints on transfers of weapons themselves.
Thus, co-production controls should be sought only for weapons
whose transfer is restrained pursuant to military/technical criteria.
B. Political/Legal Criteria
With respect to political/legal criteria, the Delegation should con-
tinue the discussions which began at the third round on the parallel US
and Soviet drafts. To the extent consistent with the position paper on
political/legal criteria prepared for the third round,8 the Delegation
should work with the Soviet side to develop mutually acceptable cri-
teria. However, these efforts should be coordinated with the pace and
tenor of the discussions on the other CAT issues, particularly the mili-
tary/technical criteria, so that agreement on political/legal criteria
does not take place prematurely.
C. Consultative Mechanism
The Delegation is authorized to build upon the presentation in
Round III to seek agreement on the establishment of, and the functions
of, a consultative mechanism to refine and implement the under-
standings arrived at by the two sides in the CAT rounds. The Delega-
tion is also authorized to present, for purposes of discussion, illustra-
tive examples of how such a mechanism might be structured and to
seek Soviet responses in order to refine our own approach to the ques-
tion. In particular, the Delegation should seek Soviet thoughts as to the
best way to structure multilateral consultations. Any consultative mech-
anism should be designed to implement agreed restraint measures.
7 Defined as co-production, licensed production, or co-assembly. [Footnote is in the
original.]
8 Not found.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
305.
Telegram From the Department of State to All American
Republic Diplomatic Posts1
12960. Subject: Conventional Arms Transfers: Debrief on US-
1. (U) Posts may at discretion draw on following to brief host gov-
ernments on fourth round of US-Soviet CAT talks, held in Mexico City
December 5–15. Joint communique´ was transmitted in Ref B.
2. (S) During the third round with the Soviets in July we reached a
general understanding that we would proceed in these talks to discuss
political-legal criteria, military-technical criteria and the regional appli-
cation of these criteria. When we met for the fourth round in Mexico
City, we were not able to reach agreement on terms of reference for the
regional part of the discussions, and therefore decided to drop that part
of the discussion for this round.
3. (S) Accordingly, the work of this round focused on general cri-
teria. The political-legal working group continued its discussion of cri-
teria and made considerable progress in developing a common text, al-
though significant differences remain.
4. (S) Regarding military-technical criteria, the Soviet side for the
first time came forward with its ideas. In a number of areas the Soviet
criteria bear similarities to the ideas we had put forward, in other areas
we are still quite far apart. No date has been set for the next round, but
it will be held in Helsinki.
cret; Immediate. Sent for information to USUN, the Mission in Geneva, and Moscow.
Drafted by George Jones (ARA/RPP) and Priscilla Clapp (PM); Ralph Johnson (ARA/
RPP), John Bushnell (ARA), Lorna Watson (ACDA), and Michael Eshes (AF/I); and ap-
proved by Gelb (PM).
2 See Document 296.
communique´ about the December 5–15 Conventional Arms Limitation talks in Mexico
matic posts of the December 5–15 Conventional Arms Limitation talks in Mexico City.
told the Government of Mexico that it “views with favor the proposal to convene, at an
appropriate time, a conference to discuss the regulation of international transfers of arms
into the Latin American region” and “would welcome the opportunity to participate.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. (S) In sum, we did not make progress on regional issues, but we
did make limited progress on the general criteria. We continue to be-
lieve that discussions about the regional application of criteria are es-
sential if arms transfer restraint is to be meaningful, and we hope that
these discussions about specific regions can be resumed in the next
round.
6. (S) However, regardless of how US-Soviet talks develop, there is
no reason why recipient countries cannot move ahead in developing
their own consensus on conventional arms restraint. They have a clear
mandate to do so from UNSSOD, and supplier countries have a man-
date to cooperate. FYI. Government of Mexico sought, as did US, a clear
statement of support for the Latin American initiative in the CAT IV
communique. The final language was as far as the USSR was prepared
to go, and it would not have gone that far were it not for threat by GOM
to denounce both powers publicly for their failure to respond to Mex-
ican expression of interest. End FYI.
7. (C) Accordingly, US has responded positively (Ref D) to Mex-
ican diplomatic requests for endorsement of its initiative and for an in-
dication of willingness to respect restraint agreements Latin American
States may reach. As secretary pro-tem of 20-nation group,6 Mexico
hopes to obtain agreement to a meeting for March 1979 in Quito to set
up a permanent consultative mechanism on arms restraint and begin
the identification of types of restraints that might be broadly accept-
able. Venezuela has told US that the Ayacucho initiative has been
folded into the larger effort and that it fully supports the 20-nation
group. (However, it would prefer a date other than March because of
the change of government that month in Venezuela.)
8. (C) Because the restraint initiative is a Latin American effort, and
must remain so if it is to succeed, the degree to which the US can be-
come involved, even behind the scenes, is limited. However, we con-
tinue to be interested in following developments closely and would
appreciate your reports of public or private comments by host gov-
ernments on either the US-Soviet talks or the Latin American initiative.
Vance
6 The Latin America and Caribbean Conventional Arms Restraint Group.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
306.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) Talks (U)
an appropriate response to the Soviet proposal that the Conventional
Arms Transfer (CAT) Talks be reconvened.3 At that meeting it was de-
cided to explore alternative approaches for establishing an agreed
agenda for the next round of negotiations. The following consider-
ations reflect the views of the Department of Defense on that subject.
(S) The Department of Defense has been supportive of conven-
tional arms transfer (CAT) restraint to the extent that it promotes col-
lective security by seeking to limit unrestrained and potentially desta-
bilizing transfers. In this regard, Defense has consistently held that
concrete regional application is essential for any meaningful CAT re-
straint regime. Moreover, it is the DOD position that an appropriate
means be found to test the willingness of the Soviets to commit them-
selves to concrete restraint without establishing the legitimacy of
Soviet-proposed regions.
(S) Defense believes the approach offering the best prospect for
success is one that would allow the talks to proceed with the under-
standing that each side would be allowed to nominate regions for re-
straint but that actual restraint proposals could not be presented until
both sides agreed on the appropriateness of a candidate region. Given
the exemptions and exclusions previously identified by each side, these
ground rules would most likely lead to a discussion of Africa, if discus-
sion of any region is in fact possible.
(S) Defense views sub-Saharan Africa as the best prospective re-
gional candidate, as US and Soviet interests are not as directly engaged
there as they are elsewhere. There are practical advantages in seeking
restraint in Africa, given both existing legal and political constraints on
1977 Arms Transfer/FMS Policy. Secret.
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions for this meeting have been found.
3 McGiffert informed Brown that the Soviets had proposed that the CAT talks be re-
sumed on March 20 however the “United States put them off temporarily, but the Soviets
are expected to raise the issue at the summit [in Vienna scheduled for June].” (Memo-
randum from McGiffert to Brown, April 13; Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
US arms transfers to the area and demonstrated willingness by the So-
viets to devote massive military assistance resources in an effort to ex-
pand their influence in the region.
(S) The United States should not, however, entertain discussion of
Soviet-proposed regions merely as a quid pro quo for Soviet agreement
to discuss Africa. Guidance for the Mexico City round was necessary
tactically to establish this point with the Soviets firmly. Having estab-
lished that position, the United States must not allow the Soviets to ex-
ploit the current impasse by focusing the talks on general principles
which they consider essential while ignoring the regional discussions
which we consider essential. Such exploitation would be effectively
blunted by making agreement on candidate regions a pre-condition of
actual restraint proposals.
(U) The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, concurs in this memorandum.
Harold Brown
307.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Seignious) to Secretary of State
Vance1
Washington, May 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer Talks
The Conventional Arms Transfer talks with the Soviets are now at
an important juncture, given the continued impasse over regions and
inability to schedule a new round of talks. I believe it is critical, both for
other US arms control objectives and for overall US-Soviet relations,
particularly in view of the upcoming summit,2 that we be in a position
to move these talks forward in a constructive manner.
I find quite promising the April 28th proposal of Secretary Brown,3
under which both sides would be free to make their case for inclusion
3 See Document 306.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
of particular regions in a restraint regime, but actual restraint proposals
would be limited to those regions which both sides had accepted. We
are prepared to support this constructive proposal, with two caveats.
First, I believe that the US should be prepared to listen to Soviet re-
gional presentations at Round V on their merits, and make no com-
ment. I favor presenting our substantive responses, whether rejection
or counterproposal, at Round VI. Second, the negotiations should pro-
ceed on other important agenda items while regional issues were being
resolved. Particularly important are the continued drafting of common
criteria and the development of a consultative mechanism; such agree-
ment would be a necessary prerequisite for effective regional restraint
and also would offer an opportunity to apply restraints on transfers of
certain weapons on a global basis.
I recommend that you convene a PRC at an early date to consider
Secretary Brown’s initiative.
George M. Seignious II4
4 Seignious signed the memorandum “George.”
308.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
11183. For EUR, PM, ACDA, and NSC only. Subject: Conventional
Arms Transfer Restraint.
1. (C—Entire text). Summary: Embassy recommends that USG
consider renewed effort to secure some greater measure of accord
among the major Western suppliers on arms transfer issues before
moving to any agreement on the subject with the USSR. While ac-
knowledging the difficulties of achieving greater western accord, we
believe recent developments and evolving attitudes make another ef-
fort worthwhile. In the absence of greater Western accord, any super
power agreement may further divide us from our allies on these issues.
End summary.
Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Paris and Bonn.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. The prospect of a renewal of US discussions with the Soviets on
conventional arms transfer restraint raises once again the problem of
involving the other major suppliers—our principal allies—Britain,
France and Germany. Each of these governments has, to a varying de-
gree, questioned the wisdom of the US approach to its own arms sales,
and has expressed skepticism regarding the prospects for securing
meaningful Soviet cooperation along the lines envisaged by the USG.
None of our allies has been willing to accept the kinds of constraints
which the US has imposed on itself, although the FRG has restrictions
of its own which are in some respects even more far reaching.
3. Clearly no US/Soviet effort at mutual restraint can be long
maintained without cooperation from the other major suppliers.
Western cooperation is, in and of itself, an important objective, in some
instances more important than achieving Soviet restraint. The major
arms sales competition in the third world is not, after all, East-West, but
intra-Western; recipient countries switching much more easily among
Western suppliers than between East and West.
4. Our allies have maintained that they could not be expected to ac-
cept cooperative restraints unless the Soviets could be brought in as
well. One should not conclude from these statements that a US/Soviet
agreement would in fact lead our allies to cooperate. On the contrary, it
may stimulate their suspicions and reinforce their determination not to
accept any external constraints. In the UK, the new government, not
having been party to our earlier consultations on this issue, could react
negatively to any US/Soviet accord it experienced as impacting on the
UK’s freedom of action. It is also instructive to note that as the prospect
for US agreement with the Soviets seemed to come closer, in 1977–
78, the French became progressively less cooperative, eventually veto-
ing further quadripartite consultations,2 and refusing to do more than
listen to US briefings.
5. These considerations lead us to conclude that unless some
greater measure of accord among the Western suppliers is achieved
prior to any US/Soviet agreement, such a super power agreement may
divide US from our allies even further on this issue. We recognize the
difficulty of achieving today an agreement among Western suppliers
which eluded US two years ago. Nevertheless, there are several new
factors which make another effort worthwhile. First, events in Iran
have illustrated the political—and even commercial—folly of unre-
strained competition among arms suppliers (all of whom, incidentally,
“France is not ready to participate, at this time, in four-power talks or talks with the So-
viet Union on CAT. The GOF would rather keep the matter as a subject for bilateral dis-

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
were Western). Second, the prospect for involving the Soviets in a dia-
logue on arms transfer seems more practical today than it did two years
ago. Third, US efforts to restrain its arms transfers and to focus interna-
tional attention on the issue have gradually had an impact on official at-
titudes, at least in the UK. Finally, the threat of greater competition re-
sulting from the US lifting some of its self-imposed constraints, in the
absence of agreed restraints, is more credible today than two years ago.
6. In seeking to involve our allies in a more constructive dialogue
we recommend setting ourselves fairly modest initial objectives. In
1977 the US notified the Europeans of the basic elements of its new
arms transfer policy3 before it had discussed these issues with them in
any depth. From their standpoint the subsequent four power discus-
sions were an effort to change their policies, without offering them the
slightest prospect that they might change ours. In renewing our effort
to achieve greater Western accord, we would suggest a more open
ended approach, one in which we explained to our allies that the USG
was reviewing its own policies, as well as its approach to involving the
Soviets and other suppliers, and would like our allies’ views before
making any decisions.
7. The new British government4 may, in our view, be open to re-
newed Western discussions on the problems posed by Conventional
Arms Transfers, leading toward more regular exchanges on such issues
and perhaps toward agreement on certain limited, generally acceptable
principles of restraint. The creation of such a forum, and even modest
agreement on elements of restraint would in our view be a major step
forward. We would welcome comment from Embassies Paris and Bonn
regarding the receptivity of their host government to any such renewal
consultations, bilateral or quadripartite, among the Western suppliers.
Brewster
4 On May 4, the Conservative Party under the leadership of Margaret Thatcher won
a general election and replaced the Labour party.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
309.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Third Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev
Topics: SALT III and other arms control issues
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
General David Jones
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
General G. Seignious
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Joseph Powell
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter
President L.I. Brezhnev
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Marshal D.F. Ustinov
Mr. K.U. Chernenko
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
Mr. L.M. Zamyatin
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.M. Vavilov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
When Gromyko turned to conventional arms transfers, the President
interjected a few comments on the anti-satellite talks.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
by Krimer on June 20; and approved by Aaron. The meeting took place at the Soviet Em-
bassy. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 203.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Returning to conventional arms transfers, Gromyko noted that the
negotiations had begun some time ago and seemed to move right
along, but then the representatives of the United States had proposed to
discuss conventional arms transfers on a regional basis. In brief, the re-
gions mentioned were those in which the United States was interested.
When Soviet representatives mentioned other areas and countries of
concern to both sides, US representatives had simply refused to discuss
them. Such a unilateral approach could not possibly be acceptable to
the Soviet side, so US representatives had simply walked out of the
talks and had returned home. Thus, the conventional arms transfers
talks were now in a state of suspense.
The President said with respect to conventional arms transfers that
our position has been that we should not begin with areas where each
country was deeply involved. We provide military assistance to South
Korea and Japan, for example. The Soviet Union provided military
assistance to Vietnam and Ethiopia. We would want to concentrate in
the beginning on areas where there was not that much controversy,
where our two countries were not involved by commitments of long
standing.
Gromyko said the Soviet Union would be prepared to resume the
conventional arms transfer negotiations.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
2 In a June 18 joint communique´, the two nations agreed “that their respective rep-
resentatives will meet promptly to discuss questions relating to the next round of negoti-
ations on limiting conventional arms transfers.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, pp. 1081–
1087)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
310.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1. Dobrynin first conveyed warm greetings from Brezhnev to the
President. He reported that Brezhnev in his report to the Politburo
spoke in personally warm terms of the President as a person with
whom one can have a serious discussion over difficult issues, without
acrimony, and as a person who is genuinely interested in arms control.
Dobrynin also added that Brezhnev said to the Politburo that “even
Brzezinski seems to be a decent fellow.”
2. I conveyed through Dobrynin to Brezhnev the President’s re-
gards as well as the two pens that the President forwarded. Dobrynin
interpreted one of the pens as a gift for himself and, given the absence
of precise instructions, I did not object. In any case the President’s note2
and the pens will go to Brezhnev with Dobrynin, who leaves for Mos-
cow tomorrow.
3. Dobrynin raised the question of CAT and Indian Ocean talks.
With respect to CAT, I told him flatly that there was no point in having
a meeting unless we resolve in advance the agenda; otherwise, the
meeting will degenerate into a hassle over the agenda. I pointed out to
him that this is in our mutual interest. If CAT is to be serious, we must
not use it for political purposes and try to undercut the politically sensi-
tive relationships of either of the participants in CAT. After some spar-
ring, Dobrynin agreed, and I said that in that case Bartholomew will be
available to discuss with the Soviet Chairman the timing as well as the
agenda of the next round.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms talks.]
Top Secret. The meeting took place at the White House.
2 Not found.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
311.
Memorandum From Charles Stebbins of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) (U)
The Mini-SCC2 agreed on the following gameplan at this morn-
ing’s meeting:
—Reg Bartholomew will try to meet one-on-one with Mendelevich
in Washington next week to fulfill the Vienna Communique´ obligation
to meet promptly on CAT.3 (C)
—He will remind Mendelevich that the US has been exercising
unilateral arms transfer restraint for two years, but will hint that the
lack of similar restraint by other suppliers will have to be factored into
our future transfer decisions—for example, in deciding how or whether
to fill the transfer “gap” resulting from the loss of the Iranian mar-
—He will reiterate the previous US position that multilateral re-
straint can only result from bilateral progress, that progress means for-
ward movement on the regions issue, and that we are prepared only to
discuss the Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin American regions. (S)
—Reg will listen to Mendelevich’s position on regions while trying
to get him to agree that the only practical way to proceed on this key
issue is to tackle relatively non-turbulent regions where neither side
has vital interests at stake. Reg will reject Soviet regions that do not
meet this criterion. (S)
—Whatever the outcome of the meeting, Reg will suggest that the
two stay in contact through diplomatic channels, and—anticipating no
real progress on regions next week—that they meet again possibly in
Europe in the Fall. (C)
formation. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads “ZB HAS SEEN.”
Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.
2 No other record of this meeting has been found.
4 In the wake of the January Revolution in Iran, the United States suspended arms
November 1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
312.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and
Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1
Washington, August 14, 1979
SUBJECT
Assessment of U.S. Arms Transfer Policy
We have recently assessed our experience of the past two years
with the arms transfer restraint policy established by PD–13.2 On the
whole, we believe the policy has supported U.S. interests in restraint
without denying us the capability to meet our foreign policy require-
ments and the defense needs of our allies and friends.
There has been considerable criticism of the policy from several
quarters. Some allies and friends perceive the policy as being artificially
restrictive to the point of denying legitimate access to U.S. military
equipment. U.S. industries complain that it disadvantages them in in-
ternational markets vis-a-vis other exporters. Most significantly, how-
ever, members of Congress continue to be skeptical of the policy. Some
believe its only achievement has been creative bookkeeping; others feel
that arms transfers are no longer being used as an effective instrument
of foreign policy. We believe that all these criticisms have been over-
stated, but we nevertheless expect them to emerge once more as Con-
gressional studies currently under way are completed and the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee moves to hearings at the end of the year.
Our own principal conclusions are:
—The policy has required the creation of a planning system that
allows us to look at the flow of U.S. arms transfers over a multi-year pe-
riod and to establish priorities.
—The machinery created to implement the policy ensures that the
Executive Branch takes a wide range of factors—political, security,
arms control, economic, and human rights—into account in all major
arms transfer cases.
—The policy has imposed measurable restraint on U.S. arms transfers.
—Even though we have sold less than we could have, there has not
been a subsequent reduction in the total volume of the world’s arms
trade.
(U) In the course of this policy reassessment, we have identified
the following issues that will require attention in the near future.
1977 Arms Transfer/FMS Policy. Secret. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum.
2 See Document 271.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
Qualitative Controls
(C) The qualitative controls of PD–13 have been generally effec-
tive. Nevertheless, there are a couple of questions that may require de-
cisions over the coming months.
(S) 1. We are currently considering whether to authorize the devel-
opment of an intermediate fighter aircraft solely for export. (The F–5E
currently fills this role.) If we decide that this is a good idea for policy
reasons, we shall then have to decide whether it requires an exception
to PD–13.
(S) 2. Several countries are expressing interest in the F–18L, a
land-based version of the Navy aircraft modified solely for export. In
1977 an Iranian request for the F–18L was denied because the aircraft
was not operationally deployed with U.S. forces. It is necessary that we
review our position on this at an early date because of renewed interest
in the aircraft.
(S) Another area of concern is co-production. We have chosen to
make exceptions to this guideline in a number of instances. This is a
basic dilemma for U.S. policy. As our non-NATO friends and allies con-
tinue to expand their own production capabilities, the long-term task of
arms control becomes more difficult; on the other hand, co-production
provides us a measure of control that would be lost if other suppliers
sold the concerned equipment. An interagency study, chaired by
ACDA, is currently under way to examine the trends in Third-World
arms production capability.
(C) A related problem has been the reluctance on the part of some
NATO countries to enter into RSI co-production arrangements because
of our control over third-party sales outside of NATO. These controls
have their foundation in our statutes as well as in the arms policy. We
are trying to work out these problems on a case-by-case basis.
Quantitative Control (The Ceiling)
(C) The ceiling on sales to non-exempt countries has been the most
controversial aspect of PD–13. Its positive features include its visibility
as a symbol of the US commitment to arms transfer restraint and the
managerial reforms associated with it. While it has not led to the rejec-
tion of any specific arms transfer requests, it did achieve its purpose of
lations by Iran, total sales could drop significantly and come in well
under the ceiling. This could lead to pressure to lower the base for cal-
culating the FY 80 ceiling. Such pressure should be resisted because in
FY 80 important sales to Israel, Egypt and Saudi Arabia could largely
fill the gap left by Iran in FY 79.
(C) In any case, we believe that no further reductions in the ceiling
should be made unless there is evidence of progress in our multilateral
restraint effort. After four rounds of negotiations with the Soviets we

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
have no tangible evidence of Soviet restraint, and our European allies
have made future restraint on their part (they have not shown any in
the past) contingent on our ability to get restraint from the Soviets. We
will be submitting our formal recommendation to you later this sum-
mer in the context of our FY 80 plan.
Multilateral Cooperation
(C) PD–13 recognized that achievement of the objective of a world-
wide reduction in arms transfers required the cooperation of other sup-
pliers and recipients. We have not yet made concrete progress toward
such cooperation although our efforts will continue. Nevertheless, we
believe that the qualitative controls in PD–13 support U.S. national in-
terests regardless of such cooperation. The substantive and procedural
benefits of the qualitative controls, as distinct from the FY 80 ceiling
level noted above, are not vitiated by the lack of multilateral progress.
We shall be assessing the results of the multilateral restraint effort and
commenting on its implications in a report due to the Congress by De-
cember 31, 1979.
Conclusions
(C) We believe that PD–13 continues to support our national objec-
tives in arms restraint and that the policy should be maintained with no
further reductions under the ceiling. As noted above, our experience
suggests that certain aspects of the policy will raise questions of inter-
pretation as circumstances change. We will continue to review PD–13
to ensure that it remains in consonance with our basic foreign policy
needs and arms control objectives. We will also continue to tailor care-
fully rhetoric about the policy and specific policy decisions in order
that it reflect realistically the objectives and achievements of PD–13.
(U) The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director, Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency concur in this memorandum.
Harold Brown
Cyrus Vance

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
313.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Assessment of US Arms Transfer Policy (C)
Cy and Harold have forwarded an assessment of the arms transfer
policy established in PD–13 (Tab A).2 They conclude that the policy
should be retained, since it supports our national objectives in arms re-
straint and has resulted in a coordination process that ensures a wide
range of factors are taken into account in all major arms transfer
However, the Secretaries do note that, despite measurable re-
straint on the part of the US, the total volume of worldwide transfers
has not diminished. As a result, they intend to recommend in the near
future that no further unilateral reductions be made in the current arms
transfer ceiling unless there is progress in our multilateral restraint ef-
forts. They also caution that a number of decisions may be required
shortly involving exceptions to PD–13. (S)
I agree with the Secretaries’ assessment. Given the high political
stakes involved, now is not the time to step away from the policy, or to
conduct a fundamental policy review. However, you could suffer do-
mestic and international political damage if you continue to be per-
ceived as consistently withholding US arms from markets that the So-
viets and other suppliers are quick to fill. The fact of higher sales
worldwide since the issuance of PD–13 makes it appear that the end re-
sult of US unilateral restraint is the encouragement of increased sales
by other countries. (C)
Therefore, without abandoning PD–13, we need to take steps that
will signal to the Soviets and others that we are reaching the limit of our
patience with their total lack of cooperation in global arms transfer re-
straint. You will receive a series of follow-on memoranda suggesting
specific steps that might be taken, beginning with the Secretaries’ forth-
coming memorandum on the FY 80 ceiling. (C)
rity, Box 2, Conventional Arms Transfers. Secret. Sent for information. In the upper
right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig—I won’t be eager to change the policy. J.”
informing them that Carter had read their memorandum. He wrote “You should be
aware that he [Carter] added a note to me, ‘I won’t be eager to change the policy’.” (Li-
brary of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 78, 1977 Arms
Transfer/FMS Policy)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
314.
Memorandum From Charles Stebbins of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfers (CAT) Talks (U)
The Mini-SCC2 agreed on the following gameplan at this morn-
ing’s meeting:
—Reggie Bartholomew will meet with Mendelevich in Europe on
September 25 to discuss a possible CAT V agenda—barring a deci-
sion later this week to delay the meeting as a result of the situation in
—Reggie will press hard to get the Soviets to accept the earlier US
position that discussions of restraint measures for Sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA) or Latin America (LA) should be placed on the CAT V plenary
agenda. He will again argue that: (1) CAT V must produce significant
forward movement on the regions issue; (2) the only practical way to
proceed on the issue is to tackle relatively non-controversial regions
where there is mutual interest in restraining transfers; and (3) in the US
view, the only regions that meet these criteria are SSA and LA. (S)
—If the Soviets cannot be persuaded to place SSA or SSA and LA
on the CAT V agenda, Reggie will be authorized to agree to convene
CAT V without any Soviet commitment on regions; but he will caution
them that, against the discouraging backdrop of the current situation in
Cuba, the US will not be able to sustain its CAT initiative without sig-
nificant progress on regions at CAT V. (This approach, coupled with
our earlier agreement to permit discussions of any regions in heads of
delegation meetings only, will tell us whether the Soviet problem with
regional discussions is substantive or procedural.) (S)
—Reggie will then propose that CAT V be convened in Helsinki in
mid-January, claiming that the US needs several months to prepare for
the round. If Mendelevich suggests convening earlier, Reggie will indi-
Copies were sent to Kimmitt and Brement.
2 No other record of this meeting has been found.
Cuba, and the Caribbean.

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
cate that the US doesn’t want CAT to complicate SALT, but if the Soviet
desire for an earlier convening can be taken as an earnest of their good
intentions on the regions issue, we might be willing to reconsider our
position on timing. (S)
The CAT Working Group was tasked to take a new look at how
Cuba should be dealt with in any CAT V restraint proposal for Latin
America. Additionally, Marshall Brement is to prepare talking points
for Reggie to use in chiding Mendelevich about the current situation in
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the above gameplan.4
4 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
315.
Paper Prepared by the Soviet Government1
October 12, 1979
As was agreed during the meeting between A.A. Gromyko and
Secretary Vance in New York September 272 concerning a bilateral ex-
change of views in Washington on the status of arms control and disar-
mament negotiations, we would like to receive the views of the Amer-
ican side on how to move forward on the following problems.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated conventional arms transfers.]
5. Limiting the Sale and Transfer of Conventional Weapons.
The sides have agreed on the basic directions of the negotiations,
and on some questions one can even detect a convergence of ap-
proaches. However, during the last round the USA sharply changed
classification markings. A typed notation at the top of the paper reads “Non-Paper
cussion of arms control in New York. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, Reel Number N/A)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
course in these talks. Without explanation, the US declined to hold the
previously agreed meeting of heads of delegation on September 25.3
We would appreciate clarification by the American side of its mo-
tives for its recent conduct with respect to the negotiations, which were
begun at the initiative of the US, as well as its views regarding further
prospects for these negotiations.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated conventional arms transfers.]
postponed the Bartholomew-Mendelevich meeting because it believed “that it would be
inappropriate to have CAT HOD [Head of Delegation] meeting while Cuban question is
erence is to the discovery of the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba.
316.
Editorial Note
On December 28, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance submitted a
report to the United States Congress on the progress of comprehensive
arms restraints discussions. “The principal objective” of the talks, he
explained, had been “to bring about reductions in worldwide arms
transfers, particularly those that could worsen regional instabilities or
stimulate regional arms races, introduce new levels of weapons tech-
nology into a given region, or prove susceptible to misuse by ter-
rorists.” The United States and the Soviet Union, he reported, had held
four rounds of talks, and had begun to draft “common texts” on the
need for conventional arms restraint. However, “the sides were unable
to move forward on the important third part of the framework, re-
gional application of criteria, because they were unable to agree on can-
didate regions for restraint.”
Vance, nevertheless, said that the two sides had made “progress”
by agreeing that “arms transfers are an urgent international problem,”
had “developed a framework for addressing arms transfer issues,” and
had “begun to develop a common text of criteria that define the legal
principles and the kinds of transfers that are of critical concern.” While
he conceded that “[m]uch remains to be done in the bilateral talks,”
Vance contended that a policy of comprehensive arms transfer restraint
“has and will continue to serve U.S. interests.” (“Report by Secretary of
State Vance to the Congress: Multilateral Discussions on Conventional
Arms Transfer Restraints,” December 28, 1979, Documents on Disarma-

Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
In January 1980, the New York Times reported that anonymous U.S.
officials said that “President Carter has instructed ACDA to stop arms
control negotiations in the wake of the Afghanistan invasion.” (Tele-
Central Foreign Policy File, D800018–0763) However, Department of
State Spokesman Hodding Carter III denied that President Carter had
issued a memorandum containing such instructions. Hodding Carter
III also told the Associated Press that “no dates have been set for resump-
tion of long-stalled talks on limiting conventional arms transfers, anti-
satellite warfare and armaments in Indian Ocean region.” (Telegram
the New York Times that the Carter administration should “continue to
pursue limits on conventional arms transfers with understanding that
when our friends are placed in jeopardy by actions or threats that are
directed against them, we will help them and provide them with mili-
tary assistance. We will continue that policy.” (Telegram 18290 to Bra-
silia, January 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
In March 1980, Vance told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
that while the administration “remained convinced” that agreements
to reduce conventional arms transfers “can contribute to a safer world,
we do not at this time foresee progress. In the absence of agreed inter-
national restraint, we do not plan to reduce further the ceiling on our
Later that evening, the Department of State told the Mission in Geneva
that “mutual disagreements over regional applications prevented the
negotiations from moving forward. There are no plans at present for
another CAT round. Recent events affecting the stability of key regions
and involving US-Soviet interests, including Afghanistan, have obvi-
ously complicated the climate. We intend to monitor the bilateral at-
mosphere and regional situations closely, and we hope that it will
eventually be possible to reconvene the CAT talks.” (Telegram 81683 to
the Mission in Geneva, March 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800156–0303)

Non-Proliferation, Safeguards, and International
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation
317.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–151
Washington, January 21, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Administrator, Energy Research and Development Administration
The Chairman, Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy
SUBJECT
Nuclear Proliferation
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee,
under the chairmanship of the Department of State, undertake a thor-
ough review of U.S. policy concerning nuclear proliferation. The re-
view should develop policy options for the United States—both near
and long term—for achieving its non-proliferation goals. The review
should:
1. Assess the current status of U.S. nuclear fuel assurance policies,
reprocessing policy including alternatives to reprocessing, and possi-
bilities for the handling and disposal of nuclear wastes.
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Subject Files Pertaining to Presidential Review
Memoranda and Directives, MEMCONS with Foreign Officials, and National Security
1, Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–15—Nuclear Non-Proliferation Policy,
January–March 1977. Secret; Exdis.

Non-Proliferation
2. Review the decisions announced by President Ford in the state-
ment of October 28,2 and identify the policy options required to imple-
ment those decisions.
3. Provide a review of the current status of major ongoing negotia-
tions with and among foreign nations concerning proliferation.
4. Assess options for formal and informal international coordina-
tion of incentives, controls and sanctions throughout the nuclear fuel
cycle in order to limit nuclear proliferation.
5. Analyze the strengths and liabilities of bilateral negotiations, the
London Suppliers Group,3 and the IAEA, as institutions for imple-
menting U.S. non-proliferation goals.
6. Identify current U.S. nuclear export requirements, and examine
what new requirements might be applied to current and future export
agreements, and what measures must be taken to insure U.S. credibility
as a nuclear supplier state.
7. Review current estimates of energy demand outside the United
States, and assess the potential of non-nuclear alternatives to meet
those needs.
8. Review congressional initiatives and suggest strategies for coor-
dination of executive and legislative branch policies concerning nuclear
export and non-proliferation.
The review should be completed by February 28, 1977.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Ford stated on October 28 that in order to reduce the proliferation of nuclear mate-
rials, the “reprocessing and recycling of plutonium should not proceed, unless there is a
sound reason to conclude that the world community can effectively overcome the associ-
ated risks of proliferation.” He promised that the United States would “greatly accelerate
its diplomatic initiatives, in conjunction with nuclear supplier and consumer nations, to
control the spread of plutonium and technologies for separating plutonium” and align its
domestic and international positions by working “closely with other nations.” He con-
cluded by calling for “all nations to recognize that their individual and collective interests
are best served by internationally assured and safeguarded nuclear fuel supply, services,
and storage” and to end their pursuit of “nuclear capabilities which are of doubtful eco-
nomic value and have ominous implications for nuclear proliferation and instability in
3 The London Suppliers Group, or the Nuclear Supplier Group, founded in 1974
after India’s successful nuclear test, included the United States, the Soviet Union, the
United Kingdom, Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, and Japan. It met
several times from 1974 to 1977 to set guidelines for the export of nuclear material to
states that did not possess nuclear weapons.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
318.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Belgium1
15111. Tovip 3. Subject: Sensitive Nuclear Exports and NPT.
Vice Presidential party, eyes only for Aaron
1. Per request transmitted by Hyland,2 following is State Depart-
ment evaluation of impact of NPT on sensitive nuclear exports. Text of
treaty is being made available to party. As party aware, FRG Under
Secretary Hermes in discussions with Secretary Vance3 cited alleged in-
consistencies between US statements during NPT negotiations and US
position now on sensitive transfers. As overall observation, Depart-
ment would note the potential pitfalls of allowing FRG officials to en-
gage party in narrow, legalistic debate over interpretation of NPT4 in
context of discussion of US policy on sensitive nuclear transfers.
2. The basic objective of NPT is to prevent the further spread of nu-
clear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices without impeding the
development, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful pur-
poses. Consistent with this objective, the treaty requires all parties,
when acting as suppliers, to ensure that transfers of nuclear material
and equipment are subject to IAEA safeguards. Article I obligates
nuclear-weapon states party to the treaty “not in any way to assist, en-
courage, or induce any non-nuclear-weapons state to manufacture or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other explosive devices.” Article
II obligates non-nuclear weapons states party to the treaty not to ac-
quire nuclear weapons or explosives from any source.
3. At the same time, Article IV states that nothing in the treaty
“shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all parties to
the treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Ar-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Also sent immediate to Bonn. Drafted by Jerome Kahan (S/P);
cleared by Louis Nosenzo (PM), Edward McGaffigan (T), Charles Van Doren (ACDA),
and Peter Sebastian (S/S); and approved by Bartholomew (S/P).
2 Not found.
3 No record of a meeting between Vance and Hermes was found. According to the
German documentary record, Hermes visited Washington and delivered a Non-Paper on
non-proliferation to Mondale on January 16. See Akten zur Auswa¨rtigen Politk der Bundes-
republik Deutschland, 1977, Part One, p. 16. The Non-Paper was not found.
4 The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or Non-Proliferation
United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union. The U.S. Senate ratified the Treaty on March 13,
1964–1968, vol. XI, Arms Control and Disarmament.

Non-Proliferation
ticles I and II of this treaty.” Article IV also calls for all parties to facili-
tate and participate in the “fullest possible exchange of equipment, ma-
terials, and scientific and technological information for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.” Special attention was to be given to the needs
of developing countries.
4. Starting in 1972 the US adopted a national policy of imposing
special restraints and review procedures over requests for so-called
sensitive nuclear exports, i.e., equipment and technology related to
uranium enrichment, plutonium reprocessing, and heavy water pro-
duction. In practice, this policy resulted in an embargo on such exports
from the US. When the London Suppliers Group convened in 1975, the
US sought to persuade other major suppliers to adopt a parallel policy
on these exports. However, in the agreed guidelines, we were only able
to obtain multilateral consensus for restraint in, but not an embargo on,
sensitive transfers. If such transfers are to be made, the guidelines call
for improved safeguards over such transfers going beyond NPT re-
quirements (e.g., safeguards triggered by technology in addition to
equipment and material). We have subsequently called for a three-year
moratorium on such exports.
5. While the US approach to sensitive transfers has been supported
by most if not all key suppliers, some suppliers and recipients have crit-
icized this policy as incompatible with Article IV of the NPT. These na-
tions argue that the NPT places an explicit responsibility on supplier
states party to the treaty to make any and all types of peaceful nuclear
assistance available to recipients party to the treaty, as long as the mate-
rials and facilities are under safeguards. To strengthen this position,
these nations cite US assurances and statements to this effect issued
during the treaty negotiations. For example, citations from some of
these US statements appear in the FRG “Non-Paper” transmitted by
Hermes to Secretary Vance at their recent meeting (we understand that
Assistant Secretary Hartman is carrying this paper).
6. The US position in response to these criticisms rests on the fol-
lowing points:
A. We do not believe that safeguards necessarily provide an ade-
quate basis for transfering all nuclear items, while supporting the over-
riding non-proliferation objective of the NPT. Transfers of sensitive
equipment and technologies can lead to the direct availability of stra-
tegic quantities of weapons-usable material (notably plutonium but
also highly-enriched uranium) in non-nuclear weapons states. It is
presently uncertain whether safeguards could be devised and imple-
mented to provide timely detection of diversion of these materials.
Moreover, if safeguards were to be terminated or abrogated, the recip-
ient could then rapidly utilize the materials and facilities in order to ac-
quire nuclear explosives capacity.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B. Regarding the meaning of Article IV of the NPT, we would note
that the rights under this article apply only to NPT parties, and not to
non-parties, (such as Brazil and Pakistan). Moreover, this provision
was not intended to create any new “inalienable right” for NPT parties.
It simply states that nothing in the treaty should be interpreted to affect
the rights that would have existed in the absence of the treaty, and goes
on to point out that any exercise of such rights must be “in conformity
with Article I and II of this treaty.” Furthermore, the Article IV lan-
guage calling for the “fullest possible exchange” of nuclear assistance
among parties must also be viewed in the light of the basic NPT objec-
tives as reflected in Articles I and II. In any case, our policies on sensi-
tive nuclear exports are not predicated on any interpretation of the
NPT; they are supplemental measures based on our interest in taking
all appropriate steps to avert the further proliferation of nuclear explo-
sives capability as technological developments increase the risks of
such proliferation.
C. We currently see little or no economic justification for acquisi-
tion of enrichment and reprocessing facilities by non-nuclear weapons
states outside the OECD area. In our view, the overall intent of Article
IV is to ensure that parties in a position to do so will help other parties
to enjoy the benefits of nuclear power for peaceful purposes. This does
not, however, oblige them to make transfers that are not economically
justified in the recipient country, especially where such transfers might
also incur increased risks of proliferation. Rather, the US believes that
the spirit and letter of Article IV can and should be met by the provision
of non-sensitive fuel supplies and fuel cycle services from supplier
states, since this can be more economic than small-scale fuel cycle
plants and would significantly reduce proliferation risks. We are, of
course, interested in exploring other alternatives, when justified, such
as regional, multinational fuel cycle centers.
D. As a nuclear-weapons state, the US sees an overriding obliga-
tion in Article I of the NPT not to “in any way” assist non-nuclear
weapons states to manufacture or acquire nuclear explosives. We be-
lieve that sensitive transfers, without economic justification and before
we have had an opportunity to explore alternatives, could contravene
these obligations. We further believe that non-nuclear weapons states
party to the treaty, when supplying nuclear assistance, should feel
bound to act in accordance with the intent of Article I, since it reflects
the essential non-proliferation thrust of the NPT.
7. FYI. While FRG concerns are focused primarily on their agree-
ment with Brazil,5 they also are very concerned with the implications of
US non-proliferation policy for their own development of sensitive
technology. Discussions of such implications are best avoided at this
point. If pressed, we recommend line that USG is currently developing
a program to evaluate risks and alternatives associated with back-end
fuel cycle activities, has reached no RPT no conclusions regarding
5 The Carter administration criticized the Federal Republic of Germany’s 1975 sale
of a nuclear reactor and plutonium technology to Brazil. For more on this see Documents

Non-Proliferation
same, and we expect early and full discussions with FRG as US evalu-
ation activities progress. Similar considerations apply in the case of
Japan.
8. If issue of amending NPT arises in connection with discussions
of US export policy, Department suggests that US position strongly op-
posing this approach as impracticable, undesirable, and unnecessary
be reaffirmed. Such an approach would be impracticable, since it
would involve reconsideration of NPT by almost 100 legislatures. It
would also seriously endanger future viability of treaty by raising devi-
sive questions and risking weakening of the NPT. This is why we and
others strongly resisted all moves at NPT review conference to amend
treaty. Further, we believe that policies US have proposed in context of
nuclear suppliers discussions are supplementary to, and not in conflict
with, the NPT. End FYI.
Vance
319.
Backchannel Message From Vice President Mondale to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
590. Subject: My First Day of Meetings in Europe
As I mentioned on the phone,2 my first day of meetings went well
and received an enthusiastic response. In the morning, I spoke to Prime
Minister Tindemans of Belgium, the NATO Council, NATO Secretary
General Luns and General Haig. In the afternoon I had indepth discus-
sions with European Commission President Roy Jenkins and the other
Commissioners, as well as Dutch Foreign Minister Van der Stoel. On
your authority I released my NATO statement, and I also held a press
conference.3
The highlights of my conversations are as follows:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
2 A record of this conversation was not found.
3 Documents on Mondale’s meetings with the NATO leaders and his statement are
scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Non-proliferation: The Dutch Foreign Minister came to Brussels
primarily to discuss non-proliferation. The Netherlands is a partner in
a consortium with the United Kingdom and West Germany to produce
enriched uranium through their own ultracentrifuge process. The Ger-
mans want to sell some of this uranium to the Brazilians for use in the
reactors provided under the West German-Brazilian nuclear deal.4 The
Dutch are considering vetoing this fuel sale, because they want no part
of the West German-Brazilian deal to transfer sensitive reprocessing
and enrichment technology, however, they are concerned over West
German threats to pull out of the consortium if the Dutch veto the sale
and are disturbed at the profound political confrontation that might
ensue. They therefore were probing for U.S. support. In this connec-
tion, they urged the U.S. to adopt the Canadian position on interna-
tional safeguards (no sale of nuclear fuel unless the purchasing com-
pany has all of its nuclear facilities under safeguards).
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]

Non-Proliferation
320.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Tokyo, February 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Vice President Mondale—Prime Minister Fukuda Conversation II
PARTICIPANTS
Japan
Takeo Fukuda, Prime Minister
Iichiro Hatoyama, Foreign Minister
Sunao Sunoda, Chief Cabinet Secretary
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador
Bunroku Yoshino, Deputy Vice Minister
Toshio Yamazaki, Director General, American Bureau
Hisashi Owada, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
Ryuchiro Yamazaki, Interpreter
United States
The Vice President
Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
C. Fred Bergsten, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs
Thomas P. Shoesmith, Minister
Michael Armacost, NSC Senior Staff
William C. Sherman, Director for Japanese Affairs
James Wickel, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
The Vice President said that there were several points he wished to
make: First, with respect to nuclear proliferation, he said the US had
pressed both Germany and France to exercise great circumspection
with respect to their sales of sensitive materials and technologies to
such countries as Pakistan and Brazil. Reprocessing facilities which
could produce weapons grade material are simply bomb factories. The
question is one in which the President has a great personal concern. We
understand Japan’s concern for assured supplies of fuel for nuclear
power plants. We are also grateful for Japanese ratification of the NPT.
The US hopes to continue discussions with the GOJ about the aspects of
the problem which may be of concern to Japan. We want to cooperate
to keep the problem under control.
The Vice President continued, saying that he understood the GOJ
was interested in sending a team to discuss Japanese views with US ex-
cret. Drafted by Sherman. The meeting took place in the Prime Minister’s Office. The
memoranda of conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIV, Korea; Japan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
perts in Washington. He said we would be happy to welcome such a
visit and to begin talking in a confidential way about this very complex
problem.
The Prime Minister said that he hoped the Vice President under-
stood the sensitivity of Japanese feelings about nuclear matters. The
Japanese cities had been destroyed by nuclear weapons, and Japan was
fully in accord with US concerns over proliferation dangers. The ques-
tion of peaceful use was quite different. Japan was by tradition and by
basic governmental and Diet policy firmly opposed to any military use,
production or possession of nuclear weapons. However, its total lack of
energy resources made it essential to consider the development of nu-
clear power for peaceful purposes. He said the Japanese would wel-
come the opportunity to send a group to discuss the subject in
Washington.
The Vice President said that we would be happy to work out ar-
rangements on his return to Washington.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
321.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
1. Please deliver the following letter from Secretary Vance to de
Guiringaud.
2. Begin text: Dear Mr. Foreign Minister: I am sure you are aware of
the high importance we attach to the avoidance of nuclear prolifera-
tion. I wish to confirm personally to you that I share my predecessor’s
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by John Kalicki (S/P); cleared by James Lowenstein
(EUR), Terence Todman (ARA), Alfred Atherton (NEA), Gelb (PM), Denis Lamb (D), Tar-
noff (S), Lake (S/P), Donald Tice (P), Leo Reddy (S/S), and Edward McGaffigan (T); and
approved by Christopher (D).
had said that regarding nuclear proliferation, “the principal problem arose because it was
difficult, because of nationalistic sensitivities, for Bhutto to indicate any change in the
GOP position on the contract for the French nuclear processing plant before the elec-
stani elections were scheduled for March 7.

Non-Proliferation
sense of the importance of our increasing cooperation in the non-
proliferation field, as conveyed in his last letter to you before leaving
office.3 We look forward to continuing our nuclear policy consultations
later this month, as we indicated to your ambassador, so as to further
align our nuclear policies. Presently we are in the process of reviewing
US policy and, in this regard, I would expect to confirm the continuity
of the basic policy directions announced in the October 28th Presiden-
tial statement.4
In the meantime, we have decided to move into official channels in
the contacts regarding sensitive nuclear projects in Brazil, about which
we have kept you informed. I anticipate high-level consultations with
both parties beginning next week, following up FRG State Secretary
Hermes’ visit to Washington and Vice President Mondale’s trip, and
we would look forward to discussing with you any progress as soon as
possible thereafter. This would afford us an opportunity to exchange
further views on the approach most likely to forestall enrichment and
reprocessing in Brazil, taking into account the important principles of
assured nuclear fuel supply and no commercial disadvantage raised
with you by Mr. Kissinger and pursued by US with the FRG.
As you know, President Carter attaches the highest importance to
removing nuclear proliferation risks in both Brazil and Pakistan, as
well as worldwide. I am encouraged by the progress we have made
with Prime Minister Bhutto and reported to you.5 I also believe that the
formula of a joint decision by France and Pakistan to indefinitely defer
Pakistan’s reprocessing plant, and substitution of French reactors, fuel
and perhaps a fuel fabrication plant, will facilitate a successful solution
of this problem.
In view of the forthcoming Pakistani elections I am indicating to
Prime Minister Bhutto that we might resume negotiations in March,
unless he prefers to open these earlier. In the interim, however, we are
making clear to him the seriousness and depth of our desire that he
forego his reprocessing plans, and this period will also give you and me
time to exchange views on the most desirable negotiating package from
our respective standpoints. I would therefore welcome any further
thoughts you can convey to me as to how best to proceed.
I greatly look forward to working with you in my new capacity,
and to contributing to a deepening of the important relationship be-
tween our two countries. Sincerely: Cyrus R. Vance: End text.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. In delivering letter, please confirm that we would anticipate spe-
cific exchange on sensitive nuclear issues with France prior to more
general consultations later this month, although latter would not ex-
clude further informal discussion of sensitive issues, if desired. You
should also seek GOF confirmation that it does not plan to transfer any
reprocessing technology or equipment to Pakistan pending further
consultations with US, in conformity with understanding previously
reached between former Secretary Kissinger and de Guiringaud at their
December 10 meeting in Brussels.6
Vance
322.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Funding for the Clinch River Reactor
I understand that you have spoken with Jim Schlesinger and are
considering approving the ERDA request for Clinch River funding. I
feel that you should know that such a course could have extremely serious ef-
fects on the success of your non-proliferation efforts in the critical next six
months.
We are asking other nations to make profound changes in their
own energy plans because of our concern with the proliferation risks of
the global trend toward a plutonium economy. The only way in which
we can demonstrate our willingness to share in the sacrifices we are
asking of others is by clearly slowing down our breeder program and
that we no longer look upon it as the centerpiece of our energy strategy.
This is entirely consistent with your campaign statements to “minimize
our efforts in the breeder field.”
9/79. Confidential. Sent for information. At the top of the memorandum, an unknown
hand wrote “NOTE: Delivered to the Pres. Via Rich Hutcheson [illegible.]”

Non-Proliferation
It is for these reasons that I—as well as the Department of State,
ACDA, the CEQ and the Domestic Council—strongly recommend that
you either zero out the Clinch River budget item or make a much more
meaningful cut in the program than ERDA contemplates. The funding
level they have recommended in no way slows the heart of the Clinch
River program and in fact entails a $41 million increase in spending over
FY ’77. I submit that this will not be seen as a serious action on our part by the
Germans, the French, the Brazilians, the Pakistanis or the Japanese.
At the same time, the course of action I am advocating does not re-
quire any concrete sacrifice in our domestic energy situation. If either
PRM–152 or the breeder program review3 indicate that the Clinch River
Reactor is not inimical to our efforts in the proliferation field or is essen-
tial to our domestic energy needs (both extremely unlikely), then a
budget supplemental can be sent to Congress in plenty of time for action before
the beginning of the new fiscal year, with no interruption in the program.
At your request I will be forwarding to you first thing tomorrow, a
paper on what we can do in regard to international restraints with the
hope of getting other nations to join in our efforts. By far the most potent
option available to us is exactly this one: to clearly tell the rest of the world that
we consider the dangers of proliferation seriously enough to halt for the time
being our own progress toward commercialization of the breeder by stopping
or dramatically slowing the first big step—further work on the Clinch River
Reactor.4
2 See Document 317.
3 See Document 337.
4 In his memoirs, Carter wrote “My first veto” of a congressional bill was a “$6 bil-
lion authorization bill for energy research,” including “$80 million for commencing con-
struction of a nuclear breeder reactor on the Clinch River near Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Be-
cause it was enormously expensive and unnecessary, and would open up a new and
dangerous plutonium industry in our country, I was determined to prevent construction
of this prototype plant.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 101–102)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
323.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Proliferation
This is a quick response to your request of February 16 regarding
possible U.S. initiatives designed to develop “international restraints”
in order to slow nuclear proliferation.2 As you know, we have a PRM in
process to develop “options for formal and informal international coor-
dination of incentives, controls and sanctions throughout the nuclear
fuel cycle in order to limit nuclear proliferation.” The PRM response
will be submitted by February 28th.
The following list of possible U.S. actions does not therefore at-
tempt to provide a thorough analysis of each, but rather sets forth some
of the major options being considered in the PRM. Many of these op-
tions entail considerable sacrifices on the part of other nations which
originally adopted the once-conventional U.S. wisdom regarding long-
range energy plans. We will now be asking them to reconsider these
plans at considerable cost in dollars or national pride or both. Accord-
ingly, there are certain domestic actions which may have to be taken to
make any or all of the above steps credible or saleable to other nations.
First, we should try to demonstrate that we no longer view the
breeder reactor (at least in its current design) as the centerpiece of our
energy strategy by sending an unequivocal signal that we are not pro-
ceeding with its commercialization—specifically with the Clinch River
demonstration project. Secondly, we might even have to consider sus-
pending completion of the Barnwell reprocessing plant3 until we have
completed our own thorough investigation of all possible alternatives
to reprocessing.4
the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum and the margin beside each paragraph
after “Preliminary options” with a “C”.
2 Not found.
3 A private-sector company began construction of a commercial nuclear repro-
cessing plant in Barnwell, SC in 1970.
4 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok but not cancel
outright.”

Non-Proliferation
Preliminary options:
1. A call by the U.S. or jointly by the Suppliers Group, for a three-year
moratorium on sensitive transfers while we search for other ways to meet
legitimate nuclear energy fuel cycle needs. The term “sensitive
transfers” refers to enrichment facilities, reprocessing facilities, and
highly enriched, weapons grade uranium (HEU).
2. Further investigate the possibility of a few multinational fuel cycle
centers which would provide regional enrichment and reprocessing capacity.
This option would only be attractive if a study reveals that there exist
suitable sites for such an operation, and that multilateral management
and control arrangements could be worked out that would guarantee
adequate safeguarding.
3. Fuel assurances provided either unilaterally or, much more attrac-
tively, multilaterally. In either case, this policy would demand that we
expand current U.S. enrichment capacity so that we can guarantee the
supply of low-enriched fuel. Longer term possibilities might include
some form of international “bank” managed by the IAEA which would
ensure non-discriminatory access by all nations to an international pool
of SWU’s (the measure of enrichment capacity).
4. As an alternative to reprocessing, the creation of a multinational spent
fuel-plutonium storage regime. Under such a policy, reprocessing would
be either ruled out or indefinitely deferred in favor of a “once through”
fuel cycle in which used fuel rods are not reprocessed but rather stored
for an indefinite period of time.
5. Renegotiation of existing agreements for cooperation. Under this
policy, the United States would attempt to renegotiate its existing
agreements for cooperation to include stricter safeguard criteria. One
possibility would require recipient nations to agree to full scope safe-
guards under which all of their nuclear facilities—regardless of where
they came from—would be subject to IAEA safeguards. Not only are
there severe legal barriers to renegotiating existing agreements, but this
effort would meet very stiff political resistance from key nations such
as Yugoslavia, Israel, and many others. Canada is encountering serious
difficulties in its effort along these lines (PDB, February 17).
6. A legislative or regulatory finding that reprocessing plants are inher-
ently unsafeguardable (there are several such Bills on the Hill). This would
mean that in exporting nuclear fuel the U.S. would have to require that
it not be reprocessed, or be returned to a nuclear weapons state for re-
processing. This would raise immediate problems with the Japanese
(among others) who have a reprocessing plant in the final testing stages
and need our permission to begin reprocessing U.S.-supplied fuel.
7. Expansion of U.S. cooperation in developing non-nuclear energy re-
sources. The United States’ abundant (relatively speaking) domestic

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
supply of energy makes many other nations highly suspicious of our
efforts to limit proliferation. Thus, a long-term effort in this area will
probably have to include a substantial commitment by the United
States to help other nations develop alternative—perhaps in some cases
non-electrified—energy programs. This would be costly.
8. U.S. or joint efforts to research and develop alternative reactor designs.
There is a likelihood that “second generation” nuclear fuel cycles can be
developed that are inherently much more proliferation resistant than
the uranium-plutonium fuel cycle. One possibility that has attracted in-
creasing attention is a thorium cycle which uses denatured Uranium-
233 as fuel.5
9. A substantially strengthened IAEA endowed with the power to impose
stiff sanctions for any violations of safeguard agreements. This would
require a major political effort to obtain the needed consensus, espe-
cially among the nuclear club members.6
5 Underneath this paragraph, Carter drew an arrow and wrote “Thorium breeder to
go critical at Shippingport [Pa] this fall—J.”
6 Underneath this paragraph, Carter wrote “I
look forward to
the
recommendations.”

Non-Proliferation
324.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
42053. Subject: U.S.-French Nuclear Policy Review. Ref: Paris
1. U.S.-French talks on nuclear non-proliferation policy on Feb-
ruary 19–20 included thorough and informal exchange of views on
major non-proliferation issues and opportunity consult on sensitive
nuclear projects in Brazil and Pakistan. Atmosphere of talks was very
open and constructive.
2. A. Policy toward sensitive nuclear transfers—both sides agreed
that it essential to avoid states backing into nuclear weapons capability
due to spread of sensitive technology and materials. U.S. suggested
that next step is to gain time to permit evaluation of further controls
and possible bilateral and multilateral incentives which could include
assured fuel supply, spent-fuel storage, exploration of alternative nu-
clear technologies. French suggested that offer of fuel cycle services on
economic basis could help to compensate for denial of technology,
were receptive to concept of multilateralizing such services, and of-
fered to consider how to effect this. They stressed that it is important
that suppliers of fuel services not be seen as a bloc opposed to techno-
logical cooperation, and that if a country chooses to develop indige-
nously an independent nuclear fuel cycle capability, it is not French
policy to prohibit them from doing so.
B. Fuel assurances—U.S. stressed that we do not propose new
regime resulting in commercial disadvantage for any supplier. Fuel as-
surances would maximize economic disincentive for go-it-alone pro-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Bonn, Brasilia, and Islamabad.
Drafted by John Adsens (EUR/RPE) and Oplinger (PM/NPO); cleared by Nye, John Kal-
icki (S/P), Denis Lamb (D), Louis Nosenzo (OES/NET), Charles Van Doren (ACDA),
Edgar Beigel (EUR/WE), and Peter Bridges (S/S); and approved by James Lowenstein
clear electrical power and needs to export” and “breeder reactors are considered essential
and their export will be strongly pursued.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770053–0997)
seemed to believe that “some form of international agreement is necessary for providing
necessary fuel cycle services to nuclear reactor customers to eliminate any quasi-
economically justified transfer technology.” Furthermore, the French believed that
“breeder reactors are a necessary thing of the future and their success will depend in part
on a successful international arrangement for coping with nonproliferation.” (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
grams: such assurances could include earmarked stocks, equity invest-
ment in supplier facilities, and possible fuel fund under international
control. While not absolute guarantee, three-tiered program of bilat-
eral, multilateral and international fund assurances could minimize
political interference with fuel supply and as noted provide economic
incentive to forego sensitive transfers. French expressed some reserva-
tions about fuel bank concept but agreed fuel assurances necessary part
of supplier package.
C. Full scope safeguards—U.S. indicated that we have not yet
reached decision on requiring safeguards on all nuclear facilities as a
condition of any nuclear cooperation; concept has advantages in that it
would appear to accomplish NPT objective to get binding legal com-
mitment not to acquire nuclear explosives: such a policy would also
minimize nuclear transfers in absence of safeguards and would remove
present anomaly of non-parties to NPT subject to less stringent safe-
guards than NPT parties. French continue to have problem with this
approach, believe it inappropriate to use French supply leverage to
prohibit indigenous nuclear programs (following French route to inde-
pendent capacity) that it would be seen as being imposed on others by
suppliers and thus increase mistrust and increase risks of independent
national efforts. However, French expressed interest in U.S. suggestion
of possible compromise formula that would require the recipient
country to accept safeguards on all existing facilities and subsequent
materials produced in these facilities. Country would make no commit-
ment not to acquire unsafeguarded facilities but it understood that to
do so would result in termination of supply. It would also agree to no-
tify supplier in advance of such a move. While states not to be required
to put existing unsafeguarded materials under safeguards, it under-
stood that any test of nuclear device would also result in supply termi-
nation. Both French and U.S. sides agreed to look further at question of
how far safeguards issue can profitably be pursued at next suppliers
meeting.
D. Suppliers group expansion—utility of group at present fourteen
members not yet evaluated; further expansion to be approached with
caution, but not ruled out. We more than French see value in contin-
uing meetings as forum for harmonization of nuclear policies, and as
framework for continued close consultations among key members.
E. Guidelines publication—some merit in publication of guidelines
which widely known to exist; however, publication crystalizes a situa-
tion which still essentially fluid. Publication also forces developing
countries to accept publicly criteria for cooperation which could lessen
flexibility in some cases.
F. Reprocessing policy—U.S. indicated we exploring number of al-
ternatives: one possibility would be general international consensus to

Non-Proliferation
observe halt on further spread of national facilities during which there
would be multinational evaluation of safeguard techniques, alternative
means of exploiting spent fuel, and alternative reactor technologies.
During this pause, it might be recognized that some reprocessing desir-
able to meet genuine needs on storage and environmental grounds to
dispose of spent fuel; this could be met by use of existing reprocessing
facilities, provided that recovered plutonium not returned to NNWS.
French emphasized strong domestic commitment to reprocessing and
breeder programs and proposed to perform reprocessing services for
U.S. customers without return of plutonium. It was agreed we would
explore those possibilities further in subsequent exchanges.
G. Sanctions—U.S. discussed number of possibilities for publicly-
expressed sanctions policies by suppliers. French indicated reluctance
to go beyond present policy that violation of agreements with France
would automatically imply (unspecified) sanctions. In other cases,
French indicated readiness to discuss in London means for strength-
ening IAEA mechanism for application of sanctions as appeared under
Article XII of statute.
3. We learned in course of discussions of sensitive issues on
margins of talks that:
—GOF has told FRG it will not seek commercial advantage in
Brazil if enrichment and reprocessing are deferred; GOF will respect re-
actor commitment at least for next 10–15 years and prepared to back up
FRG fuel supply.
—French told us we could inform Brazilians in course of talks next
week that GOF will not seek commercial advantage and is prepared
back up fuel supply as in return for deferral of sensitive transfers.
—French will defer sensitive transfer now pending to Pakistan for
at least three more weeks to give us time to persuade GOP to accept
joint agreement on indefinite deferral.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
325.
Study Prepared by the Ad Hoc Interagency Group on
Nuclear Proliferation1
Washington, March 9, 1977
This report has been prepared in response to PRM–152 in which
the President has requested recommendations on how the United
States should proceed in its efforts to deter the spread of nuclear
weapons. The material which follows includes an introductory section
setting out the background, broad policy considerations, and principal
issues that the current study is designed to address. This is followed by
a series of sections outlining optional and recommended courses of ac-
tion in the primary areas of current concern.3
[Omitted here is the table of contents.]
I. INTRODUCTION
A. BACKGROUND
For over twenty years the United States has been firmly committed
to preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. The President has
pledged that this Administration would, as a matter of priority, in-
tensify US efforts. The proliferation of nuclear explosive capabilities
to an increasing number of countries threatens to reduce our ability to
control international events and manage crises, expose our nation to
new risks, have a dissolvent effect on our alliances, and enhance the
prospect of terrorist nuclear attacks. Our objective is to prevent this
proliferation.
A successful non-proliferation policy requires attention both to the
political and security motivations that lead states to acquire explosive
devices and to the technical capabilities that make it possible for a state
to develop nuclear explosives with little timely warning. Avoiding pro-
liferation ultimately will depend to a large extent on how successful we
are in reducing motivations to acquire nuclear weapons capability.
These motivations are complex and are not amenable to short-term so-
lutions. They reflect political evaluations of national security interests,
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Subject Files Pertaining to Presidential Review Me-
moranda and Directives, MEMCONS with Foreign Officials, and National Security De-
Box 1, Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–15—Nuclear Non-Proliferation Policy,
January–March 1977. Confidential.
2 See Document 317.
3 Detailed analyses of these issues and options were prepared as a basis for this re-
port and are available. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
of the strength and durability of alliances, the reliability of security
guarantees, and perceptions that nuclear weapons status or near-status
is prestigious and carries significant political rewards.
To successfully meet these concerns over the long-term, steps must
be taken to enhance the credibility of existing security guarantees. We
also need to make progress in achieving meaningful and verifiable
arms control agreements that reduce nuclear weapon force levels and
limit or prohibit nuclear testing; in establishing nuclear-free zones; in
strengthening alliances; and in devaluing the prestige identified with
nuclear weapon capability. This report, while sensitive to the impor-
tance over the long-term of reducing political and security motivations
to acquire nuclear weapons, focuses on the more immediate problem of
containing technical capabilities.
The problems addressed in this report arise from the nature of nu-
clear technology itself. The nuclear fuel cycle begins with mining of
natural uranium. The amount of fissile material in natural uranium—
the isotope U–235—must be increased to produce fuel for US-type nu-
clear power reactors (enrichment). Fuel assemblies are fabricated from
the enriched uranium and burned in a reactor. The resultant spent fuel
is stored temporarily at the reactor site.
After burning in a reactor, nuclear fuel contains a mixture of pluto-
nium, slightly enriched uranium, and radioactive waste products. This
spent fuel must be cooled for several months at the reactor site.
After cooling, spent fuel can be transported to more permanent
storage. However, it has been assumed that spent fuel would be reproc-
essed to recover the plutonium and uranium, which would be recycled
into new fuel (mixed-oxide or breeder fuel), thus reducing the amount
of fresh enriched uranium required. The radioactive wastes separated
during reprocessing would be prepared for permanent disposal.
The current problem is that many states are developing or have
plans to develop full fuel cycle capabilities, that is, not only power re-
actors, but also reprocessing facilities and, in some cases, enrichment
facilities that produce or are capable of producing weapons-usable
material.
We are particularly concerned that the spread of enrichment and
reprocessing facilities will bring these states close to the nuclear
weapon threshold, making it easier to decide to acquire weapons in the
future and reducing the time that diplomacy has available to counter
moves toward proliferation. Motivations respond rapidly to changing
political and security perceptions. If motivations coincide with a capa-
bility to produce nuclear explosive devices, further proliferation will
almost certainly result. However, the technical capabilities which states
have to acquire or produce weapons are amenable to more immediate
controls than are motivations. Our efforts in the first instance must,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
therefore, focus on averting the further spread under national control of facil-
ities and materials capable of use for weapons purposes and on strengthening
safeguards and other controls over all peaceful nuclear activities.
Our non-proliferation policy must also take account of the legiti-
mate role nuclear power can play in contributing to world energy
needs and, specifically, in reducing reliance on costly and uncertain
sources of oil. Non-proliferation and energy cooperation objectives
need not conflict: even if national access to weapons-usable material is
limited, supplies of non-sensitive fuels and reactors can continue; con-
versely failure to contain proliferation risks will not only seriously re-
duce world security but will also result ultimately in serious setbacks
to, if not curtailment of, the continued application of peaceful nuclear
power.
The US has had a long-term interest in assuring that nuclear power
should be available, but only under the most rigorous safeguards, and
that the growth and direction of the industry should not outpace
progress in forging the necessary protective constraints and institu-
tions. To this end, important protective arrangements were developed
over the past two decades including bilateral constraints and controls,
IAEA safeguards, and the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Since the Indian test of 1974,4 which demonstrated that a devel-
oping country could produce nuclear explosives by misusing peaceful
nuclear cooperation, the United States has taken a number of initiatives
seeking broad supplier state acceptance of common export policies.
These include not only safeguards and control over nuclear exports
and strengthening of the international safeguards system, but also ef-
forts to forestall the acquisition of sensitive facilities by countries not al-
ready possessing them and minimizing access to and improving con-
trol over weapons-usable materials.
These and other related actions were stated in President Ford’s
October 28 nuclear policy message.5 The key decision was that repro-
cessing would no longer be regarded as inevitable and should not pro-
ceed unless there is sound reason to conclude that the world commu-
nity can effectively overcome the associated risks of proliferation.
Avoidance of proliferation must take precedence over economic in-
terests. In addition, the Ford statement called for a three-year morato-
rium on transfers of sensitive technology while alternative ways of
meeting fuel cycle needs were explored, coupled with a domestic pause
on commercial reprocessing pending evaluation of its proliferation
risks. This latter decision was taken in the context of reprocessing for

Non-Proliferation
recycle in present reactors and did not address the US breeder reactor
development program.
B. OVERALL STRATEGY
The October 28 statement—and the Carter San Diego speech6—
offer a similar political and technical basic framework for the conduct
of non-proliferation policy.
A common element in these policy statements is reinforcement of
controls to ensure that civil nuclear supply is only used for peaceful
purposes. They call for action to strengthen technical controls through
more universal application of IAEA safeguards and improvement of
safeguards and physical protection measures to deter unauthorized
use of nuclear materials and facilities.
A second key element is denial of access to sensitive technologies (e.g.,
enrichment and reprocessing) so as to delay the spread of stockpiles of
weapons-usable material and the facilities that produce them, while the
international community develops ways to shape the future of nuclear
energy so as to reduce proliferation risks.
Both policy statements also recognize that an effective non-
proliferation policy cannot rely solely on denials and controls. A policy
based solely on denial of sensitive technology transfers would lack
legitimacy in the eyes of other nations, and over the long term would
not present indigenous development of sensitive technologies and fa-
cilities. Similarly, a policy which permits the spread of sensitive na-
tional facilities, albeit under strengthened political commitments, in-
ternational safeguards and physical security measures, would not in
itself meet the problem of states acquiring capabilities which could
quickly be turned to weapons purposes after abrogation of safeguards
agreements.
We believe that a meaningful long-term non-proliferation policy
requires the addition of a third approach based on the principle of bilateral
and multilateral incentives. Such incentives must be responsive to other
countries’ energy requirements. In particular, in encouraging accept-
ance of our non-proliferation policy and objectives we must be able to
provide assured supplies of non-sensitive nuclear fuels (e.g., low-
enriched uranium) on a timely, adequate, reliable and economically ac-
ceptable basis and be responsive to concerns over the management of
spent fuel and nuclear waste.
would halt further arms sales of nuclear power technology and nuclear reactor fuel to
any nation that refused to forgo nuclear weapons development or insisted on building its
own national plant for reprocessing reactor fuel.” (Charles Mohr, “Carter Vows a Curb

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
We also believe that a key element in developing international sup-
port for our non-proliferation policy is establishment of an Interna-
tional Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program that objectively and thoroughly
examines the economic, environmental and non-proliferation advan-
tages and risks of the current fuel cycle and major alternatives. The
domestic component must relate our future energy needs with our
non-proliferation and environmental objectives. The international com-
ponent must seek to involve countries with major nuclear energy pro-
grams (both existing and projected) and address their legitimate con-
cerns, to ensure that the evaluation will be internationally accepted.
This international component is particularly important because
many other countries, including most key suppliers, strongly disagree
with the US assessment that reprocessing is not necessary in the near
term. Rather they consider this technology essential for resource con-
servation, for meeting waste handling and environmental require-
ments and for breeder development and fuel purposes.
C. MAJOR ISSUES
While the approaches identified above—controls, denials, incentives,
together with an International Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program—are key
policy elements in our proposed overall non-proliferation strategy, a
number of major policy implementation choices need to be made.
1. How should the US deal with reprocessing and the export and disposi-
tion of weapons-usable materials?
There is interagency consensus7 on the need for an international morato-
rium on the export of enrichment and reprocessing plants and tech-
nology, the most difficult cases being the existing French and German
agreements to export such facilities to Pakistan and Brazil, and our ef-
forts to ensure the absence of reprocessing in Taiwan.
There is an interagency consensus on the need for assessment of repro-
cessing and examination of alternatives for recovering energy value from
irradiated fuel and that this evaluation should be international and
broad based.
There is also an interagency consensus that domestic, regional, and inter-
national spent-fuel storage arrangements are needed in supporting our ap-
proach to reprocessing.
Differences among Agencies exist, however, on the following
issues:
7 Consensus, as used here and subsequently in the report refers to the working level
only, and not necessarily to official Agency views. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
—how an international fuel cycle evaluation program should allocate re-
sources and effort domestically and internationally between reproc-
essing and alternative technologies.
• Some argue that virtually all domestic technical evaluation ef-
forts should be addressed to non-reprocessing technologies, in order to
provide a clear signal to others that the US is not going forward with
reprocessing. Existing reprocessing plants abroad could be used for
evaluation of reprocessing, both technically and organizationally.
• Others favor an approach in which the US technical evaluation
includes not only alternative technologies but also reprocessing itself in
order to establish more effective safeguards and controls in the event
that decisions (in the US or elsewhere) are made to proceed with
reprocessing.
Options and recommendations on this issue are on pages 15 & 16.
—how the US should deal with reprocessing activities abroad.
• We are being pressed by Japan, Spain, Switzerland and Sweden
to permit them to ship US-supplied fuel to the UK or France for reproc-
essing, on the grounds that lack of available spent fuel storage capacity
could force them to shut down their reactors. This raises a number of
issues requiring immediate decision: Should we permit reprocessing in
existing facilities in these nuclear weapon states (NWS), subject to US
approval over disposition of separated plutonium? Should we seek a
moratorium on all new reprocessing plants? How should we handle ex-
isting reprocessing plants in non-nuclear weapon states (NNWS)8 such
as the plants in Japan, in Germany and Belgium? Do we integrate some,
all or none of these into an International Fuel Cycle Evaluation
Program?
• A major issue in our on-going negotiations is the US right of ap-
proval over reprocessing. This has also raised problems in our attempts
to obtain such rights in negotiating with Iran, Spain, Yugoslavia and
others. While there is a consensus on the need to tighten and extend our
veto rights over reprocessing, we need to spell out the conditions under
which we allow reprocessing and/or alternative disposition of spent
fuel.
• Finally, there are the related questions of how to meet near-term
domestic and foreign spent fuel storage concerns and how best to as-
sure that adequate fuel supplies will be available during the evaluation
period. In addition, we must determine whether or under what condi-
tions to continue exporting weapons-usable material or reactors re-
quiring their use. Proposed licenses to export highly-enriched uranium
to the FRG and South Africa under existing contracts are pending and
are being challenged in licensing proceedings.
2. How can the US help to create a reliable nuclear fuel assurance system?
There is interagency consensus:
8 In this report and in the NPT, only the US, UK, France, USSR and China are con-
sidered NWS. All others, including India, are NNWS. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—that the US must move rapidly and decisively to reestablish its reli-
ability as a nuclear fuel supplier, and that to achieve this end we must not
only take steps to provide new enrichment capacity but also to restore cer-
tainty that contractual commitments will be honored on a timely basis for all
cooperating states adhering to their non-proliferation obligations;
—that a policy of constraint on reprocessing must be accompanied
by strong incentives, focusing on assured supply of low-enriched uranium
and of natural uranium fuel;
—that the establishment of parallel policies among the nuclear
supplier states which would at least entail cooperative planning of new
enrichment facilities and close consultations on the relation between
fuel assurances and “back-end” constraints is essential;
—that multilateral as well as international arrangements to assure
access to fuel supplies are needed in order to avoid placing reactor ex-
porting nations at a competitive disadvantage or recipients at an eco-
nomic disadvantage provided they abide by generally accepted non-
proliferation guidelines.
Differences exist over what specific steps need to be taken now with re-
spect to multilateral collaboration in the area of enrichment.
Discussion of this issue and recommendations on fuel assurances
are on pages 22–28.
3. How should we tighten our agreements for civil nuclear cooperation
and our nuclear export policy?
Nuclear exports take place under agreements for cooperation be-
tween the US and individual recipient countries.
There is interagency consensus that stricter terms should be required in
new agreements including, if all suppliers concur, full-scope safeguards (i.e.,
safeguards on all nuclear activities in NNWS); and that we should seek to
upgrade existing agreement to include at least some additional conditions.
This study examines:
—what new requirements we will impose for future agreements for
cooperation. Of primary concern are:
• Whether we make full-scope safeguards (i.e., safeguards on all nu-
clear activities in a NNWS) a condition of US nuclear cooperation or in-
stead insist on alternative measures aimed at widening safeguards
application.
• Whether and to what extent the US should impose new require-
ments in the absence of agreement by other key suppliers to impose them.
(A decision to impose increased safeguards and other conditions
for new agreements would affect, among others, the proposed agree-
ments with Israel, Egypt, and Brazil.)
—how we should upgrade cooperation under existing agreements, in
particular:

Non-Proliferation
• What interim export standards should we apply pending renegoti-
ation of existing agreements and consultations with other suppliers.
• Should we favor, as part of our comprehensive legislative pro-
posal, the application of new stricter export standards either automatically or
subject to a Presidential determination, after a specified period of time.
If these new stricter standards (e.g., full-scope safeguards require-
ments) are applied to exports under existing agreements, this would re-
quire modification of all agreements. Depending on the nature of the
increased safeguards conditions, these could be particularly difficult in
the case of some key non-NPT parties such as India, South Africa and
Spain. US reprocessing controls are also likely to raise bilateral tensions
with both NPT and non-parties. While US leverage alone may suffice in
many cases, whether other suppliers adopt similar policies will have an
important bearing on the success of such a US policy.
It should be noted that current bills in Congress which have strong
bipartisan support, go much further in tightening the criteria for both
agreements and licensing, particularly in seeking to foreclose foreign
reprocessing.
Options and recommendations on nuclear export policy are on
pages 31–41.
4. How far-reaching a policy should we pursue alone and with others to
strengthen sanctions against violations on non-proliferation obligations?
There is a consensus supporting the October 28 statement to at
least cut off nuclear cooperation with states who may in the future vio-
late a US safeguards agreement. The issues now are:
—whether to extend this policy to include a clearly stated intention
to cut off supplies in the event any international safeguards agreement
is violated or if a US customer hereafter explodes a nuclear device (useful,
perhaps, in the case of India);
—whether and how to strengthen the operation of the sanctions
provision of the IAEA Statute;
—whether to expand sanctions into non-nuclear areas, such as au-
tomatic suspension of eligibility to receive discretionary US economic,
military, or financial assistance;
—how much emphasis to place on obtaining agreement on
common sanctions policies from other suppliers before determining a
US position on the above measures?
Discussions and recommendations on these issues are addressed
on pages 29–30.
D. CONSIDERATIONS AFFECTING POLICY FORMULATION
In addressing and deciding on specific issues associated with the
above areas, four policy considerations must be factored in:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—urgency associated with the decision in question. For example, a
number of bills have been introduced in Congress, that, if enacted,
could adversely affect our ability to further non-proliferation objec-
tives. The Executive Branch needs to put forward a comprehensive leg-
islative package urgently to focus Congressional efforts in a supportive
direction.
—the relative emphasis given to denials, controls, sanctions and incen-
tives in implementing our non-proliferation policy. A decision on how
to handle reprocessing of US-origin fuels, for example, must be evalu-
ated in terms of whether our objectives are best achieved by strict con-
trols over reprocessing, and recovered plutonium, denying outright
authorization to reprocess, offering alternative guaranteed fuel sources
in lieu of reprocessing, assistance in spent fuel storage or a combination
of these approaches;
—the degree to which the United States should stress a unilateral or mul-
tilateral approach in defining and implementing our non-proliferation
policy. For example, we must recognize that fundamental differences may
exist between the US and other supplier and recipient states on the best way
to control proliferation; and that unilateral US policies may lead to un-
productive or possibly counterproductive non-proliferation results.
—the need to assess the longer-term costs as well as benefits of short-term
non-proliferation policy measures. Total denial of safeguarded nuclear
assistance to a given country could, for example, lead that country to
undertake development of indigenous and uncontrolled nuclear weap-
ons capability.
Against this background of policy considerations and major is-
sues, the following section presents the detailed options and recom-
mendations to allow policy decisions consistent with the overall
strategy outlined above.
[Omitted here is Part II: Policy Options and Recommendations.]

Non-Proliferation
326.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 11, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
FRANCE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
Francois de Laboulaye
GERMANY
Political Director
Gunter van Well
Political Director
UNITED KINGDOM
Sir Michael Palliser
UNITED STATES
Permanent Under Secretary
Ambassador Henry Owen
Sir John Hunt
President’s Representative
Cabinet Secretary
Arthur A. Hartman
Reginald Hibbert
Assistant Secretary
Deputy Under Secretary
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant
to the President
Robert Hunter, Senior Member
National Security Council
Roger Waldman, Assistant
to Ambassador Owen
James F. Dobbins, Jr. EUR/WE
(Notetaker)
Owen opened the meeting by noting that its purpose was to review
the handling of non-economic issues which President Carter wished to
raise at the summit.2 President Carter wished to raise these issues for
two reasons: first, because he thought they were important and de-
served discussion; and second, because he was of the general view that
Japan should be involved more extensively in consultations with the
United States and Europe on non-economic issues.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
Turning to proliferation, Owen said that there had been bilateral
contacts between the US and all the participants in the summit of the
seven (Italy was to be contacted in the near future) on the US proposal
for a fuel cycle evaluation program. In his own discussion with Japa-
nese officials, Owen said, he had found them extremely interested. The
subject of proliferation was on everyone’s minds and would certainly
be discussed at the summit. Certainly President Carter would do so.
Owen suggested that there were two aspects of non-proliferation—re-
straints and how to meet legitimate needs. The question of restraints
was being dealt with in the London suppliers group. It did not appear
Old Executive Office Building.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
that there was much the summit could add. The more interesting ques-
tion was the second—that of meeting legitimate atomic energy needs.
In this area it seemed to him that there were three principles which
might be discussed and perhaps agreed upon at the summit. These
were:
—that these needs were real and should be met;
—that it was in the general interest that these needs be met with
the minimum risk of providing countries the means to convert civilian
to military nuclear programs;
—in some cases a multilateral or international role in meeting
these needs might be desirable.
If summit discussion could focus on these principles, continued
Owens, and if agreement could be reached to launch a study to give ef-
fect to them, this would represent an important outcome.
Owen noted that the issue of energy was already on the summit
agenda and suggested that as nuclear
energy and
thus non-
proliferation were inextricably connected to this topic, perhaps they
should be discussed under the energy item.
De Laboulaye acknowledged that it might be impossible to avoid a
discussion of nuclear energy under the energy item. It was probably
better, however, not to go into detail, given the limited time available at
the summit. He suggested, therefore, that discussion be limited to the
first two of the three principles Ambassador Owen had outlined.
He felt that there was insufficient preparation for discussion to pro-
ceed to the third point—that of international intervention. In the ab-
sence of agreement, discussion at the summit on this point could be
counterproductive.
Owen wondered whether there might not be agreement on the first
of these two points, and on the initiation of a study. De Laboulaye re-
plied that this was perhaps possible, but would seem to him to be the
maximum his government could accept.
Van Well agreed that proliferation should be discussed under en-
ergy. He felt, however, that the third of Owen’s proposed principles
should be discussed among the four before participation was enlarged.
At this point there was some discussion about whether the four-
power summit should come before or after the seven power meeting.3
It was agreed that the desirability of discussion of non-proliferation
among the four should not override other considerations which tended
to favor scheduling the four-power meeting following the seven nation
summit.
and the Federal Republic of Germany scheduled for May in London.

Non-Proliferation
Palliser said that everyone was agreed on the importance of non-
proliferation efforts. Discussion at the summit should not leave the im-
pression that there was disagreement on this fundamental point. He
agreed that the subject should be discussed under the energy item. He
felt that the principles which Ambassador Owen had outlined were at a
pretty high level of generality. The question was whether summit
agreement to initiate a study would be viewed by press and the public
simply as a way of postponing discussion.
Ambassador Owen noted that a great deal would depend on the out-
come of bilateral consultations which the United States was under-
taking with each of the summit participants. If there was agreement,
the summit could reflect it. If there were not, one would have a dif-
ferent situation. In this case, perhaps, the summit should confine itself
to endorsing the principles he had outlined—either two or all three of
them. These principles might be rather general but that was, after all, in
the best tradition of summitry.
Hibbert noted that it was important that non-participating states
not feel that those at the summit were ganging up on them. Owen re-
plied that his first principle was included for that purpose. Reflecting
on the problem of non-proliferation in general, Owen recalled that Eu-
rope had confronted a somewhat similar difficulty thirty years ago
and had resolved it by creating the European Coal and Steel Commu-
nity. Perhaps on non-proliferation a similar international approach is
needed to overcome national suspicion and rivalries.
Owen noted that bilateral consultations on the proposal for a fuel
cycle evaluation program would have progressed by the next summit
preparatory meeting. He felt there was agreement that proliferation
should be discussed at the summit under energy, and that at least the
first two of his three principles were generally acceptable. Whether the
third principle could be agreed upon and a study initiated at the
summit was still open for discussion. This was generally agreed to be a
fair summation of where matters stood.
Van Well reiterated that there should also be discussion of prolifer-
ation among the four. This would offer a better form to review certain
political ramifications of the issue. Owen inquired what questions the
four would address. Van Well envisaged discussion in the four focusing
on the political constraints which each of the participants felt in this
area. Hartman agreed that a frank discussion of this sort among the four
leaders would be very useful. No one felt that such a discussion would
require detailed preparation. Owen noted that President Carter might
well treat the political aspects of non-proliferation among the seven.
Van Vell said that this was perfectly acceptable but that other leaders
might prefer to reply in the four.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
327.
Intelligence Report1
Washington, March 1977
Political Perspectives on Key Global Issues
[Omitted here are a table of contents and Parts I–V of the report.]
VI. NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION
Despite the efforts of the US and other nuclear supplier countries,
a small number of states will probably fabricate nuclear explosives
within the next decade or so. It is therefore necessary to plan for an era
in which proliferation is occurring, as well as to continue efforts to pre-
vent or retard its occurrence. The principal objectives of the discussion
that follows are to identify and measure the strength of those trends
that contribute to the proliferation process, to assess the implications of
further proliferation for US interests, and to indicate some of the com-
plexities of dealing with the dual problem of slowing the rate of prolif-
eration and managing the consequences when it cannot be prevented.
A. Motives, Capabilities, and Opportunities
The decision to build nuclear weapons flows from a convergence
of pressing national motivations and adequate capabilities.2 While an
appropriate technical base is a necessary precondition for the develop-
ment of atomic arms, it is clearly not sufficient in itself to cause a
country to cross the nuclear threshold. Several West European states,
for example, have for some time been capable of building nuclear
weapons. But because US security guarantees, the existence of NATO,
and the general relaxation of East-West tensions have dampened anx-
ieties about external threats, they have lacked the political incentives to
do so.
For most states, considerations of national security have been and
will continue to be the principal determinants governing their attitudes
toward the acquisition of nuclear weapons. However, as the threshold
costs of acquiring a nuclear capability are lowered, less demanding se-
2 A nuclear weapon here refers to any explosive generated by fissionable materials.
The distinction between an explosive and a weapon, although analytically valid, does not
possess immediate policy relevance. In the contemporary political context, the possession
of even a “crude” weapon has a psychological and political impact transcending its ac-
tual military utility. In the future, however, if and when more states attain greater levels
of sophistication in weaponry and delivery systems, the size and quality of nuclear ar-
senals will take on important military and political significance. [Footnote is in the
original.]

Non-Proliferation
curity interests, and even prestige and domestic political motives may
be enough to cause some states to reconsider the nuclear option.
While it should be emphasized that years of restraint have not nec-
essarily immunized the nonweapon industrial democracies from pres-
sures for proliferation, it is among the LDCs that the interaction of mo-
tivations and capabilities is of most concern today. In these countries
feelings of political and military insecurity are widespread, aspirations
to greater global or regional status abound, and the demands on do-
mestic stability are difficult to satisfy. All of these political pressures are
occurring at a time when the economic and technical costs of building
nuclear weapons are declining.
Political Motivations
Security: Intense and longstanding regional conflicts account for
much of the anxiety motivating the LDCs to acquire nuclear weapons.
The likelihood that these basic feelings of insecurity will launch con-
crete actions designed to bring the nuclear option within reach has been
significantly enhanced by several international developments, for
example:
—Real or perceived inabilities to compete effectively in local con-
ventional arms races because of deficiencies in access to foreign supply,
in financial means, or in other resources (e.g., Pakistan and South
Africa).
—The acquisition of a nuclear capability by a declared or potential
rival (e.g., Pakistan and Iran).
—Loss of faith in the credibility or utility of great power security
commitments (e.g., Pakistan, Taiwan, South Korea).
Other developments that have increased the security concerns of
some nuclear threshold states (Taiwan and South Korea in particular)
include the US defeat in Indochina, the continuing debate over with-
drawal of American troops from abroad, and mounting evidence of
wide popular support for reducing the level of US commitments gener-
ally. In short, the impression that national security will increasingly be-
come the exclusive responsibility of individual states has buttressed ar-
guments in favor of developing nuclear weapons for deterrence and
defense.
Prestige: The demands of LDCs for more control over international
arrangements affecting their fortunes and futures and their dissatisfac-
tion with the existing international political and economic system have
led many states to give priority attention to enhancement of their global
or regional stature. And for some countries, most notably India and
Brazil, but probably Argentina and Iran as well, the prestige associated
with actual or potential nuclear status has furnished a particularly
strong incentive for developing a nuclear weapons capability.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Domestic Political Concerns: Internal factors have also contributed to
proliferation pressures in a growing number of countries. Substantial
domestic benefits can accrue to regimes that can demonstrate the com-
petence necessary to build a nuclear device, especially among the
LDCs. The prestige of the Indian Government, for example, experi-
enced such a boost when it set off its nuclear explosion, although its
effects were largely temporary. Conversely, failure to undertake or
complete a nuclear weapons program in the face of clear regional chal-
lenges or great power pressure could severely undermine a regime’s
existing base of support. This consideration may currently loom large
in Pakistani Prime Minister Bhutto’s calculations.
Facilitating Factors
A number of economic and technological trends have combined to
facilitate the acquisition of the capability to fashion nuclear explosives.
The enormous expense and vulnerabilities related to dependence on
foreign sources of petroleum have, for example, heightened the appeal
of nuclear power as a potential source of cheap, independent, and reli-
able energy. Also, the prestige that accompanies the acquisition and op-
eration of highly sophisticated facilities, especially if it creates a poten-
tial base for increasing future military power, has made nuclear energy
a particularly attractive investment for many states.3
Competition between suppliers of nuclear technology, arising in
part from balance-of-payments problems created or aggravated by the
enormous increase in the cost of imported oil, has also served to in-
crease the capabilities of threshold states. Of the leading suppliers, the
French and the Germans have offered to sell equipment that would
greatly facilitate the fabrication of nuclear explosives. They have used a
uranium enrichment plant and spent fuel reprocessing facilities as
sweeteners to clinch sales of power reactors to Brazil and Pakistan.
Partly in this manner, nuclear technology originally acquired at
great effort and expense by the leading nuclear states is now becoming
widely disseminated. Not only have many of its initial mysteries be-
come matters of public knowledge, but there has been an international
effort, led to a great degree by the US, to assist LDCs to gain access to
the benefits of the atom by providing research facilities and aiding in
the construction of an international nuclear power industry.
3 Virtually any state with a nuclear power program can build a nuclear explosive
within a decade or less of the decision to do so. It needs to separate out the plutonium
produced as a byproduct of running power reactors (and design and develop a device).
These are not trivial tasks, but not of insurmountable technical difficulty for many states.
The political obstacles—ranging from consequence of the violation of treaty obligations
to great power retribution—are more formidable. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
B. Antiproliferation Efforts
With a few exceptions, the policies adopted by the great powers to
slow the spread of nuclear weapons have focused primarily on limiting
the opportunities and capabilities of threshold states. Hence, apart
from a few international declarations of intent to resist nuclear aggres-
sion, such as Security Council Resolution 255,4 most nonproliferation
efforts have concentrated on creating institutional and legal arrange-
ments to embargo, monitor, or control international nuclear commerce.
The reluctance of the major nuclear powers to address the problem
of motivations directly is understandable. The costs in terms of the nec-
essary massive readjustment of foreign policy priorities, the risks and
the demands on limited resources that would flow from more active
engagement in local and regional affairs in various parts of the world,
and the loss of freedom of maneuver in areas ranging from superpower
competition and alliance politics to North-South disagreements over
the distribution of international wealth and power would be enormous.
Furthermore, the high degree of concern and cooperation among the
nuclear powers required for success in such an endeavor would be dif-
ficult to sustain.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 constitutes the central
legal instrument of the anti-proliferation effort. Some 100 nations have
adhered to the treaty since it was opened for signature. But a number of
nuclear weapon and key threshold states, including France, India, Is-
rael, Egypt, Pakistan, Brazil, and Argentina, have so far proved un-
willing to endorse the Treaty.
While it does require nonweapons adherents to forgo the acquisi-
tion of atomic arms, the NPT makes only a passing reference to the
major concerns which fuel the proliferation process. Addressing rela-
tively minor motivating factors, it obligates the five nuclear weapons
states to end their nuclear arms race and to supply peaceful nuclear
explosives to nonweapons states at reasonable cost and on a nondis-
criminatory basis. So far, however, neither of these pledges has been
fulfilled.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), under UN aegis,
has become the central organizational instrument of the nonprolifera-
tion regime. It administers the international “safeguards” agreements
governing proper use of peaceful nuclear materials and facilities.
4 UN Resolution 255, “Question Relating to Measures to Safeguard Non-Nuclear
Weapons States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,” June
19, 1968, proclaimed that Non-Nuclear Weapons States threatened by “aggression with
nuclear weapons or the threat of such aggression” would receive aid from UN members,
ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/RES/255(1968))

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Lacking enforcement powers, it acts chiefly as a certifying accountant.
In performance of this function, it is obligated to notify all members of
the IAEA, the Security Council, and the UN General Assembly of any
“violations” that it uncovers. So far, the IAEA has reported no irregu-
larities that it deemed warranted such action.
Within the IAEA an exporters’ committee of NPT signatories,
known as the Zangger Committee, has been established. It maintains a
“trigger list” of nuclear items that must be placed under IAEA safe-
guards before they can be transferred abroad. However, because some
nuclear exporters are not NPT adherents or are uncomfortable with the
public scrutiny arising from IAEA procedures, another organization
has been formed to regulate nuclear commerce—the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, also known as the London Suppliers Conference—and it has
maintained the confidentiality of its discussions. It, too, has a “trigger
list.”
Individual supplier states have also attempted to control the nu-
clear potential of nonweapons states by means of unilateral embargoes
on nuclear technology and materials as well as through bilateral efforts
to restrain other exporters and importers. The US, for example, has con-
sistently refused to export nuclear fuel separation technology and has
actively sought to block the proposed sale of such technology to Brazil,
Pakistan, and South Korea by other suppliers. Similarly, Canada has
threatened to suspend exports of nuclear materials to potential
weapons states, while the Soviet Union has generally demonstrated
great caution in managing the nature and extent of its nuclear exports.
There are a number of weaknesses in the NPT–IAEA system, in-
cluding a provision that allows a nation to renounce its treaty obliga-
tions on 3 months’ notice. Another lies in the fact that, although the
IAEA has so far escaped the politicization that has hampered other UN
agencies, it is limited in effectiveness by shortages of funds and man-
power. In addition, the nuclear safeguard regime is beset with the tech-
nical obstacles and uncertainties associated with almost any system of
international inspection and verification. Indeed, the “normal” margin
of error in the accounting practices at some nuclear facilities is large
enough, theoretically, to permit the undetected diversion of enough
nuclear material to build several weapons a year. Finally, with a few ex-
ceptions, only items of international nuclear commerce are covered by
safeguards at all. Indigenous nuclear facilities can be developed that
fall outside the inspection system, as in the Indian, Israeli, and South
African cases.
Efforts to curb the spread of nuclear technology through unilateral
embargoes and direct intervention have incurred substantial costs. In
addition to the loss of export opportunities, the US, for example, has
found that its tough antiproliferation posture has strained its political

Non-Proliferation
relations with a number of LDCs, for example, Brazil and Pakistan.
Moreover, US efforts to block sales of uranium enrichment plants or
spent fuel reprocessing facilities by other suppliers have led to tensions
with West European countries, particularly France and Germany, as
well as with Japan.
Only one country, India, has publicly crossed the nuclear thresh-
old since the NPT came into existence. Measured in these terms, the an-
tiproliferation effort has been relatively successful. But the number and
determination of the countries that are currently seeking to place them-
selves in a position to develop nuclear weapons underscore the inade-
quacy of a basically unidimensional approach and raise troublesome
questions about the decade that lies ahead.
C. The Outlook
In part because of the persistence and interplay of the global
problems discussed in earlier chapters, none of the principal political
motives for acquiring nuclear weapons shows signs of losing its force
in the decade ahead. On the contrary, the odds are that some factors,
such as aspirations to regional dominance arising from new-found eco-
nomic power, will loom larger than before. It is also safe to assume that
the international environment will continue to be characterized by con-
siderable tension and conflict, the international political and economic
systems will remain under challenge, and a substantial number of gov-
ernments will have to cope with domestic strife and instability.
At the same time, technological advance and the continued spread
of nuclear expertise are almost certain to continue to erode the eco-
nomic and technical obstacles to developing nuclear weapons. Thus,
pressures for proliferation will mount while the difficulty of crossing
the nuclear threshold will decline.
Recognition of this state of affairs is likely to sustain the trend
toward greater consensus and cooperation among nuclear suppliers
that has emerged during the past few months. Although the currently
contested sales of sensitive technology to Pakistan and Brazil may yet
go through, tighter export controls recently adopted by France, Can-
ada, and perhaps Germany, indicate that nonproliferation is gaining in
salience as an international issue.
Nevertheless, although some of the major weapons powers may
desire to undertake more energetic efforts than in the past to dampen
the basic motives that underlie the proliferation process, they will find
it exceedingly difficult to do so within the framework of a comprehen-
sive and coordinated campaign because of other, conflicting national
and international policy objectives. And since the record suggests that
measures aimed primarily at curbing the ability of LDCs to develop a
nuclear device can do no more than slow the proliferation process, the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
prospects are strong that over the next years or so additional states will
either fabricate nuclear devices or develop the capacity to do so on very
short notice.
D. Implications
While certain to add new risks and complexities to international
politics, the emergence of a few new nuclear powers need not neces-
sarily provoke regional holocausts, dangerous superpower confronta-
tions, or an all-out nuclear arms race. On the contrary, there is some
prospect that the introduction of nuclear weapons into some current
areas of tension and conflict (e.g., the Middle East and the Korean Pen-
insula) could, over time, contribute to regional stability and reduce in-
terstate violence by creating local “balances of terror.”5 Elsewhere, the
acquisition of atomic arms by states not feared for their irredentist or
hegemonial ambitions might diminish the chances—or at least con-
strain the scope—of wars among regional rivals through what one ob-
server has described as a “porcupine effect.” And in any case, if the su-
perpowers can muster the necessary determination, they will have it
within their powers to reduce significantly the risks of direct nuclear
confrontation arising from third-party disputes.
Nonetheless, the proliferation process will require careful and con-
stant management during the critical period of adjustment that will
characterize the decade ahead, if some of the more disastrous conse-
quences are to be avoided. The actual impact of proliferation will de-
pend in large part on the pace at which the process proceeds, the mo-
tives and behavior of the states that acquire nuclear weapons, and the
actions taken by the major nuclear powers to anticipate and contain the
tensions and problems that arise.
One of the most important determinants of the consequences of
proliferation is the nature of the states that eventually do develop nu-
clear weapons. The character of the regime and the motivation for
achieving nuclear status are the two most critical factors. Unfortu-
nately, a great number of the potential LDC nuclear powers have polit-
ical systems prone to chronic or latent instability, which makes their
nuclear conduct difficult to predict. Although a valid argument can be
made that any additional proliferation heightens regional and global
tensions generally, some states clearly represent more risk than others.
For example, the Brazilian-Argentinian rivalry, which centers more on
a competition for prestige than deep-seated antagonisms, would likely
5 The conviction—publicly professed by a number of Arab spokesmen—that Israel
has a nuclear arsenal may have been one of the factors contributing to the recent modera-
tion of Arab positions on the settlement of the Middle East conflict. [Footnote is in the
original.]

Non-Proliferation
provoke a much less dangerous nuclear arms race than the Pakistani-
Indian case.
Until now, the relatively long time lag between each new entry
into the nuclear club has eased the task of containing the resulting re-
verberations. The expanding list of states with large and growing
stockpiles of plutonium-bearing spent reactor fuel creates the potential
for a more destabilizing spread of nuclear explosive capabilities. While
it is true that the decision to traverse the nuclear threshold will be made
by autonomous political units, a chain reaction may be established as
each successive proliferating state anticipates the security implications
of the nuclear program of other states. Not only are “proliferation
chains” possible in specific regions (the Middle East, Latin America,
Far East), but nonsecurity motivations may also set them off across re-
gions—e.g., Brazil following Pakistan, Iran following Brazil—as as-
piring regional powers compete for international prestige and status.
The attitudes and policies of the major nuclear powers will
perhaps be the single most important determinants of the ultimate con-
sequences of the proliferation process. They have an obvious common
interest in preventing the nuclearization of regional conflicts that could
involve the superpowers in a serious confrontation. However, crosscut-
ting interests impair their ability to employ cooperatively the military,
political, and economic measures necessary to lessen the regional inse-
curities driving the resort to nuclear diplomacy. Paradoxically, Taiwan,
West Germany, Japan, and South Korea—to cite a few—are cases
where great power competition has led to a nuclear umbrella for
weaker allies that now serves to restrain further nuclear proliferation.
The challenge to US policy arising from the proliferation process
will therefore be twofold: to continue to slow the spread of nuclear
weapons and to cope with such additional proliferation as occurs.
Judgments advanced earlier in this discussion suggest that the first of
these tasks is likely to become increasingly difficult. And both tasks are
certain to conflict to some degree with other important objectives, such
as controlling the pace of conventional arms transfers, disengagement
from regional conflicts, and advancement of human rights. Hence diffi-
cult policy choices will be required.
The transfer of increasing quantities of sophisticated conventional
weaponry to LDCs may be necessary to deflect them from developing
nuclear weapons or, if that fails, from brandishing or using them once
they have been fabricated. US military capabilities may need to be in-
creased or reoriented to deal with new and more powerful potential
adversaries. Some longstanding tacit or explicit alliances may need to
be reevaluated in terms of the costs of association with or intervention
on the behalf of new nuclear states or their rivals. The adoption of any
or all of these courses of action may well interfere with other policy ob-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
jectives—and it is unlikely that any single approach will be able to ad-
dress comprehensively the proliferation consequences presented by
every nation in every region.
Whatever the specific trade-offs made, the costs of managing the
proliferation process over the next decade—and particularly of those
steps that will be needed to dissuade new nuclear states from brand-
ishing or using their weapons—will be high. In a sense, they will likely
be comparable to those that would have been involved in addressing
the general admixture of motives driving the proliferation process at an
earlier stage. One possible advantage may be that they can be paid
piecemeal and with better appreciation for the risks and trade-offs in-
volved, and for their likely damage-limiting effects.
In any event, greater cooperation among the major nuclear powers will
be essential. Specifically, such concert will have to be directed toward
decoupling possible regional conflicts from their own global competi-
tion, assuaging regional tensions, and controlling the behavior of new
nuclear states through a combination of pressures and incentives. Since
the interests of the USSR and the PRC will be even more directly threat-
ened than those of the US should most of the present threshold states
attain nuclear status, the Communist powers might prove quite willing
to explore ways of sharing those burdens.6
In sum, proliferation presents a twofold problem of delay and man-
agement. Slowing proliferation when it cannot ultimately be stopped
could prove of substantial value in reducing the long-term costs of the
process. The dangers for regional and global peace can probably best be
muted if the process is spread out as much as possible in both time and
space. Thus, special attention should be paid to the requirements and
costs of dampening the effect that the entry of each new member into
the nuclear club is likely to have on pressures for proliferation else-
where—including those felt in the industrialized states that have so far
eschewed the acquisition of nuclear weapons.
Finally, since the degree and quality of great power cooperation
will greatly affect the level of risk to the US and to the world generally
of the proliferation process, special attention will have to be paid to the
prospects for and the reverberations of acquisition of nuclear arms by
those states (e.g., Taiwan, Japan, and West Germany) most likely to
have the sharpest adverse impact on relations among the powers. Here,
as in most aspects of the proliferation issue, the Communist powers
6 The emphasis placed on nonproliferation by the great powers may create oppor-
tunities for linkage by threshold and nonthreshold states alike. Other issues—conven-
tional arms transfer policies, North-South economic relations, law of the sea negotiations,
energy cooperation, or behavior in international organizations—might become entan-
gled with great power antiproliferation efforts. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
will probably have strong incentives to cooperate with the US. But even
then, the resources and attention necessary to minimize the dangers
presented by the spread of nuclear weapons are likely to be substantial
and continuing.
328.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Summary of PRC Meeting on Nuclear Proliferation (PRM–15)
The meeting2 began with a summary by Nye, of the two principal
conclusions of the review:3 that the U.S. should seek a pause in interna-
tional nuclear developments which make weapons useable material
more available; and that the pause would be used for an international
nuclear fuel cycle evaluation program (hereinafter FCEP) in which suppliers
and recipients jointly participate.
FCEP and Reprocessing: The Key Question
Discussion opened on the principal issue: What should the FCEP
evaluate? Should the evaluation concern itself with improvements
(safety and safeguards) in reprocessing? Or, should it concern alterna-
tives to reprocessing and to other sensitive technologies which make
plutonium or HEU directly available? Views were presented on what
should be done about domestic reprocessing, but without reaching any
conclusion. The discussion quickly turned to the question of what the
FCEP should evaluate and how it should be presented to the interna-
tional community. ERDA felt that in order to be “credible” the evalu-
ation would have to include reprocessing, (Option a, Recommendation
3, p. 16). State felt that while FCEP should concentrate on alternatives,
that we could not present the international program as one in which re-
processing is a closed question to which we already know the answer.
Therefore, the evaluation would have to include reprocessing abroad,
memorandum.
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions of the March 16 meeting were found.
3 See Document 325.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
although we would cancel it domestically so as to provide a strong “ed-
ucational” signal.
Brown argued that this position raised the question of “who would
co-opt whom”. He felt that State’s position amounted to saying “we
won’t reprocess, but you can” whereas we could be saying “we won’t,
and we don’t believe you should because it’s dangerous and perhaps
suicidal”. Brown doubts that State’s position is a correct tactic: “If we
are unable to head off the French, the Germans, and the Japanese then
we are simply indulging in a self-denial”. He stated that even Option b
as presented in the PRM isn’t strong enough: “the tone of the paper
doesn’t satisfy me” and that the only tactic which holds some chance of
success would be to take a very tough position against reprocessing. He
acknowledged that this is a risky approach and we have no way of
knowing whether it will work.
Schlesinger agreed that we will have to spend “considerable diplo-
matic capital” and added “the only way to head off the French is to deal
with the breeder, just playing around with safeguards isn’t going to do
it”. However, he is even less optimistic than Brown that our efforts will
be successful. On being asked to sum up his position, Brown said that
the FCEP should focus “exclusively on alternative fuel cycles not re-
quiring separation of plutonium”. When asked by others how he
would prevent other nations from going ahead with reprocessing he re-
plied: “we will let them go ahead to the extent we can’t help it”.
Warnke agreed with Brown. Schlesinger did not disagree but was
highly skeptical of its chances of success. Nye continued to argue that
some reprocessing was required “as the bait on the hook” and to an-
swer “technical and institutional” questions.
International Plutonium Storage
The group reached quick agreement that we not continue to
pursue the concept of an IAEA plutonium storage regime as proposed
Full Scope Safeguards
All agencies firmly agreed that we should adopt full scope safe-
guards as a “goal”, the discussion concerned whether we should adopt
them unilaterally. ACDA took the lead in strongly arguing that we do
(Option a, Recommendation 13, p. 34) while State argued for a modi-
fied version (Option b) under which a nation would not have to place
existing sensitive material under safeguard and could acquire an un-
safeguarded sensitive facility by simply terminating—but not techni-

Non-Proliferation
cally breaking—its agreement with us. State believes that this option
would be more acceptable to non-NPT parties, particularly, Israel.
Aaron argued that the Israelis would never agree to this, and that
therefore we might as well adopt full scope safeguards because of its
symbolic significance. ERDA disliked both Options a and b and favored
Option d—continuation of present policy. Schlesinger moved from a
position of uncertainty to one of outright disapproval of full scope safe-
guards, warning that it was “not a risk but a certainty” that we would
lose some of the market share we now have if we adopt full scope. Brze-
zinski commented that we have to be much more explicit in the as-
sumptions we make as to the probable reactions of other nations to our
policies. We have to be more precise about the political price we may
have to pay. The discussion ended with no consensus, but with some
leaning toward full scope safeguards.
Application of New Criteria
The group then considered how new export criteria would be im-
posed on existing agreements for cooperation (Recommendation 19, p.
41). State favored the position that the law should require the President
to determine after a specified time whether supply to a given nation
could continue if all the criteria are not met (Option b). ERDA on the
other hand favored Option c which would simply make the new cri-
teria “negotiating goals” which would be applied to existing agree-
ments only when there is complete supplier acceptance. ERDA feels
that “we no longer have much market control, its timely to use what
we’ve got”.
EURODIF Purchase
The question of whether the United States should purchase shares
in EURODIF (multinationally-owned enrichment enterprise in France)
was discussed. State was alone in urging that the Administration seek
legislative authority to do so. Others argued that this proposal needs
more study, particularly Schlesinger who argued that this plan would
amount to saying that “we don’t trust ourselves” and that it would be a
direct attempt to “circumvent U.S. law and U.S. policy”. All then
agreed on the need for further study, with State urging that it be treated
as a “matter of urgency”.
Legislative Approach
There was a swift and complete consensus that the Administration
produce its own comprehensive legislative package, rather than at-
tempting to work through bills already introduced.
Open Season
On the question of whether ERDA should hold an open season
(Recommendation 7, p. 24) when customers would be allowed to cancel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
or defer enrichment commitments made on the basis of unrealistic de-
mand expectations, there was complete agreement, except from Schles-
inger who felt that we had worked hard to get long term contracts, and
now we should stick to them.
Follow-On Needs
Nye summarized the issues which urgently need further work, in-
cluding establishing the international diplomatic framework for the
pause and the FCEP, and the budgetary and program decisions neces-
sary to implement whatever policy is agreed upon. He felt that the
former task should be carried out by a task force chaired by State, and
the latter by one chaired by ERDA. Both task forces would be subcom-
mittees of the follow-on interagency group.
OMB
OMB, was not represented at the meeting, but did submit written
comments5 which focus on “the lack of necessary analysis” in several
areas, but particularly as regards the fuel assurances and spent fuel
storage incentive programs. OMB feels that questions of scope, costs,
criteria, effectiveness and domestic impacts have not been adequately
defined and that therefore the studies proposed in Recommendations
mentation. OMB also favors continued funding for some reprocessing
activities (Option a, Recommendation 3).
Attachment
Areas of Agreement6
Washington, undated
There is consensus (or very nearly so) on these PRM recommendations.
Number
Subject
Comments
Pause
ERDA notes its belief that if
Japan participates in the
evaluation program the Tokai
plant should be allowed to
operate.
5 Not found.
6 Secret.

Non-Proliferation
International
Evaluation Program
Spent Fuel Storage
OMB feels that much more must
be learned about the parameters,
costs and consequences of such a
program, but does not disagree
so long as the study is clearly a
study and not a plan of
implementation.
International Plutonium Consensus at PRC on option b—
Storage
de-emphasize efforts to establish
international plutonium storage.
(This reverses a recommendation
made by Ford in the October 28th
statement.)
Fuel Assurance—
All agencies agree on open
Further Study and
season (allowing both
Open Season7
cancellation and deferral) but at
PRC meeting Schlesinger
disapproved, feeling that this
would be “administrative
self-abuse” and “would not help
to establish our credibility as a
supplier”.
Fuel Assurance—
Revised Terms for
Enrichment Contracts
Fuel Assurance—
Presidential Override of
NRC Decisions
10 (p. 26) Fuel Assurance Study
OMB feels that on this as on 7
and 8 above, that the PRM goes
too far toward implementation
and does not adequately reflect
the current lack of programatic
development and budgetary
analysis. OMB has no problem
with a thorough study however.
7 Debated at PRC. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
11 (p. 27) Investment in
Consensus was reached after
EURODIF/COREDIF8
PRC discussion that this proposal
will not be adopted at this time
but will be studied as one of
many possible international fuel
assurances to be analyzed in 10
above—the study to be
conducted as a matter of
urgency.
12 (p. 29) Sanctions
There is strong agreement on this
package with the exception that
ERDA “questions the wisdom” of
the proposed legislation since it
might “unduly limit Presidential
flexibility”.
13 (p. 34) Safeguard Policy if
agreed by other
Suppliers
This issue is closely tied to, and
should be considered in
connection with the question of
required safeguards
(Recommendation 14).
16 (p. 36) Other Provisions in
New Agreements
17 (p. 37) Criteria Applied to
ERDA has problems with the
Existing Agreements
reprocessing criterion which it
feels “could immediately result in
delays in export”.
18 (p. 39) Upgrading Existing
OMB approves if it is understood
Agreements
that the use of fuel assurances as
“primary incentive” in any
negotiation be contingent upon
Presidential approval of
recommendations made in the
study required by 10 above.
8 Debated at PRC. [Footnote is in the original.]
9 Debated at PRC. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
Vigorous unanimity at PRC that
Administration should develop
its own comprehensive bill.
21 (p. 49) Non-Nuclear
All agencies approve this recom-
Alternatives
mendation, but it is substantially
weaker than position taken dur-
ing campaign. Stronger alterna-
tive (World Energy Conference,
or some other) is proposed.
10 Debated at PRC. [Footnote is in the original.]
329.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Takeo Fukuda, Prime Minister of Japan
Vice President Walter Mondale
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Iichiro Hatoyama, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Advisor
Sunao Sonoda, Minister of State and Chief Cabinet Secretary
Thomas Shoesmith, Charge’ d’Affaires, American Embassy, Japan
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador
Keisuke Arita, Deputy Vice Foreign Minister
Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia
Toshio Yamazaki, Director General
Hisashi Owada, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
Koji Watanabe, Division Chief, First Section North American Affairs Bureau,
Foreign Ministry
Henry Owen
Michael Armacost, Senior Staff Member, NSC (Notetaker)
Robert Hormats, Senior Staff Member, NSC
meeting occurred in the Cabinet Room. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in
full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIV, Korea; Japan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Ryuichiro Yamazaki (Interpreter)
James Wickel (Interpreter)
William Sherman, Japan Country Director, Department of State
The President began by outlining to the large meeting the points
discussed in his preceding private talk with Prime Minister Fukuda.2
He underscored the importance the U.S. attaches to nonproliferation
and the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel, and noted that we are cur-
rently in the process of developing a national policy concerning energy
which would be made public in mid-April. He expressed his belief that
reprocessing spent fuel elements of light water reactors is not necessary
anywhere in the world. He noted that despite the billion dollar invest-
ment we have made in the Barnwell reprocessing facility in South Car-
olina, if we adopt the policy on reprocessing toward which he is cur-
rently inclined, that facility will not be used. He acknowledged that
Japan has a large stake in nuclear energy and has developed its own
pilot reprocessing plant at Tokai.3 He added that this issue—which will
be on the agenda at the Summit meeting in London—will require inter-
national agreement, and he hoped that we could get all nations to
forego the use of reprocessing capabilities. In this connection the Presi-
dent said he had given the Prime Minister the just-published report of
American scientists on the problems and potential of nuclear energy
use (Nuclear Power Issues and Choices). The President emphasized the
need for very close consultations among governments to develop
guidelines for restraint in this area which we would apply first to our-
selves and to all nations of the world, not just Japan.
The President recognized that there are many nations involved in
this problem. He stated that we have complete confidence in Japan’s
sincere desire to avoid proliferation, but, he said, we need a worldwide
agreement to control the proliferation of nuclear weapons capabilities.
In this connection he referred to difficult negotiations we have already
undertaken with Germany, Brazil, Pakistan, and France. In addition he
said that we are trying to control the development of a nuclear weap-
ons capability in Taiwan, the ROK, South Africa, and India. He noted
that Canada and Australia, both major producers of uranium, are eager
to control proliferation. He expressed again his belief that close consul-
tations between the U.S. and Japan were desirable, whatever his final
decision. He affirmed that we intend to avoid making our decisions in a
way which would be embarrassing to Japan, but he reiterated his desire
to promote a wide agreement concerning reprocessing capabilities that
would help avoid the spread of nuclear weapons.
2 Not found.
3 The implications of the Japanese reprocessing plant at Tokai are analyzed in an
NSC Paper, undated, attached to a memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, April 5; ibid.

Non-Proliferation
The Prime Minister then emphasized the special position of Japan
concerning nonproliferation. Japan, he said, is the only nation which
suffered a nuclear attack; the Government of Japan firmly maintains
the three non-nuclear principles, i.e. no manufacture, no use, no intro-
duction of nuclear weapons into Japan. His concerns about nonprolifer-
ation, Prime Minister Fukuda said, may even exceed those of President
Carter. At the same time, Japan’s energy situation compels it to explore
all possible alternatives to fossil fuels. When Japan ratified the Non-
proliferation Treaty, the GOJ promised the Diet and the Japanese
public that this would remove impediments to Japan’s acquisition of a
complete nuclear cycle, including reprocessing capabilities.4 Japan now
has a pilot reprocessing plant which is ready to begin “hot” tests this
summer. Inability to initiate these tests, Fukuda said, as a result of U.S.
decisions would constitute his “biggest political headache”.5 The Prime
Minister then posed the question: “Are other countries possessing re-
processing capabilities going to stop their activities in this field? What
about the communist countries?” If the others continue, and Japan is
prevented from doing so, he said this would constitute an example of
“unforgivable inequality”. Prime Minister Fukuda promised to pass
the report which the President had given him on to his experts, but he
added that urgent consultations at a governmental level between the
U.S. and Japan would be required. He asked, “Who is the highest and
most authoritative U.S. representative on this subject with whom we
should consult?”
The President indicated that the U.S. would try to obtain the agree-
ment of the UK, France, West Germany, and the USSR—as well as
Japan—to join us in stopping reprocessing. We think reprocessing is
wasteful and unnecessary. We have no authority over other nations, he
said, but we are thinking in terms of voluntarily complying with con-
straints on the use of reprocessing capabilities ourselves even in the ab-
4 In an undated memorandum, Vance told Carter that since Japan was “90 percent
dependent on outside energy sources,” it saw nuclear power “as its only realistic means
of reducing this dependence” in spite of its “historic sensitivity to the dangers of prolifer-
ation.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box
memorandum. In his memoirs, Brzezinski recalled that he had alerted Carter “to the ex-
treme sensitivity of the Japanese to any changes in our nuclear policy and the impact
these changes would have on U.S.-Japan relations.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp.
5 On February 25, the Embassy in Japan warned the Department of State that “the
Japanese believe that controls on fuel reprocessing which the U.S. may adopt could set
back their effort to make themselves less dependent on OPEC oil. It would be difficult to
overstate the strategic importance of this issue. In all probability, few developments
could contribute more to confirming Japan’s long-term orientation toward the U.S. than
our assured cooperation in its nuclear energy program.” (Telegram 2626 from Tokyo,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sence of an international agreement. The President emphasized that we
intend to assure reliable supplies of enriched uranium for light water
power reactors, and the United States is moving in the direction of im-
proving its ability to provide fuel to other nations. As for the USSR, he
indicated that he did not know what position they would take, but Sec-
retary Vance would be able to give a quick report after his visit to
Moscow.6 Dr. James Schlesinger, he said, would represent him in fur-
ther discussions with Japan on this subject.
The Prime Minister asked whether U.S. policy decisions in this
area would be announced on April 20.
The President indicated they would.
The Prime Minister then asked whether the U.S. expected to be in
touch with the British, French, Germans, and Japanese on this matter
before that time.
The President again responded affirmatively.
The Prime Minister indicated his intent to designate someone from
the Japanese side to represent his government in urgent consultations
with Schlesinger.
The President said “fine”.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
330.
Presidential Directive/NSC–81
Washington, March 24, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Administrator, Energy Research and Development Administration

Non-Proliferation
ALSO
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy
SUBJECT
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Policy (C)
It shall be a principal U.S. security objective to prevent the spread
of nuclear explosive—or near explosive—capabilities to countries
which do not now possess them. To this end U.S. non-proliferation
policy shall be directed at preventing the development and use of sen-
sitive nuclear power technologies which involve direct access to pluto-
nium, highly enriched uranium, or other weapons useable material in
non-nuclear weapons states, and at minimizing the global accumula-
tion of these materials.
1. Specifically, the U.S. will seek a pause among all nations in sensi-
tive nuclear developments in order to initiate and actively participate
in, an intensive international nuclear fuel cycle re-evaluation program
(IFCEP) whose technical aspects shall concern the development and
promotion of alternative, non-sensitive, nuclear fuel cycles. This pro-
gram will include both nuclear supplier and recipient nations.
2. For its part the United States Government will:
—Indefinitely defer the commercial reprocessing and recycle of
plutonium in the U.S.
—Restructure the U.S. breeder reactor program so as to emphasize
alternative designs to the plutonium breeder, and to meet a later date
for possible commercialization. As a first step the need for the current
prototype reactor, the Clinch River project, will be reassessed.
—Redirect the funding of U.S. nuclear research and development
programs so as to concentrate on the development of alternative
nuclear fuel cycles which do not involve access to weapons useable
materials.
—Provide incentives, in the area of nuclear fuel assurances and
spent fuel storage, to encourage the participation of other nations in
the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program. Detailed studies of
these programs shall be carried out by the NSC Ad Hoc Group estab-
lished herein, and submitted to me as directed in the accompanying
memorandum.
—Initiate a program of assistance to other nations in the develop-
ment of non-nuclear means of meeting energy needs.
—Increase production capacity for nuclear fuels.
3. It shall also be U.S. policy to strengthen the existing non-
proliferation regime: by encouraging the widest possible adherence to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and to comprehensive international safe-
guards; by strengthening and improving the IAEA; and by providing
stronger sanctions against the violation of nuclear agreements. There-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
fore the U.S. will announce its intention to terminate nuclear coopera-
tion with any non-nuclear weapons state that hereafter
—detonates or demonstrably acquires a nuclear explosive device;
or
—terminates or materially violates international safeguards or any
guarantees it has given to the United States.
4. In order to implement these policies to perform the necessary
studies, and to coordinate departmental activities in the non-
proliferation field, I hereby establish an NSC Ad Hoc Group, to be
chaired by the Department of State, and to include the Presidential As-
sistant for Energy. This group shall establish task forces, chaired by the
appropriate agencies, to perform, among others, the tasks detailed in
the accompanying memorandum.
Jimmy Carter
Attachment
Tasks for the NSC Ad Hoc Group2
Washington, undated
The NSC Ad Hoc Group, established in PD–8, is directed to:
—prepare and submit by March 31 a comprehensive list of all ac-
tivities, facilities and technologies related to nuclear power, which in-
volve direct access to weapons useable materials;
—prepare and submit by April 1, a review of the Fiscal 1978
budget with appropriate recommendations to implement the policies
set forth in the accompanying Presidential Directive;
—prepare and submit by April 5, proposed nuclear export pol-
icies, including: a summary of current applications for export of Highly
Enriched Uranium and plutonium; criteria which should be applied to
nuclear exports at the licensing stage; a list of criteria and conditions
which should be required for new and amended agreements for coop-
eration, and necessary revisions in existing agreements; explicit options
covering U.S. policies on consent to retransfer, reprocess, reexport and
reuse U.S.-supplied fuels, Highly Enriched Uranium, plutonium, and
materials irradiated in U.S.-supplied facilities; and legislative pro-
posals to implement these recommendations;
—prepare and submit by May 1, a detailed study of measures the
U.S. might take so as to be able to offer nuclear fuel assurances to na-
2 Secret.

Non-Proliferation
tions participating in the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program,
including: rigorous revised estimates of future nuclear energy demand;
measures to expand U.S. enrichment capacity; analysis and justification
of U.S. stockpile programs; recommendations for appropriate terms
and conditions for future toll enrichment contracts; assessments of the
benefits of declaring an open season on enrichment contracts; explora-
tion of international undertakings and agreements; and other short and
long-term options for providing nuclear fuel assurances and collabo-
rating with other suppliers;
—prepare and submit by May 1, a thorough study of measures the
U.S. might take concerning nuclear fuel storage including: measures to
expand U.S. spent fuel storage and transportation capacity; proposals
for meeting the storage needs of those participating in the International
Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program; analysis of the advantages and disad-
vantages of international spent fuel storage (but not plutonium storage
which the U.S. shall discourage and measures to accelerate the devel-
opment, demonstration and licensing of long-term spent fuel storage,
both retrievable and terminal.
—prepare and submit by May 1, a program for promoting the de-
velopment of non-nuclear energy alternatives and for assisting other
nations with non-nuclear means to meet their energy needs.
Jimmy Carter
331.
Telegram From the Department of State to the White House1
67973. For Dr Z Brzezinski only. Following tel sent Action Bonn,
Brasilia, Brussels, Berlin, The Hague, Islamabad, London, Moscow,
New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Prague, Rome, Stockholm, Tehran, Tokyo,
Warsaw, Info NATO, EC Brussels, IAEA Vienna, USUN New York,
USDel Secretary from State March 27:
Quote Secret State 67973 Tosec 30017. Eyes only for the Ambas-
sador; Moscow for Secretary Vance. Subject: Presidential Nuclear
Policy Statement.
that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. In the very near future, the President intends to announce cer-
tain policy decisions concerning nuclear non-proliferation.
2. You should approach host government at high level—Foreign
Minister, Prime Minister, or equivalent—and advise host government
in strictest confidence of forthcoming Presidential statement, indicating
that U.S. is consulting only small number of important states in ad-
vance. You should explain that we envisage announcement will pre-
sent U.S. domestic policy decisions, within context of strong U.S. de-
sire to develop effective international arrangements to meet global
energy needs, while minimizing risk of spread of nuclear explosive
capabilities.
3. For your use in briefing host government, you should use the
following talking points, which may be left behind as a Non-Paper.
Begin text:
(A) The United States is mindful of global energy needs, and the
desire of individual countries to gain a secure source of energy supply.
At the same time, the U.S. is deeply concerned about the consequences
for all nations of a further spread of nuclear explosive capability. It be-
lieves that these risks would be vastly increased by the further spread
of sensitive nuclear technologies. The United States views sensitive
technologies and facilities as those which involve direct access to pluto-
nium, highly enriched uranium, or other weapons useable material.
(B) The United States has made a thorough review of nuclear fuel
cycles, bearing in mind all relevant factors. It has concluded that the
overriding dangers of proliferation and direct implications for peace
and security—as well as strong scientific and economic evidence—mil-
itate for a major change in U.S. domestic nuclear energy policies and
programs.
(C) Accordingly, the United States has reached the following do-
mestic decisions which will be announced in the very near future. The
United States will:
(I) Indefinitely defer the commercial reprocessing and recycling of
plutonium in the U.S.;
(II) Restructure the U.S. breeder reactor program to emphasize de-
signs other than the plutonium breeder, and to defer date for possible
commercialization;
(III) Redirect funding of U.S. nuclear research and development
programs, to concentrate on development of alternative nuclear fuel
cycles which do not involve access to weapons useable materials; and
(IV) Increase U.S. production capacity for nuclear fuels.
(D) These U.S. domestic decisions have implications for other na-
tions. Accordingly, the United States wishes to consult closely with a
limited number of interested nations on the international implications
of its domestic decisions, and on the best way for it to proceed in con-

Non-Proliferation
cert with these other nations to promote the objective of developing ef-
fective international arrangements to meet global energy needs and
minimize the risk of proliferation.
(E) The United States would like to discuss a wide range of interna-
tional approaches and frameworks, that will permit all nations to
achieve their energy objectives while reducing the likelihood of a fur-
ther spread of nuclear weapons. Among other things, it wishes to ex-
plore the possibilities of an international nuclear fuel-cycle evaluation
program, aimed at exploring (I) alternative, non-sensitive fuel cycles;
(II) a variety of international and U.S. measures to assure access by all
nations to nuclear fuel supplies and spent fuel storage.
(F)
The
United
States
is
committed
to
strengthening
the
non-proliferation regime: by encouraging the widest possible adher-
ence to the NPT and to comprehensive international safeguards; by
strengthening and improving the IAEA; and by enforcing sanctions
against the violation of nuclear agreements with the U.S.
(G) The United States seeks comments and suggestions on this ap-
proach, as part of developing a multilateral framework to resolve
issues raised above. Initial comments and questions would be welcome
in advance of announcement of U.S. domestic nuclear policies and pro-
grams. These comments and questions may be given to the U.S. Am-
bassador for referral to Washington, or directly to the State Department
through embassies in Washington. We would welcome receiving initial
comments and questions by April 1.
(H) Following announcement of U.S. domestic programs, the
United States will continue the closest possible consultations with other
governments, seeking ways to meet in an international framework the
various problems and issues involved. End text.
4. For Brasilia and Islamabad. On an urgent basis the Department
would value advice you may have to offer in connection with briefing
host government. Christopher. Unquote.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
332.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Middle East, Arms Control
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary Arthur
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M.
Hartman
Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. Leslie Gelb
Notetaker—Name Unknown
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
NON-PROLIFERATION
Gromyko suggested that the subject of non-proliferation required
some discussion.
The Secretary said he would be happy to start. As he had indicated
the other day, the question of non-proliferation was a matter of major
concern for our government, for the Carter Administration.2 As a con-
sequence of the priority we attached to this issue, we had begun a study
immediately upon taking office. That study was about to be completed.
We would be prepared to discuss such things as international fuel as-
surance arrangements, international spent fuel storage and strength-
ening IAEA safeguard arrangements. As a result of the study, we had
come to the following conclusions, which would be announced very
shortly: First, we would indefinitely defer commercial fuel reproc-
proved in draft by Hyland. The meeting took place at the Kremlin. The memorandum of
conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Docu-
ment 20.
2 On March 28, Vance told Brezhnev and Gromyko that Carter “felt that we must be
bold and vigorous in achieving control over nuclear weapons,” that “in the very near fu-
ture we would announce certain policy decisions concerning nuclear non-proliferation,”
and that the United States “shared Soviet concern about the dangers of proliferation of
nuclear weapons, and we believed that the actions which we are about to take would con-
stitute a major step forward toward this end.” The memorandum of conversation is

Non-Proliferation
essing; Secondly, we intended to restructure our breeder reactor pro-
gram in such a way as to stress designs other than plutonium-related;
Third, we would redirect the funding of nuclear research and develop-
ment programs in such a way as to concentrate on alternative nuclear
fuel cycles that would not involve materials that could be used for
weapons purposes; Fourth, we planned to increase US production of
nuclear fuels. We believed that these steps will be constructive and that
they should be discussed in international fora, to see whether interna-
tional action could be taken to strengthen control on sensitive tech-
nology with the objective of stopping further proliferation. That in brief
was where we stood today. We would, of course, continue to urge
those who had not signed the NPT to sign and ratify the treaty in view
of its great importance. We would continue to encourage widest pos-
sible use and adherence to the treaty and urge strengthening and im-
proving safeguards for enforcing sanctions against violators of such a
treaty.
Gromyko said that he had listened to the Secretary’s communica-
tion on this issue with interest, and so had his colleagues. Soviet views
on this issue were as follows: the task of preventing nuclear war de-
manded most insistently that insuperable obstacles be placed in the
path of the spread of nuclear weapons. Above all, this was the task of
making the NPT, already in effect, truly all-embracing and universal. It
was well-known fact that countries such as the Peoples Republic of
China and France were outside the treaty; so were a significant number
of other countries. The Secretary knew this well and also surely knew
that there were some countries that were very close to starting the
building of their own nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union was pre-
pared, together with the United States, to continue efforts aimed at in-
suring that these and all other states so far outside the treaty become
parties to the treaty. Why could not our two countries think of some
new forms of influencing them, perhaps even on a trilateral basis (i.e.,
the US, the USSR, and UK) or on a bilateral basis only, with the Soviet
and US governments approaching the governments of non-participating
countries to speed up adherence to the treaty. Speaking quite frankly,
Gromyko would say that the Soviet side had not yet observed any ener-
getic measures on the part of the United States to exert its influence in
the right direction. It was quite true that occasionally some statements
were made urging adherence, but this was only a small part of what
could be done. He would not say that the United States had acted
wholeheartedly in this matter so far. The danger remained that non-
nuclear countries which received nuclear materials from other coun-
tries would utilize such materials for purposes of weapons develop-
ment. The Soviet Union was resolved to make sure that international
cooperation in this field and in the field of peaceful nuclear explosions
not become another channel for nuclear weapons proliferation. He was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
convinced that this was not a commercial question, but a major ques-
tion of policy.
By way of example, Gromyko thought it would be appropriate to
mention the current nuclear deliveries by the FRG to Brazil and by
France to Pakistan, deliveries that could not but give rise to concern. In
the Soviet view, what was needed was effective nuclear control over
any receiving country. The Soviet Union had advocated and now advo-
cates all-embracing improvement of the system of control in this field,
and was prepared to cooperate with the United States and others.
The Secretary interrupted to say he appreciated hearing this from
Gromyko. As Gromyko would know, we had worked with Brazil, Ger-
many, France and Pakistan to see to it that sensitive materials and in-
formation transfers through creating processing plants not be brought
to fruition, and that other measures be taken to guarantee fuel supply
so as to eliminate the danger in this area.
Gromyko said it would be hard for the Soviets to believe that the
United States was not able to bring greater pressure to bear on Brazil in
these matters. Had the Brazilian leaders really come to the conclusion
that they could not live without nuclear weapons? He thought the Bra-
zilians must be fully aware of the fact that their action might set off a
chain of events, thereby worsening the situation. Of course, he knew
that some positive statements were being made in the US from time to
time, say every six months or so, but it seemed to him that the United
States was not fully using its options to bring pressure to bear. Perhaps
the new Administration would need some time before it could do more
in this respect.
The Secretary said he disagreed with the Minister. His deputy had
gone to Brazil to discuss this issue.3 We had asked Brazilian leaders to
stop their arrangement with Germany and find an alternate solution.
We had told them we would guarantee fuel supply. As a result of this
maximum pressure, Brazilian-US relations had become quite strained.
It was difficult to see how we could have done more.
Gromyko said that, of course, the Secretary was a better judge of
what could be done. He would suggest that in addition to the contacts
we had on this subject within the framework of international organiza-
tions, it would be useful to hold Soviet-American consultations on the
whole complex of the problem of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
It was true that we had not had too much contact in this respect. Some
meetings were held a long time ago and at infrequent intervals. In the
course of such consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States
could agree on joint action in the direction of improving the already op-
3 See Document 404.

Non-Proliferation
erating London understanding between the exporting countries, in
which the Soviet Union, the United States and others were active. In the
course of such consultations we could also review the effectiveness of
IAEA functions, and discuss the question of sanctions. We had a great
deal to do.
The Secretary said that he would welcome that.
Gromyko said that was very good. He would ask that both sides
specifically reflect on when they could consult on setting a specific
schedule.
The Secretary agreed to do that.
Gromyko said he wanted the US Government and President Carter
to know that the Soviet Union attached signal importance to the entire
issue of non-proliferation. The Soviet leadership liked it when the Pres-
ident, or the Secretary, or others, stressed the importance of this issue in
the view of the United States.
The Secretary said that was very good. The President will be very
pleased to hear of this Soviet position.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
333.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
5585. Department please pass Moscow for Secretary Vance. Sub-
ject: Presidential Nuclear Policy Statement. Ref: (A) State 67973;2
Begin summary: After carefully reviewing talking points outlining
substance of forthcoming presidential statement on nuclear policy and
making several comments and inquiries regarding specific points,
Chancellor Schmidt said outline would be studied immediately and
cret; Immediate; Nodis.
2 See Document 331.
credibility,” the United States should “expedite the issuance” of enriched uranium li-
censes to the FRG “in all cases where such action would not run directly contrary to our
broader non-proliferation policy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
comments would be given as soon as possible, in first instance orally to
Secretary Vance when he visits Bonn March 314 however, Schmidt un-
derlined in serious tone that he felt time limit of April 1 for comments
on subject of such major significance to his country and to world as a
whole was quite inadequate. Somewhat bitterly, he questioned
whether this procedure reflected the nature of genuine consultations
which should take place between allies. End summary.
1. Chancellor Schmidt received me March 29 for what developed
into one and one-half conversation. Subject matters concerned forth-
coming presidential statement on nuclear policy, FRG-Brazil nuclear
deal, financial aid to Portugal and SOFO. (Latter three subjects will
be reported Septels).5 Chancellor was accompanied by Chancellery
Deputy Assistant Secretary Loeck; I was alone.
2. After listening to my presentation regarding presidential state-
ment on nuclear policy and carefully reading Non-Paper which I left
with him containing talking points, Chancellor commented that, at first
glance, he felt US position as outlined was “not free from in-built intel-
lectual conflict.” In this connection, he noted point (F) in talking points
where it is said that US is committed to encouraging widest possible
adherence to the NPT. He had no quarrel with this thought and indeed
supported it strongly; however, Chancellor felt it would be more accu-
rate if reference had been made to an “amended NPT,” since it seemed
clear that US was not satisfied with NPT as it presently exists. Indeed, if
NPT were to be re-negotiated, one could think of a number of changes
which should be made in it based on experience of last ten years. Chan-
cellor recalled his conversation in Bonn with Vice President Mondale in
which he had stressed that FRG will adhere to NPT and to any other
treaty to which it is a party;6 moreover, FRG will be ready to negotiate
additional agreements in field of non-proliferation which would con-
tribute to increased controls.
3. In present circumstances, however, Chancellor saw a discrep-
ancy between US calling for wider adherence to NPT and our stand
with regard to provision of nuclear technology to other states, as re-
flected in our attitude toward FRG-Brazil agreement. Here, he referred
to Article IV of NPT providing for non-discrimination. I remarked that
4 During their March 31 meeting, Schmidt handed Vance a Non-Paper detailing his
government’s comments. (Tosec 30162/71504; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Global Issues, Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 43, Proliferation: Foreign
discussions of the FRG-Brazil nuclear deal, aid to Portugal, and the U.S. Army’s Special
Operations Field Office (SOFO) in Berlin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P850050–2334)

Non-Proliferation
we did not believe that Article IV constituted an obligation for a state to
transfer sensitive nuclear technology to a state not possessing it. Chan-
cellor rejoined that this could be our interpretation and could be valid
for US, but he did not see that, on other hand, Article IV constituted an
obligation on the FRG to refrain from transferring such technology.
4. Chancellor inquired as to meaning of phrase “indefinitely defer”
(para B.1 of talking points) in reference to commercial reprocessing of
plutonium. He wondered if this meant that a firm decision had been
taken to cancel all plans for commercial reprocessing; I said I did not
believe this was the case and that the phrase should be taken as it
stands, i.e., that further work on commercial reprocessing installations
would be deferred for the indefinite future. Chancellor inquired if
US had military reprocessing plants in operation and I responded
affirmatively.
5. Chancellor noted wording in para F of talking points regarding
sanctions against the violation of nuclear agreements with the US and
inquired whether at the present time the US considered that any states
with nuclear agreements with the US are in violation of those agree-
ments. I replied that I did not believe that this was the case and that the
wording was intended to apply to possible future events.
6. In this connection, the Chancellor referred to “reluctance” of US
to deliver highly enriched uranium to EURATOM7 and inquired
whether this should be taken as a deliberate signal and a foresha-
dowing of the type of sanctions which the US would take against other
states which might not agree with US views on nuclear policy. I said
this was not the case and that the delay in approval of shipments of
highly enriched uranium has been caused by bureaucratic require-
ments. (In this connection, see Reftel (B).)
7. Chancellor focussed on date of April 1 (para G of talking points)
by which US would wish to receive comments and noted that this was
extremely short timeframe in which to comment meaningfully on
matter of such importance to FRG and to world as a whole. He said
Defense Council (NRDC) to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) requesting that
exports of Highly Enriched Uranium for use in FRG nuclear reactors be denied. The
NRDC claimed that since the FRG had refused to commit to “not export these technol-
ogies and ‘because the FRG has shown a willingness to export sensitive nuclear technol-
ogies,’ (apparently a reference to FRG-Brazilian cooperation), development of these re-
actor types by the FRG will inevitably lead to their spread to other countries.” The NRDC
also cited “over a dozen alleged inadequacies in EURATOM safeguards system, in-
cluding absence of various types of U.S. back-up safeguard rights, lack of physical secu-
rity requirements, and inadequate U.S. knowledge of operation and inability to obtain in-
formation from EURATOM system.” Despite the petition, the Department of State
reported that it expected that the export application, currently “under review within ex-
ecutive branch,” would “shortly be forwarded to the NRC with recommendation for is-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
that, obviously, FRG would wish to give most serious consideration to
statement of such “global strategic significance” but that it was clearly
impossible to provide considered views by April 1. At this point, Chan-
cellor queried whether Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan had been in-
formed of forthcoming Presidential statement on a matter of such im-
portance to Japan during his recent visit to the United States. I said I did
not know but that Japanese Government, together with small number
of other governments, was being informed at present time of proposed
statement.
8. Chancellor noted Secretary Vance would be visiting Bonn March
31 and that preliminary FRG views could be conveyed to him orally at
that time. However, and here Chancellor spoke in emphatic and se-
rious tones, he wished to emphasize his personal view that, if indeed
President’s statement is to be issued as soon as April 3 or 4, he would
find it difficult to understand, since he did not feel that provision of
such a limited time for consideration of a question of this magnitude
was really compatible with the type of consultative procedures which
should obtain between close allies.
9. Deputy Assistant Secretary Loeck, who escorted me out of chan-
cellery after conversation with Schmidt, noted implications of Presi-
dential statement for FRG’s program to develop reprocessing capa-
bility. He said FRG feels latter is essential to accomplishment of FRG’s
nuclear energy program; in light of this, Loeck said, he anticipated that
President’s proposed statement would be seen as having extremely se-
rious impact on FRG’s situation.
Stoessel

Non-Proliferation
334.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Comments on Jim Schlesinger’s Memorandum of March 31 Regarding PD No. 8
I have no fundamental problems with Jim Schlesinger’s thoughtful
comments (Tab A). More specifically:
1. Regarding constraints on non-nuclear weapons states, it seems
to me that the distinction between nuclear weapons states and
non-nuclear weapons states is an important fact; in some circumstances
this fact should be treated differently when it involves in one case an
ally and in another case a non-ally, and our diplomacy should reflect
this additional distinction.
2. With respect to the phrase “demonstrably acquires a nuclear ex-
plosive device,” [2 lines not declassified] Thus I believe you retain the
needed flexibility, though otherwise Jim’s point is well taken.
3. Unless I am profoundly mistaken, I think that the first interpre-
tation given by Jim to the phrase “emphasize alternative designs to the
plutonium breeder” is correct.
4. I share Jim’s concern that we do not overdo our efforts given our
interest in good trilateral relations. I believe your present efforts at con-
sultations take that consideration into account. The question which is
really at issue here is one on which the government is deeply divided:
should the fuel cycle evaluation program include reprocessing, or just
alternatives to it? The first section of the attached summary of the PRC
meeting on proliferation (Tab B)2 will give you some feeling for the dif-
ferent positions.
[1]. Secret. Carter initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 See Document 328.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Tab A
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Schlesinger) to
President Carter3
Washington, March 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Problems Raised by P.D. No. 8
In accordance with your suggestion,4 I outline below the four
problems that I see created by the precise wording of P.D. No. 8.
1. The all-inclusive constraint on non-nuclear weapons states. The P.D.
imposes a definitive barrier between the nuclear weapons and non-
nuclear weapons states in terms of the handling of nuclear power tech-
nologies. Some non-nuclear weapons states, notably Germany and
Japan, will regard this barrier as highly discriminatory. Both at the time
they were urged to ratify the NPT and in bilateral negotiations both
countries were assured that they would not be subjected to discrimina-
tion by remaining in the status of non-nuclear weapons states. (It has
been the continuing desire of the United States Government to avoid
creating any incentive to become a nuclear weapons state.) Reproc-
essing facilities in Germany, Japan, and also Belgium and Italy were es-
tablished under these understandings. These nations must be per-
suaded to join with the United States in the effort directed toward the
control of weapons-useable material. But they will not accept being
treated as in the same category as Pakistan, Iran, or Brazil. To avoid un-
productive controversy and to provide the proper incentives for collab-
oration, the line of distinction will have to be drawn someplace other
than the non-nuclear weapons states.5
2. Termination of nuclear cooperation. The difficulty in the phrase
“demonstrably acquires a nuclear explosive device” [2½ lines not declas-
sified] The political difficulties are obvious. Consequently, you may de-
sire to put more flexibility in your policy position before going public.6
3. The U.S. breeder program. If the phrase “emphasize alternative de-
signs to the plutonium breeder” implies that new money and the high
growth rates will go to alternative designs, that is readily accom-
3 Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig—
Comment. J.”
4 Not found.
5 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “I agree.”
6 Carter underlined the words “before going public” and wrote “not going public
with this” in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.

Non-Proliferation
plished. If, however, it were to imply that aggregate spending on and
program size of the alternatives will be larger than for the LMFBR pro-
gram, it would imply either the dismantling of the LMFBR program or
waste in the other programs or both. We will need, I believe, to main-
tain an adequate base program for the LMFBR. We should avoid
plowing ahead with commercialization. But we must continue our
R&D on the LMFBR because in the 21st Century it may be an essential
fallback—if none of the other energy alternatives materialize. We
cannot afford, as the Ford Foundation study emphasizes,7 simply to
back away from R&D on the LMFBR. We can defer commercialization,
but it will remain an essential fallback option.8
4. The larger diplomatic problem embodied in the P.D. No. 8 is one
requiring your careful analysis, to assure that substantive benefits ex-
ceed diplomatic costs. Briefly other nations will be reluctant to follow
us on reprocessing and even more reluctant to follow our lead on de-
fering the breeder. The starker (and purer) our diplomatic position on
these matters, the less likely is it that we shall gain the necessary acqui-
escence of the Germans and Japanese, let alone the French. But ulti-
mately we must have the collaboration of the other supplier countries.
Thus, the question for your determination is the amount of diplomatic
capital that you wish to expend in staking out a position which has the
virtue of logical clarity but has the deficiency of forfeiting the necessary
foreign support.9
7 Not found.
8 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “I agree.”
9 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “I agree.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
335.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The Future of the London Suppliers Group
I am very concerned at the evolution of the proposal to expand the
London Suppliers Group to include “threshold” states, from the status
of a suggestion we were willing to study in order to make progress in
the German-Brazilian talks, to a proposal whose implementation we
are now apparently studying.2
In my view, there are several compelling reasons for not ex-
panding the London Group, to wit:
—The London Suppliers Group has been a powerful and effective
instrument for achieving concerted supplier policies. It is the only such
instrument available.
—Brazil may have two reasons for wanting entrance: status and
the ability to disrupt the suppliers club through an expanding member-
ship of recipients (if Brazil is admitted, many other nations will de-
mand equal treatment). Thus their motive might be not only to become
one of the big guys, but perhaps to destroy the only really effective
anti-proliferation forum in the process.
—We clearly have to deal with the growing antagonism among the
non-supplier LDCs toward the ability of the suppliers to set policy both
in the London Group and in the IAEA. However my understanding
was that this was precisely the function we were envisaging for the
Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program which would be open to any nation
which wished to join.
—However, if both the London Group and the Fuel Cycle Evalu-
ation are open to recipients, we are left with no forum in which the sup-
pliers can agree on tough anti-proliferation policies.
—Expanding the Suppliers Group would be an enormous price to
pay for . . . what? We have no indication so far that Brazilians would
give up the sensitive parts of the FRG deal as the quid pro quo for ad-
mittance. Even if they were to accept this condition, however, this plan
2 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
seems like short sighted policy. What are we going to offer to the next
nation—Pakistan and the others which will follow—which will already
be members because of the expansion.
—In an expanded group the Soviet Union would gain direct access
to Western supplier relations with Western consumers. It could be ex-
pected to take a hard line—and then sit back and watch us try to pick
up the pieces with Brazil and others.
I believe that this is a very important decision, and one which has
not been seriously enough studied. I note that it has been discussed
with several parties, including the Russians. My feeling is that we
should make clear to the Germans and to others who may ask, that the
U.S. position is that the expansion is a proposal—one among several—
that we are willing to consider and to study, but no more. Anything be-
yond this I believe would require the President’s direct approval. I
would welcome your thoughts on this matter.
Zbigniew Brzezinski3
3 Brzezinski signed the memorandum “Zbig.”
336.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 2, 1977
SUBJECT
Proliferation—Follow-on to PD–8
As a result of the Presidential Decision you signed last week, sev-
eral tasks were immediately assigned to the follow-on group. The first
paper is attached. A second decision paper addressing the Japanese
problem is also ready at this time.2 Negotiations with the Japanese
begin next Tuesday. Three more short papers, dealing with different
aspects of U.S. nuclear export policies, will be ready within a few days.
[1]. Confidential. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig—
What do we have in reprocessing capacity now. For military or other purpose? J.”
Papers, Energy Department, Japan, 1977–1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
In PD–8, you build U.S. policy around the central concept that the
U.S. will attempt to discourage the further development and use of
“sensitive nuclear power technologies which involve direct access
to weapons useable materials.” The first task is therefore to define ex-
actly what we will classify as “sensitive,” and in so doing, to achieve
government-wide agreement on this central issue. Since these defini-
tions will form the conceptual bedrock of our policy, they do require
your approval. One issue—concerning technologies which appear to
lie on the boarderline—is flagged for your special attention (Part II).
Part III of the paper deals with important political questions, and
with the crucial issue on which the bureaucracy is still deeply divided,
of whether our evaluation program will include reprocessing, or just al-
ternatives to it, and more specifically, what the U.S. attitude should be
toward existing reprocessing plants.
The attached paper (much of which I do not understand) was ap-
proved by an interagency group, including Jim Schlesinger.
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the Interagency Group on Proliferation3
Washington, undated
ACTIVITIES, FACILITIES AND TECHNOLOGIES INVOLVING
DIRECT ACCESS TO WEAPONS USEABLE MATERIAL
I. Definition of Weapons-Useable Materials
Weapons useable materials are:
—uranium which is enriched in the isotope 235 to 20% or greater
(HEU), or uranium-233 (produced by irradiation of thorium).
—plutonium.
These materials must be in either metal or oxide forms in order to be
directly useable in weapons: we will call these forms Category A.
Uranium 235 and 233 and plutonium may be present in various
chemical and physical forms short of pure oxide or metal: conversion of
these forms to pure oxide or metal presents differing difficulties in
terms of complexity of chemical operations, time required, and amount
of material required. They can be categorized as follows:
3 Confidential.

Non-Proliferation
Category B: Material requiring relatively simple chemical operation
—HEU in UF6 form (i.e. the output of enrichment plants).
—HEU oxide or metal in unirradiated fuel elements.
—HEU and/or Pu in nitrate form (i.e. the output of reprocessing
plants).
Category C:4 Material requiring more complex chemical operation
—unseparated U-Pu nitrates (e.g. from “coprocessed” LWR fuel).
—mixed oxide (U-Pu) fuel for LWRs (Pu less than 20%).
Category D: Material involving complex chemical operation, in presence
of high radioactivity levels, or involving isotopic separation (decreasing order
of difficulty)
—low enriched or natural uranium.
—all irradiated fuel.
—partially coprocessed fuel (i.e. some fission products removed).
II. Technologies/Facilities
The major nuclear fuel cycles are presented in Table I, and identi-
fied by their utilization or production of the various categories of mate-
rial. The Table reveals much useful information concerning prolifera-
tion. For example, it indicates that only one strictly non-sensitive fuel
cycle now exists: the heavy water natural uranium cycle (HWR) with-
out reprocessing. It should be noted however, that the HWR has signifi-
cant non-proliferation problems. Its core uses many more, smaller indi-
vidual (and therefore harder to keep track of) fuel rods than an LWR,
and it is reloaded continuously, without shutting down the reactor. On
the other hand, an LWR must be shut down to be reloaded, and this is
only done twice a year, after which it is sealed. The HWR is also capable
of producing high quality weapons grade plutonium without inter-
fering with its power production. It was a research version of this re-
actor which produced the material for the Indian explosion.
The other attractive fuel cycle from the proliferation viewpoint is
the LWR without recycle. A large majority of nuclear power programs
are based on this reactor (though not on this fuel cycle). The principle
drawback of the LWR cycle, is of course that it requires—somewhere—
an enrichment capability. All known enrichment processes produce a
Category B product, except laser isotope separation which produces
Category A.
The decisions which arise from these technical analyses relate to
which technologies will be included in our international program, and
4 There is some controversy over whether Categories B and C are really different.
The answer is not yet known. You should note that they may turn out to be essentially
one category. However the gap between C and D is very large. [Footnote is in the
original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
which we regard as too sensitive, and therefore beyond the pale. The
major problem on which agencies now disagree, is whether coproc-
essing should be encouraged, for example at Tokai. NRC feels that co-
processing is no better in the long run than reprocessing, ACDA dis-
agrees. Other agencies are unsure. To a lesser degree, this same
confusion holds for partial coprocessing. This issue is addressed in the
accompanying paper on Tokai. It does not require a Presidential deci-
sion at this time, but any guidance you might care to offer would be
valuable.
COMMENTS:
III. Political Aspects
To be effective, the evaluation program needs to develop and
demonstrate:
1. technical alternatives which will maximize physical barriers to
the direct accessibility of weapons-useable materials, e.g., LWRs with
long-term spent fuel storage instead of reprocessing, or cycles using
fuel “spiked” with highly radioactive material from partial coprocessing.
2. technical/political alternatives which will isolate sensitive tech-
nologies, facilities and materials under effective institutional arrange-
ments, e.g., multinational centers, or supplier monopolies on sensitive
facilities.
3. institutional arrangements by which positive results of the pro-
gram could be implemented as widely as possible.
The success of the evaluation program will depend, in large part,
on a) its acceptability to the other industrialized countries and b) the
degree to which it can be reconciled with existing programs relating to
breeder development and associated reprocessing. In this regard, it
should be noted that the British are in the process of scaling up their
Windscale reprocessing facility, the French have a commercial reproc-
essing plant in operation with specific plans to increase capacity, the
Japanese have built their Tokai pilot reprocessing plant and are ready
to begin testing it, and the FRG has a pilot reprocessing plant in opera-
tion and appears firmly committed to another much larger facility.
Table II lists existing or planned foreign reprocessing facilities. All
of these nations also have avowed interests in proceeding with the
breeder. In some cases, the U.S. does not have substantial leverage over
their activities. Our objective is to try to induce them to actively partici-
pate in the evaluation program and to reorient their current programs.
Given this situation, we could seek the cooperation of France, the
UK, and the FRG through an evaluation framework which would in-
clude optimizing safeguards and related controls that might be applied

Non-Proliferation
to reprocessing and related plutonium handling facilities. Results
of such work would prove valuable should we not be successful in
moving the world away from a plutonium economy.
Alternatively we could adopt an approach which would leave ex-
isting facilities outside the evaluation framework. At the same time, in
either case, the U.S. could attempt to wean away British and French re-
processing clients through aggressive aid with spent fuel storage, and
through selective use of the U.S. veto over reprocessing of U.S.-origin
fuel.
If we adopt a more confrontational position, such as seeking to actively
discourage operation of all foreign facilities, there is significant risk that key
allies will go forward in spite of our efforts, that we will undercut our attempts
to move others away from a plutonium economy, and that we will be isolated in
the process from both industrialized and developing countries.
ISSUE: General U.S. stance toward existing reprocessing facilities:
Include in the evaluation program—work to improve safeguards
Neutral stance—existing plants outside the evaluation program
Actively discourage reprocessing wherever it exists
Other
COMMENTS:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
337.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Schlesinger) to
President Carter1
Washington, April 7, 1977
SUBJECT
BREEDER REVIEW REPORT
In late February, I directed the Acting Administrator of the Energy
Research and Development Administration (ERDA)2 to establish a
Steering Committee to review the Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor
(LMFBR) program with particular emphasis on the role of the Clinch
River Breeder Reactor Project (CRBR) in the program. The Steering
Committee was made up of knowledgeable opponents and proponents
of the breeder reactor program. The work of the Committee has been
completed and the Acting Administrator has provided me with his
judgements, conclusions and recommended courses of action.
The Committee reached a consensus conclusion3 that the U.S.
should:
—Preserve the fission option for the long term;
—Research reactor technologies consistent with our nonprolifera-
tion objectives;
—Recognize there is no totally proliferation-proof fission option.
I regard these conclusions as sound foundations of our policy on
advanced nuclear technologies and they reinforce the role of nuclear
power in providing portions of our future energy needs.
The Committee’s disagreements centered around the balancing of
energy risks and proliferation benefits of pursuing alternative systems.
The balancing of these risks and benefits is at the heart of national
policy on the breeder program, and the Committee’s disagreements il-
luminated the central issues. The role of the CRBR is primarily a func-
tion of the larger risk-benefit issue of the breeder.
nuclear/files/nuc_77060801a_23.pdf)
2 Not found.
3 After the word “conclusion,” Schlesinger wrote “*” and at the bottom of the page
wrote “* a delightful surprise since Committee included such [illegible] as Thomas
Cochran and Russell Train.”

Non-Proliferation
However, the risks of pursuing alternative systems depend almost
entirely on assumptions, of which there are many varying views,
regarding:
—the size of the U.S. uranium resource;
—the installed nuclear capacity in 2000;
—the rate of electricity demand growth after 2000.
With an estimate of 400,000 megawatts of installed nuclear ca-
pacity by about the year 2000, which is consistent with our national en-
ergy policy, it can be concluded that:
—if uranium resources are only 1.8 million tons, then the existing
LMFBR program is needed to sustain the fission option; or
—if uranium resources are 3.7 million tons, and if electricity de-
occur shortly after the turn of the century; or
—if uranium resources are 3.7 million tons, and if electricity de-
delay breeder introduction until about 2010.
Consistent with our nonproliferation objectives, we should ac-
tively pursue research and development on advanced reactor concepts,
fuels and systems, and to the extent possible, with other nations. The
potential benefits could lead to:
—significant reduction in inventories of plutonium;
—extension of the uranium resource base (as shown in the attach-
ment);4
—limiting the accessibility of weapons materials through the use
of denatured fuel cycles (which require isotopic separation of the mate-
rial rather than the easier chemical separation).
During the next 1–2 years while these R&D programs are un-
derway, the construction of the CRBR should be deferred but the de-
sign and licensing processes should continue. This approach:
—is consistent with our new nonproliferation policies and pro-
vides a responsible and balanced signal to other nations;
—is consistent with the acceptable minimum delay in breeder in-
troduction (LMFBR or alternative) of 5–10 years beyond the current
date of 1993;
—mitigates dissolution of the Government/Industrial infrastruc-
ture somewhat;
—extracts the benefit (a complete design) in which most of the
CRBR program costs have been invested to date.
4 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Based upon my consideration of the conclusions reached by ERDA
and the Steering Committee, I recommend an advanced nuclear tech-
nology policy that reflects the following elements:
—The LMFBR base program to be held at somewhat less than its
current level, and directed toward evaluation of alternate breeders,
fuels, and advanced converter reactors with emphases on nonprolifera-
tion and safety concerns.
—Construction of the Clinch River Breeder Project indefinitely de-
ferred but the design completed and reviewed with the licensing
authorities.
—Within two years,
—One or more alternate concepts (breeder, advanced con-
verter, and/or fuel) be selected and an aggressive R&D program
be mounted to pursue the selected concepts.
—A demonstration plant for the alternate concept be part of
the R&D program.
—A final decision be made to abandon CRBR construction en-
tirely, or to reorient it to the new concept.
338.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 15, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Attitude Toward Reprocessing Abroad
From the very beginning of the PRM deliberations, the key central
decision on which views have continued to differ is the question of how
the United States should relate to the reality of existing reprocessing
abroad. The first section of the attached minutes of the PRC meeting
summarizes the arguments that were made on this subject at that time
The State Department feels very strongly that we have to be able to give a
specific answer to the question: “Will the international fuel cycle evaluation
program include reprocessing?”
right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 See Document 328.

Non-Proliferation
After your announcement,3 Joe Nye and Nelson Sievering (of
ERDA) held a consultation in Paris.4 The French took a very tough line,
stating that they would not participate in the international evaluation
program if reprocessing were not included in it. The State Department
interprets this as a flat final position on the part of the French. I have no
way of knowing whether that is the case or whether their position was
dictated by negotiating tactics. However, as you know, it cannot be
doubted that there is substantial international resistance to our prolifer-
ation proposals, particularly from the French.
The international evaluation program has been conceived as in-
cluding major physical demonstrations and actual operating plants on
the various new technologies. No one doubts that the United States will
be providing the bulk of the financial support for these operations.
There is therefore a real likelihood that if reprocessing is included in the
program, we would be supporting it abroad while banning it here
(which may mean a $250 million loss to the Barnwell consortium).
This decision is a tough, close, political call. To rule out reproc-
essing might fatally jeopardize the program, while to include it might
merely result in marginally improving the safety and safeguardability
of reprocessing plants, or even “proving” (perhaps by being outvoted
in some program forum) that reprocessing is acceptable—exactly the
opposite of what we set out to do.
A possible middle position might be to offer to do paper studies on
reprocessing within the context of the evaluation program and to leave
Windscale and LaHague (the British and French reprocessing plants)
operating outside the program. I do not believe that there is any a priori
reason that every nuclear facility in the participating countries has to be
a part of this program. Further, there are a great many issues—in fact
the key issues—which can be debated and decided on paper. These in-
clude economic questions as to the value of reprocessing in a non-
3 On April 7, Carter stated that despite his belief that the “benefits of nuclear
power” were “very real and practical,” he worried that “components of the nuclear
power process will be turned to providing nuclear weapons.” Therefore, he announced
that the U.S. would “defer indefinitely the commercial reprocessing and recycling of plu-
tonium produced in the U.S. nuclear power programs” and called for the “establishment
of an international fuel cycle evaluation program aimed at developing alternative fuel
cycles and a variety of international and U.S. measures to assure access to nuclear fuel
supplies and spent fuel storage for nations sharing common non-proliferation objec-
tives.” His administration would also begin to “redirect funding of U.S. nuclear research
and development programs to accelerate our research into alternative nuclear fuel cycles
which do not involve direct access to materials usable in nuclear weapons.” He closed by
promising that the U.S. would “develop wider international cooperation in regard to this
vital issue through systematic and thorough international consultations.” (Public Papers:
4 The Nye/Sievering consultations with the French are reported in telegram 9761

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
breeder fuel cycle, the availability of uranium resources, future nuclear
energy demand, etc. Other key issues that determine the value of re-
processing will be directly addressed in the operational sense, in-
cluding accelerated R&D and development of spent fuel storage tech-
nologies. I do not know whether this position would be acceptable to
others but it may be worth exploring.
Issue:
—A tough U.S. stance against reprocessing everywhere where we can
influence it.
or
—Including reprocessing in the international fuel cycle evaluation
program.
or
—A compromise position including paper studies, but not operational
demonstration.
Requests for approval for retransfer for reprocessing.
The United States now has the right to approve or veto any re-
transfer of U.S.-supplied fuel to another country (now the UK or
France) for reprocessing. U.S. policies on approving such requests is in-
timately related to our overall policy toward reprocessing, since we can
in effect, halt or very substantially slow British and French reprocessing
by preventing their clients from coming to them.
The interagency group recommends that approvals be granted
only when:
—Both the fuel owner and reprocessor are generally cooperative in
non-proliferation and evaluation efforts;
—The U.S. is provided a veto on retransfer of the produced
plutonium;
—A need exists, for example in terms of requirement for fuel
movement due to fuel storage capacity limitations; and
—No commitment is implied for long term continuation of
approvals.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission which has the responsibility
for implementing these decisions, points out in its formal agency com-
ments6 that: “The paper could usefully include as an option a tougher
stance on requests for approval for retransfer of reprocessing. Under
5 Carter checked this option and wrote “We won’t pay reprocessing costs for
others.”
6 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
this option, reprocessing in the UK and France would be viewed only as a last
resort, to be avoided if at all possible. A clear showing of need would be a
strict prerequisite to granting of approvals.”
Issue:
Interagency recommendation
or
Tougher stance (which still allows flexibility)
7 Carter checked this option and underlined the phrase “still allows flexibility.”
339.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Proliferation Issues
There are two major issues on which there is interagency disagree-
ment whose resolution is required before the Administration legisla-
tion package can be completed this weekend.
I. Additional Conditions to be Required in New Agreements for Nuclear
Cooperation.
The following are proposed to supplement existing requirements
in the negotiation of new agreements. We would also seek to incorpo-
rate these conditions in existing agreements, through renegotiation and
the use of incentives.
A) Reprocessing:2 U.S. consent required for reprocessing and fur-
ther disposition of foreign fuel irradiated in all U.S.-supplied (including
previously supplied) reactors.
2 Consent for US-supplied fuel is already required. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B) Retransfer:3 U.S. consent required for retransfer of foreign fuel ir-
radiated in all U.S.-supplied (including previously supplied) reactors.
C) Full-Scope Safeguards: That the recipient be required to place all
its nuclear facilities and materials under IAEA safeguards.
We can anticipate significant difficulty in negotiating U.S. rights of
approval over reprocessing and disposition of U.S.-supplied nuclear
fuel or foreign fuel irradiated in U.S. reactors. Many countries view
U.S. control of their fuel as infringement on their sovereignty and their
rights to recover the residual fuel value in the spent fuel. In addition,
with countries not party to the NPT, our greatest difficulty will be in at-
tempting to negotiate a full-scope safeguards provision requiring that
such recipients place all their nuclear facilities and materials under
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy. This includes such
countries as Spain, Brazil, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, South Africa, India
and a number of Arab countries.
Issue C: Full-Scope Safeguards
Traditionally, safeguards have been required by a supplier only on
nuclear material and equipment it supplies, although the 99 non-
nuclear weapon states party to the NPT have agreed to accept safe-
guards on all their peaceful nuclear activities. Only Canada and
Sweden have gone beyond this in adopting the policy of insisting on
full-scope safeguards in new nuclear agreements. While the UK, USSR,
and others urge this as a common supplier policy, they have heretofore
been unwilling to adopt it unless all suppliers agree. In the past, the
French have specifically resisted agreeing to such a safeguards require-
ment, arguing that it would put them in the position of requiring of
non-nuclear weapon states defacto NPT adherence, a position they
continue to reject as a matter of principle.
All Agencies agree that we should favor a “full-scope safeguards” policy.
Agencies differ, on both the form of the full-scope safeguard commit-
ment that should be required and whether deviations should be toler-
ated in exceptional circumstances.
In your San Diego speech of September 25,4 you said that the U.S.
should make no new commitments for the sale of nuclear technology or
fuel to countries which refuse to forego nuclear explosives and to place
their nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. There is a range of for-
mulations consistent with your San Diego statement. For example, at
British initiative, and with non-NPT parties in mind, the IAEA has
drafted a model NPT-type agreement under which a recipient would
undertake, for a period of 25 years, to place all nuclear facilities and
3 Consent for US-supplied fuel is already required. [Footnote is in the original.]

Non-Proliferation
materials that it might acquire under IAEA safeguards which would
survive any termination of the agreement.
Some favor this formulation as a fallback to our obvious first pref-
erence for NPT adherence. They believe that the NPT-type interna-
tional commitment covering existing and future facilities inherent in
the British formula is necessary to preclude the possibility that a country
would use outside assistance while developing indigenous capabilities with in-
tent to forego safeguards once they achieve independence. Those who sup-
port this formulation also believe that U.S. adoption of such a policy
would significantly improve chances of supplier agreement at the April
meeting of supplier countries to require full-scope safeguards as a
condition of new supply commitments, or, failing that, of getting the
French and Germans to agree not to undercut the application of such a
policy by other suppliers.
Others favor (again as a fallback to our first preference for NPT ad-
herence) a bilateral formulation. Under this formulation, the U.S. would
simply require as a provision in new bilateral agreements for coopera-
tion that the recipient have all its facilities and materials under safe-
guards as a continuing condition of U.S. nuclear supply. As an example,
Brazil, because it presently has all its nuclear facilities and materials
under safeguards, would qualify for U.S. supply under this formula.
However Brazil or any other nation would not be required to make an inter-
national commitment to full-scope safeguards but would understand that
U.S. nuclear supply would be terminated if it acquired any unsafe-
guarded nuclear facilities or materials.
Those who favor this formulation believe it achieves full-scope
safeguards but avoids forcing key recipients of concern, such as Brazil
and Spain, to make a highly-visable and long-term NPT type commit-
ment which they have publicly rejected in the past. They believe that
while its negotiability is uncertain, it may be more acceptable to certain
countries of concern. They also believe that this approach may prove
more acceptable to the French and therefore a greater chance of full
supplier agreement.
Issue:
That you authorize the U.S. to require in new agreements for nu-
clear cooperation the proposed controls A) and B) over foreign fuel ir-
radiated in U.S.-supplied reactors and:
i) Either NPT adherence or, failing this, a full-scope safeguards for-
mulation along the lines of the British formula involving an interna-
tional commitment to full-scope safeguards.
APPROVE
(ACDA)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
OR
ii) Either NPT adherence or, failing that, a full-scope safeguards
formulation involving a bilateral formulation between supplier and
recipient.
APPROVE
(State and Defense)5
(ERDA favors neither)
II. Presidential Flexibility.
Another issue concerns the degree of flexibility we will permit in
approving or disapproving new agreements, or in renegotiating ex-
isting agreements, if we fail to obtain recipient acceptance of one or
more of required new conditions. Congress has taken a strong position
that all nuclear cooperation should be cut off if a particular agreement
does meet every single required condition. On the other hand, Execu-
tive branch agencies believe that flexibility is essential in seeking to re-
negotiate existing agreements where U.S. termination of supply on the
grounds that new conditions are not met, could be legal grounds for a
recipient to contend that in return it can legally view its safeguards
commitments as lapsed.
Agencies differ on the issue of whether flexibility—in the form of
exceptions to be determined by the President when he believes it
would serve the national interest—should be allowed just for existing
agreements or for new agreements as well.
Issue:
That you authorize us to seek in any proposed legislation of export
criteria, provision for exception by Presidential determination or equiv-
alent flexibility:
for existing as well as new agreements
(State, Defense)6
OR
for existing agreements only
(ACDA)
5 Carter did not check either option.
6 Carter checked this option and underneath wrote “JC.”

Non-Proliferation
340.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)1
Washington, April 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Presidential Decision on Proliferation
The President has decided that the international fuel cycle evalu-
ation program should include paper studies but not operational dem-
onstrations of reprocessing. He feels that there is no reason why every
nuclear facility in a participating country must be a part of the pro-
gram. He does not want any American funding—direct or indirect—of
reprocessing activities, other than paper studies. He believes that many
of the key questions concerning reprocessing—the economic value of
reprocessing in a non-breeder fuel cycle, the availability of uranium re-
sources, future nuclear energy demand, etc.—can be debated and de-
cided on paper. Other key concerns, particularly the development of
spent fuel storage capabilities, will be operationally studied. He views
this option as a compromise position between a rigid American posture
against reprocessing on the one hand, and encouraging the further de-
velopment of reprocessing by including it in the evaluation program,
on the other.
He has further decided that a clear showing of need should be a
strict prerequisite to granting of U.S. approvals of requests to retransfer
for reprocessing. This is basically the interagency recommendation—
retaining flexibility—but with a stronger presumption against ap-
proval of these requests. Under this option, reprocessing in the UK and
France would be viewed as a last resort, to be avoided if at all possible.
He has approved the bilateral formulation favored by State and
Defense for full scope safeguards, with the explicit provision that this
be regarded as an interim measure, and the understanding that we will
continue to press for supplier acceptance of a requirement for formal
recipient commitment to full scope safeguards, preferably through ad-
herence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
On the question of Presidential flexibility, he has approved the op-
tion which provides for exception by Presidential determination for
both new and existing agreements.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
341.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
International Atomic Energy Agency1
102157. Following repeat London 7093 Action SecState Info Lon-
don Apr 30.
Quote. Subject: Bilateral Nuclear Suppliers Consultations With
Japan, April 27, 1977.
1. Japanese Del headed by Kobayashi opened meeting with state-
ment he was instructed to make emphasizing necessity for Japan to
develop nuclear power for peaceful purposes to sustain economic
growth. He indicated this necessity will be raised in bilaterals at the
economic summit, pointing out that a Japanese full fuel cycle is an in-
dispensable part of their nuclear program for peaceful purposes which
in turn is essential to their being able to play expected role in world eco-
nomic order. Kobayashi indicated they were encouraged by presiden-
tial statement at April 7 press conference2 which recognized necessity
for certain countries to reprocess. But he expressed deep disappoint-
ment over subsequent explanation that this did not mean that U.S.
would consent to reprocessing of U.S.-supplied fuel in Japan.
2. Japanese Del asked whether U.S. would treat Japan as a major
ally and partner in global economic and political affairs, or like Pak-
istan, Brazil, Argentina, Kenya and even Uganda? He implored us to be
consistent. If Japan were not allowed to proceed with reprocessing he
said there would be bitter resentment among Japanese people, grave
difficulties in Diet efforts to get IAEA safeguards agreement approved,
questions regarding value of NPT adherence and continuing credibility
of NPT, and a serious problem of de facto discrimination against Japan
in favor of European countries, which could do harm to our tradition-
ally cooperative relationship and to far east stability.
3. Nye replied that he would report GOJ views faithfully and elab-
orated on the April 7 presidential statement. He repeated U.S. position
supporting current generation nuclear reactors, but stressing impor-
tance of examining alternative technologies before proceeding with
plutonium economy.
4. Japanese Del was informed current bilateral difficulties re-
garding Tokai were occasioned by Article 8(c) of agreement of coopera-
cret; Exdis; Priority. Drafted by Jane Coon (OES/NET/RD); cleared by Arthur Shankle
(S/S); and approved by Louis Nosenzo (OES/NET).

Non-Proliferation
tion,3 which required us either to give or refuse consent to an activity
that we were not permitting in the U.S. In spite of this provision, presi-
dential statement showed U.S. cognizance of Japanese energy needs.
The small quantities of uranium recycled through Tokai would be in-
significant relative to total Japanese energy requirements.
5. Nye reassured Japanese Del that U.S. viewed Japan as a major
economic power and had no desire to restrict their energy needs. He ex-
plained Japanese role in INFCEP would be without prejudice to solu-
tion on Tokai issue.
6. Thorne (ERDA) explained budget steps being taken to imple-
ment U.S. non-proliferation objectives. A comprehensive program
involving 750 million dollars with Fall 1978 target date identifies nu-
clear power options and alternatives with lower proliferation risks.
Studies would include assessment of uranium and thorium reserves
availability.
7. Japanese showed concern that INFCEP would a priori exclude
reprocessing and prejudge conclusion of studies. A study over 3 or 4
years that did not produce an acceptable solution would place Japan in
a difficult position. Nye acknowledged U.S. intent to include evalu-
ation of reprocessing and that U.S. does not prejudge study outcomes.
Japanese replied that economic and environmental aspects of repro-
cessing were domestic problems and that they were fairly certain that
reprocessing could be safeguarded.
8. When asked, Kobayashi replied that Japan could go along with
U.S. on Article 14 (sanctions). They were reluctant to make Article 9 (re
consent to reprocessing) mandatory but would not block consensus on
this. On Article 4 (full scope safeguards), they stated that requirement
to meet safeguards duration requirements of GOV 16214 caused some
problems when exporting small parts for countries already possessing
reactors.
9. Nye provided explanation of presidential decision to issue
MB–10s5 on a case-by-case basis based on demonstrated need, for ex-
ample congested storage at reactor sites. Yamamoto subsequently
called U.S. Del’s attention to the requirement for Japanese utilities to
make a five percent deposit by the end of August in order to confirm
contract to be negotiated by end of May for reprocessing in UK and
quired Japan to obtain advance approval from the U.S. Government for any international
transfer of nuclear material of U.S. origin.
5 The Presidential Decision was not found. MB–10 refers to applications that na-
tions must submit in order to obtain shipment-by-shipment approvals from the U.S. Gov-
ernment prior to transporting spent nuclear fuel to overseas reprocessors.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
French facilities beginning in 1982/3. He suggested that we agree to
discuss the extent of need for MB–10 covering fuel envisioned under
contract well before mid-August deadline for GOJ decision on com-
mercial reprocessing contract, preferably in the course of follow-on
Tokai consultations beginning in May.
Spiers.
Unquote.
Vance
342.
Memorandum of Conversation1
London, May 7, 1977
SUMMIT—May 7, Afternoon Session
NON-PROLIFERATION
Callaghan: We have agreed to begin this afternoon with a discus-
sion of nuclear energy and I would like President Carter to open up on
this issue.
President Carter: I think we are all aware of the public displeasure
at the rapid turn to nuclear power. In the United States, 22 states had
referenda to prohibit the construction of nuclear power plants. I feel
that governments should depend more on nuclear power in the future
for electricity. We have a major industry in the mining and enrichment
of uranium. We export enriched uranium at no profit, and sometimes at
great headache. But it is hard to convince the opposition to our exports
that we should maintain an export policy when they think this is going
to be used for explosives.
The question is how do you maintain nuclear production in the
US, and supply others, without the fear that we will enhance the ca-
pacity of other countries to produce explosives?
This must be addressed on an international basis. We endanger re-
lations with consumer countries if we act unilaterally. When I became
Non-Proliferation
President I inherited a moratorium on the export of nuclear fuel which
was imposed by my predecessor.2 I know this concerned all of you.
I want to work with you to find ways of stopping proliferation and
the possible use of nuclear fuel for explosives in order to export fuels
which will be used for nuclear power. There are a number of different
degrees of status among nations on this issue. Some NPT signatories
produce weapons, other do not. Other have vowed never to produce
weapons. We must cooperatively address this question. I know of the
national sensitivities which are involved. I want you to know that I
plan to expand US enrichment production capabilities. I want to insure
that if we can find means of improving accountability, treatment of
waste products and proper safe guards we will insure fuels for nations
who want to produce electricity and are willing to comply with these
safeguards. We believe it is necessary to assess the future of the pluto-
nium economy and especially the fast breeder reactor, although we be-
lieve this technology won’t be needed for 20–25 years.
We built two reprocessing plants in the US before I became Presi-
dent. They have been shut down because they did not work. They did
not help on waste disposal, but instead generated by-products. We
have also decided to cancel construction of our next reprocessing plant
and we won’t build the breeder, although we will not prevent others
from building it if they wish. As I said, we don’t think a breeder will be
needed for 25 years. Some of you have different opinions. And I can un-
derstand your reluctance to rely totally on us for uranium.
But it is difficult for me to get our people to support shipments of
uranium supplies unless there is some assurance that the uranium will
not be used for weapons. I suggest therefore that we set up a group of
technicians to examine this issue and report back to us. This can pro-
vide an analysis of the problem so that we can understand what the
needs are. I cannot control people’s views on the export of raw mate-
rials unless I can give them answers on the issue of explosives. I would
rather take action along with you than action which might be ill ad-
vised. We should be concerned with the complete fuel cycle including
the availability of uranium reserves around the world and the inten-
tions of suppliers to increase enrichment facilities. We should define
the possible constraints to be placed on consumers before they receive
supplies. This should be done on a multilateral basis. We should also
look at the breeder from a common vantage point and look at how to
resolve the issue of nuclear waste disposal. I know that I have already
aggravated leaders here because of my hesitation to change my prede-
cessor’s decisions on fuel exports.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Callaghan: Is your proposal for a preliminary study different from
your proposal for an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation pro-
gram? If the final preliminary study is completed in two months, it
could in other words decide on how to establish an international fuel
cycle evaluation.
President Carter: Yes, it would be preliminary to the longer study.
Trudeau: President Carter’s case is based on the unstated major
premise that there is a danger of proliferation which we can and should
do something about. I am not convinced that all here share that
premise. All agree the danger exists, but some may not think we can do
anything about it.
President Carter: The CIA has done a sobering study on the pros-
pects of the technology capabilities of nations who might want to built
nuclear devices.3 Twelve to fifteen countries are capable of building nu-
clear devices. One premise at the end of the study might be that any
country in the future which explodes a device gets no more fuel. Such
countries include Brazil and South Korea. They see nuclear power as a
status symbol. Perhaps we did not deplore the Indian explosion
enough. If it were pre-ordained that if a country exploded a nuclear de-
vice they would get no more fuel maybe they would not try it.
Schmidt: I, as a person and as Head of Government, agree that
there is a danger which you, Prime Minister Trudeau, describe, and
that we should do something about it.
But what are the consequences of this? The effort does not embrace
the number of states and the categories of states which must be brought
in. There are four categories of states: NPT members who are nu-
clear, NPT non-members who are non-nuclear; non-NPT members
who are nuclear; and non-NPT members who are non-nuclear. If ar-
rangements additional to the NPT are agreed upon and do not include
these different groups of states with different interests there could be
difficulties.
If there were an additional arrangement, plus the NPT, it might not
include all the important groups. These countries not invited would
need careful watching.
After Germany came into being in October 1954 we signed the
Brussels Treaty which renounced nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons. We also signed the NPT. It was not easy to ratify in Parlia-
ment. I pushed ratification hard but we had to change governments in
order to do it.
There is no doubt that the peaceful use of nuclear energy by my
country is a vital means of safeguarding our energy supplies as well as
3 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
our social, economic and technological progress. Not all present at this
Conference have signed the NPT. The NPT should run parallel with
any new arrangement on safeguards involving the provision of nuclear
supplies. We should have no discrimination against non-weapon
states. The NPT is the legal basis for non-proliferation. Our efforts must
run parallel to efforts to develop the peaceful use of nuclear energy and
safeguard world energy supplies. We will support and participate in
the energy consultations sketched out by President Carter. But we
should include countries who by 1985 or 1990, if left out, will use pluto-
nium and uranium to produce nuclear weapons. We must also recog-
nize that the stronger our supplier rules are the more the incentive for
countries to develop their own uranium. Such countries should be in-
cluded in this group.
Trudeau: I agree. It is better to have the other countries agree than
to disagree. But how would they get the uranium?
Schmidt: All countries can get uranium. You can make an A-bomb
in your back yard. Other technology will spread. I see them spreading
already.
Trudeau: Isn’t that like saying there is nothing we can do?
Schmidt: No, no, no. That is not what I meant. If you exclude them
they will from the beginning be of no help. They will be difficult.
I will be willing to participate in this study but it should not preju-
dice existing relations among countries, no more moratorium and no
constraint on existing bilateral or third country arrangements. It should
not prejudice the work of the Nuclear Supplier Club. And we must give
the “have nots” and the “must nots” the feeling that we are not discrim-
inating against them. That would decrease chances for successful
cooperation.
Jamieson: If we say we want to help you develop peaceful tech-
nology do we also say we do not want you to use it for an explosive de-
vice? What does the distinction mean?
Schmidt: Yugoslavia rather than Brazil, is a good example. If we do
not take their interests into account it could produce an attitude you
cannot control.
Jamieson: It is a question of national pride with Yugoslavia.
Trudeau: It is not a matter of pride that countries should have bio-
logical weapons. It should not be a matter of pride but Yugoslavia and
India develop nuclear weapons.
Schmidt: National pride is an important factor of life. If you want to
get countries cooperation you cannot tell them what you know is in
their best interest. There will be additional uranium found in the years
ahead just like oil in the North Sea and Alaska.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Vance: Would you include just the threshold countries or just those
with reactors?
Andreotti: Two comments. First, I am convinced of the need for
non-proliferation. I saw this as urgent when we signed the NPT. We
signed it with conviction. Article IV of the NPT gives the assurance that
we will use nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.4 I agree that we
should have two months to consider the issue. But what is in Article IV
should remain valid in its entirety. The Conference should restate the
importance of Article IV. It should restate that enriched uranium
should be used for reactors and for industrial development and scien-
tific research. Second, in the last few days we have read that French sci-
entists have developed a process without the risks of use of uranium
for military purposes. I would like President Giscard to comment.
Giscard: For my part France is aware of the dangers of nuclear pro-
liferation. We believe in the need to share responsibility and address
this problem. I agree with President Carter and Prime Minister Tru-
deau on this. We have not signed the NPT for a variety of reasons.
Where we depart from the US is that we consider nuclear energy
unavoidable. There will be reduced energy causing slower industriali-
zation unless we have nuclear sources, particularly in view of the
coming oil shortage. It is a valid source of energy for countries without
military technology. We were entitled to provide ourselves with nu-
clear energy.
Certain factors are essential in operating plants. Enrichment is now
done primarily by the US and 20% by Britain, Germany, France and
Italy. At present, enrichment is a probable factor in proliferation. But
the construction of international plants is difficult and expensive and
small countries cannot do it. Reprocessing involves creation of pluto-
nium from nuclear fuel elements after their use. We feel that it is not re-
alistic to think of medium-size countries storing non-processed nuclear
waste. Therefore, the waste should be destroyed. But this is difficult in
that plutonium is a byproduct of reprocessing. It is impossible for
medium-size countries to have nuclear industry without reprocessing.
With respect to the breeder, it is possible that between 1985 and
1990 there will be a shortage of natural uranium. The producers will be
the US, Canada, Australia and France. France will be knocking on the
door of the uranium producers monopoly. But we will have to ensure
that maximum benefits are derived from uranium. The breeder gives
you 50 times more electricity from the same amount of uranium. It is
4 Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty stipulates that “Nothing in this Treaty
shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the Parties of the Treaty to de-
velop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without dis-

Non-Proliferation
like a multiplication of the amount of oil we have by 50. We cannot rule
out the breeder without an analysis of the large number of issues in-
volved. We and the Germans have launched an experimental effort on
the environmental and safety issues involved. A breeder does not ap-
pear more dangerous than other reactors. It is as dangerous as a light-
water plant. The danger is the amount of plutonium which comes out
of the process. It can be subverted to military use. But to manufacture
the bomb from stolen plutonium, you would need 2000 people
working 18 months. This would be difficult to hide. All countries need
to recognize the risks of the danger of proliferation by terrorists. But the
breeder is indispensable if we are to make the best out of our uranium.
I am not sure we should accept Helmut’s view that each country
should do what it wants, that is make its own decisions about when to
provide nuclear technology to other countries. Why did we suspend
the sale of nuclear technology to South Korea? This was not because of
US pressure. It was because information we received was that despite
public statements they were going to manufacture a nuclear bomb.
Let me then spell out our thinking on this. First, very few countries
will require reprocessing—Germany, Japan and EURODIF countries.
They will need a large program to deal with their nuclear waste. Others
will not need a reprocessing facility. Second, only those producers who
are embarking on a breeder—France, Germany and the USSR, as well
as the UK, need plutonium. We are, therefore, justified in finding meas-
ures to meet our needs while not transferring technology to countries
which do not need it. Third, on enrichment, there are a number of non-
proliferation technologies. French scientists are developing a new tech-
nique to enrich fuel to a level insufficient for military purposes. If coun-
tries attempt to take it further, to too high a level of enrichment, the
process would break down. If a critical level were reached, a chemical
process would take over like a sort of slow explosion which would take
a long time.
Fourth, on reprocessing, we can imagine a formula to reduce the
military risks. We can imagine a form of service contract where repro-
cessing countries reprocess the waste of others and retain the pluto-
nium under some international agreement whereby an international
organization would supervise it. The rest of the reprocessed fuel could
then be sent back to the consumer. The technique needs further investi-
gation as does the form of contract which might be used. This would be
a way to reduce the military risks, and I believe it is achievable.
We can subscribe to the view of the US and can provide technology
for the peaceful use of energy and see that it remains peaceful.
Schmidt: I believe President Giscard misunderstood me. I do not
feel that a country should be left to do what it wants to do about sales.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
But we should not discriminate against countries on the peaceful uses
of energy.
Fukuda: I appreciate and agree with the importance of President
Carter’s comments. Japan was the first nation baptized by nuclear holo-
caust. We had agreed not to manufacture, not to allow in, and not to
own nuclear weapons. President Carter is concerned about the issue of
nuclear energy because of the danger of weapons. We cannot and will
not do this.
In the morning we discussed the economic recession and its struc-
tural causes. One factor of this depression is tighter energy supplies.
The US CIA study indicated that in 10 years energy, particularly, oil,
would be in short supply. In the 21st century, there will be fusion. In
the meantime, we must ride out the gap. We must ask how we bridge
the gap and give people confidence in the future. This is our percep-
tion. This is why we in the last few years, with American advice, have
spent roughly $1 billion on a reprocessing plant. Our experimental re-
processing plant will be open by autumn.
Japan is in a unique position. For us, Article IV of the NPT is an im-
portant issue which we cannot ignore. People have confidence in the
sanctity of this Article. It has an impact on the minds of people every-
where. With respect to the new study, it is hard to expect that all of the
countries now producing explosives could be included. We cannot pre-
dict the attitude in China, India and the USSR. It is difficult to expect
most poorer countries in the world to agree with President Carter’s
plan. Nations’ rights must be safeguarded. Why not have professional
experts undertake global surveillance in a central mechanism of those
countries concerned? We can get countries together to study the means
of surveillance. Reprocessing is needed to give economies strength and
to give energy to our economies.
Some countries may wish to get out of the NPT if we do not act
wisely.
President Carter: President Giscard misunderstood me on the im-
portance of nuclear energy. I think nuclear energy for electricity is a
crucial part of the use of energy for the future. I believe in the increased
use of nuclear power in the civilized world. This is demonstrated by
our willingness to export nuclear fuel, a decision I recently made. This
is not profitable for us. We use one-third of the enriched uranium we
produce; we export one-third; and we store one-third for future do-
mestic use and exports. The action we have taken in initiating this dis-
cussion is a crucial prerequisite for the unrestrained export of nuclear
fuel. Unless there is international surveillance of the use of nuclear fuel,
it will be difficult for us to manufacture and ship it. The sale of repro-
cessing plants to NPT countries is most worrying.

Non-Proliferation
Reprocessing is no panacea for waste-product storage. I cannot
agree with President Giscard that there is a lack of space available to
store waste. It does not take a large country to store nuclear fuel. One
square mile is adequate. It is no easier to store fuel in the US than it is in
Japan or other countries. Reprocessing is no answer to disposal. In all
countries people fear the proximity of nuclear fuel. The size of the na-
tion is a minor fact.
We are eager to find a solution. We want to provide fuel to others.
If there is international supervision over how to control nuclear facil-
ities, then we can export.
I also do not agree with President Giscard’s view that uranium will
run out soon. I think we have 25–30 years of uranium available. By that
time there will perhaps be production of the breeder. In September, we
will go critical on our new thorium reactor.
We will be cooperative in trying to remove restrictions on the ex-
port and use of nuclear fuel. But unless we take action to ensure the fa-
cilities, and think they are safe, we cannot export. We must find assur-
ances to satisfy the people of my country. Hundreds of demonstrators
have just been arrested in New Hampshire protesting against a light-
water reactor.5 The example I have suggested can improve our
understanding.
Trudeau: I believe that President Carter and President Giscard are
both reaching the same conclusion. President Giscard is saying, I be-
lieve, that there should be safeguards for the full fuel cycle and the plu-
tonium should be brought back to the suppliers. Did I understand you
right, President Giscard, that you want full fuel cycle safeguards when
you suggested that plutonium be recycled?
Giscard: We think reprocessing is a technical necessity. Work must
be carried forward for technical reasons and to encourage the breeder
because European uranium supplies will be less guaranteed than the
supplies of oil. From 1980 onward, we will import all of our natural
uranium. The uncertainty of supply compels Europe to derive max-
imum benefits from minimum amounts of uranium. We can be self-
sufficient with the breeder. If not, we will have to be 50 times more de-
pendent on Canada, the US, and Niger. Thus, reprocessing is necessary
from a technical point of view.
On technology transfer and safeguards, we must seek all pos-
sible legal and fiscal guarantees on safeguards beyond the NPT.
There should be no technology transfer without sound economic
arrangements.
5 On May 1, hundreds of demonstrators opposed to the construction of a nuclear
power plant in Seabrook, NH were arrested. (John Kifner, “Hundreds Arrested in New

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Trudeau: On the fuel cycle, as far as the ultimate idea is concerned,
we need to define a safeguard system to ensure that production does
not lead to explosive devices. I feel the question of reprocessing is sec-
ondary to that.
Giscard: The US at one time stopped the export of uranium on the
grounds that there would be reprocessing and because of the fear of ex-
plosives. We will study, as suggested, aspects of non-proliferation. But
we cannot subscribe to the dictum that there should be no reprocessing
of uranium.
Trudeau: Are you saying in your plan that there should be no re-
processing elsewhere?
Giscard: No. They send back the waste. Then we keep the pluto-
nium which comes out of the reprocessing. I am not saying that Japan
and Germany could reprocess without safeguards. I would want to in-
sist that the plutonium be returned.
Schmidt: President Carter, you say that it is difficult to get the con-
sent of the people in the area for even one square mile of storage of nu-
clear waste. Are you saying that you will not store other nations’
waste?
President Carter: It is almost impossible to get people to agree to
store the waste from a foreign country. We are faced with states saying
they will allow no power plants in their borders; and they object to the
transfer of nuclear waste across the borders. Vermont allows no power
plants. People will not accept the waste of others.
Schmidt: Some people in Germany say that we will let you build a
power plant if the US will take the waste. Now it is clear that you
won’t?
President Carter: This is not an unfriendly statement, but it is an ac-
curate statement.
Schmidt: No, no; I understand. It is a necessary clarification and a
reflection of the interest of the US.
I agree with Valery on the need for safeguards.
No one has mentioned Brazil so far. But we are under criticism for
our bilateral, or trilateral, deal on Brazil. The Vienna agency is the third
party. When we signed this deal, we not only followed the NPT, we
went beyond it. In the meantime, there were new views, and new
dangers were seen. But at that time we went far beyond the existing
legal obligations and in fact added international controls beyond what
we were legally bound to do, or to ask of the Brazilians. We have lived
up to our obligations. But we do not want to take additional obligations
if others don’t.
Jamieson: We have said publicly that your agreement with Brazil
involves obligations above the legal maximum.

Non-Proliferation
Owen: All of us will have to tighten up on safeguards. There is a
need for a wider group. Some countries want nuclear energy. The
danger is in delay. We support the fuel cycle evaluation program and
also agree on the preliminary study. But this could take a year. We
should make progress in the London Suppliers Group and perhaps
widen the membership. We who are deeply involved should lead the
way. If we did nothing in the Suppliers Group, it would be dangerous.
Our scientists question whether you can store waste from such re-
actors very well. The UK Magnox is a case in point. There we have got
to reprocess. But there is a great deal to be said about the exchange of
information.
President Carter: The crux of the question is whether we are going
to insist that reprocessing be under strict safeguards to allow countries
access to fuel in a prudent and acceptable way. If the safeguards are not
adequate, it will be difficult to provide nuclear fuel. This is true for
Canada and Australia as well, although I cannot speak for them. I have
no objections if nations wish to reprocess or have the breeder. But there
is no reason for us to permit countries who are not signatories to the
NPT to develop nuclear weapons capabilities. I am not trying to stop
the breeder. Our reprocessing plants did not work, but I hope that you
who are building a breeder will be more successful. The crux of the sit-
uation is to devise some way to develop adequate safeguards so that
we can provide fuel to those who need it.
Callaghan: The difficulty you have is to persuade other countries
that your position is based on the reality of the problem of proliferation
rather than to serve your advantage as an energy rich country. You
cannot give people the impression that you are trying to shut other
countries out. I accept that your view is based on concerns about prolif-
eration and the need for proper safeguards but it is important that you
not give the impression of depriving countries of the benefits of nuclear
fuel.
I believe President Carter’s suggestions offer an opportunity of
moving forward. If you in the US go forward in the absence of a study,
it presents difficulties for all of us. The issue that we must study is that
we have got to see that safeguards can be erected so that what you want
can be achieved. What is said here has indicated that without agree-
ment on this matter countries without coal, oil or natural gas will have
problems. We need a technical study so that we can really work out the
issues that can be solved in this manner.
MacDonald: Canada’s policy is to refuse the supply of raw ura-
nium. We will control supply in the first instance. We would have to
reach an understanding on what the safeguards are going to be. The ar-
guments in the US situation are the same as in Canada. If we were
forced to take unilateral action we would be hit from both sides by not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
supplying raw uranium and not providing reprocessing. Canada there-
fore supports the study group idea and believes that somehow there
should be a linkage with the London Supplier Group.
Vance: There is no inconsistency; the London Supplier Group
could go along without interfering in the study.
Giscard: Are we going beyond the NPT or was the proposal for
physical guarantees governing the sale or non-sale of various plants. I
believe that in President Carter’s thinking one can go beyond legal
guarantees and consider that certain sales would not take place in cer-
tain circumstances. I believe that restrictions over and beyond legal
guarantees should be considered.
The reprocessing countries are represented here in this room. It is
not a question of what conditions we impose on our own procedures.
Germany and Japan have industrial potential. It is foolish to consider
imposing conditions on them. What we are talking about is conditions
on the sale of reprocessing facilities to others—physical conditions in-
volved. There will be no more sales by France because of proliferation.
Pilot plants present a serious danger of proliferation and these need to
be considered as well as other proliferation techniques. Do we agree
that there should be physical limits? And I should like to ask where
and when will President Carter’s study group meet and what would it
discuss?
Callaghan: As I see it the preliminary study would be done among
ourselves. I suggest that we establish a group of experts to work out the
terms of reference for the evaluation program—detailed terms of refer-
ences for the Carter program. I wonder, however, when we need to in-
volve the Soviet Union. Perhaps not now, but in the second stage.
President Carter: Our contacts suggest that the Soviets do not want
to come in at this stage but perhaps later.
Callaghan: As long as the Soviet Union does not feel excluded. We
should ask our experts to meet quickly and report by the end of June or
July. I am worried about one impact that will come out of this meeting.
The experts group should be represented as part of the normal process
of consultation. On location, I understand that Paris is pleasant in the
spring. Our aides should agree on the terms of reference.
President Carter: Yes, two months is just about what is needed.
Trudeau: President Carter’s study would focus on whether reproc-
essing is good or necessary. But Giscard was asking a different ques-
tion. He also asks what kind of safeguards are we talking about—legal
or physical (sale or non-sale) of reprocessing plants. I am also worried
about President Giscard’s point that safeguards should only be applied
to other countries and not to the seven represented here. This is dis-
crimination. If we go for safeguards they must apply to all of us. Also

Non-Proliferation
how do you apply legal safeguards to the US and France who have the
bomb and Germany and Canada who do not but might want to pro-
duce some day.
Callaghan: Our people have to consider whether safeguards can be
contained in a legal framework. There are a lot of technical questions.
We should try to get the agreed facts. The group should consider
whether safeguards should be confined to existing legal frameworks,
with possible physical safeguards in addition.
President Carter: We are willing to let Japan have nuclear fuel, but
we would want to tell Congress about the safeguards if that fuel is re-
processed. There are a number of questions raised about reprocessing. I
would like to tell people that if the fuel is reprocessed there will be con-
ditions. And we will have to have inspections on ourselves. Even
though this will be a difficulty for those building bombs.
Trudeau: Will we apply these safeguards to ourselves? Unless we
answer this question we cannot expect nuclear fuel.
Callaghan: UK has adopted international inspection procedures.
Trudeau: But the UK is not building the bomb.
Schmidt: I would not like to see this type of discussion in the press.
Someone said that there might be the possibility of others keeping their
own nuclear options open. Especially, then, I would not like to see any
suggestion that some countries might not keep their international nu-
clear commitments. This would cause an up-roar in Germany.
But what do we say to our public? I did not know that it was
agreed that the Ministers would see the press, but perhaps it cannot be
avoided. We must be very careful not to provoke public opinion in
other countries. We should be very careful in reporting to our press.
Simply say we had a very valuable, necessary, discussion that we are
not as far apart as has previously appeared in the press. We should not
tell things to the press about what was said.
Schmidt: It is possible after the discussion to describe it with three
sentences which represent the highest common denominator. The first
sentence should say that we have set up a task force. We should limit
ourselves to another long sentence on the terms of reference on the task
force. You and your people could formulate this over dessert. We
should agree on the terms of references and insure that there is not a
great row in the press.
On the confidence issue good words can add confidence. It is also
important that we represent orally and on TV only what we want to
present. We made progress in understanding each other, and the way
that we present this is important.
Giscard: Let me raise quickly a number of points. We must clarify
our differences. One key issue is our supplies to third countries such as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Iran and Brazil. One concrete problem is how we supply countries with
plants without opening up charges of proliferation.
Second, if the system of safeguards applies to ourselves, we would
cause difficulties as a number of agreements already exist such as
among the UK, France and Germany, and France and Japan. We should
not apply the same discipline to the US as to Brazil or India. With
respect to the three party and two party agreement, should we can-
cel them? We should have mutual trust. We should not leave the im-
pression that we are bringing our agreements among ourselves into
question.
How can we meet our energy needs and achieve non-proliferation,
or as little proliferation as possible? If we open up agreements among
ourselves, we will not make much progress. I like the first few sen-
tences of the US draft paper.6
Trudeau: President Giscard says we should discriminate in favor of
ourselves. Chancellor Schmidt says we should treat everyone equal.
This is a difference that is still not resolved. Although we will all be
there tomorrow at the conclusion in Banquet Hall, we should have one
spokesman so that our differences will not emerge. I think that it
should be our Chairman.
Callaghan: The public point is important and cannot but have inter-
national repercussions. I agree with Helmet on the press briefing. We
should keep this type of discussion out of the press. We can try a form
of words.
Trudeau: We should not discuss the discrimination issue but
simply talk about how we can meet energy requirements.
President Carter: Perhaps we can use the first three sentences of the
US draft.
Schmidt: We can use those sentences and add that the group here
has established a study of how this can be brought about.
Andreotti: I agree with that type of statement. I wish to stress that
there are countries who having signed the NPT, particularly Article IV,
do not wish to see this contested once again. We should say that we are
not discussing Article IV, or policy which has been established.
Callaghan: Does anyone want to discuss Article IV?
Schmidt: This is not being put under question. We should say that it
stands up.
Callaghan: Do we agree not to bring this into question?
Trudeau: With India, they say their energy is also for peaceful use.
Should we send more nuclear material to India?
6 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
Callaghan: I know you would like guidelines which would relieve
you of certain arbitrary decisions.
Trudeau: My electorate will say, “Is this what they agreed in
London?” It will not impress my electorate.
Callaghan: You are saying this will not be enough to help you re-
store shipments of nuclear fuel to India.
President Carter: We are in different positions. The study will not
help to resolve some of these difficulties but the results may help.
Trudeau: We are now imposing unilateral safeguards on everyone.
If we go no further than we have this afternoon this will continue. We
have suspended sales since December.
Callaghan: We should not be able to say we recognize the diffi-
culties of the situation. We can have confidence. For the time being we
should get the study going. We should say that the seven recognize the
need to establish a system of international assurances but meanwhile
have sufficient confidence in each other to decide when new shipments
should be approved. But it is not possible on the basis of a 1-½ hour dis-
cussion to refer to physical safeguards of the type mentioned by
Giscard.
Schmidt: I want the US to develop its nuclear technology. I want
them to do it. The study should move ahead. Once the 8–10 week study
is concluded it will take months and years to bring it into effect. We
cannot now reach a just position which alleviates the burden of deci-
sion of the US and Canada. This is why other states also wish to explore
these problems. Others have stakes in this field but are not represented.
We should not exclude them or we will provoke them to do what we do
not want them to do. We should ultimately find some way of including
the threshold countries—not South Africa or Israel. Not inviting the
threshold countries will not encourage confidence abroad.
The utmost that can be achieved is the three sentences of the US
paper which will give the task force terms and say how this can be
brought about. Then the matter can be discussed again and decisions
made on the involvement of other countries.
Fukuda: I agree in principle with the experts committee. But I share
some of the concerns already stated. Can the Soviet Union and China
be persuaded to come in? I think that will take a long time. President
Carter said the study should be completed in two months, but I am not
sure that is quite workable.
The committee or task force would be of such a nature as to merely
represent the views of the seven. The target of the group should be the
end of June or something like that. With respect to press we should say
that we discussed a broad range of issues, including future energy
question, including other sources, and not just say we were discussing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the reprocessing of spent fuels. We should say that we exchanged
views on a broad range of issues on supply and demand for energy
sources.
Callaghan: The US has stated the position that there should be a nu-
clear fuel cycle evaluation program. We are here trying to develop an
understanding of the terms of references of the study and to try to meet
the points the President has raised. It would work in parallel with the
London Supplier Group. It would determine what is to be included and
what is not to be included. The expert group would see whether terms
of reference could be agreed for this program. The emphasis should be
on meeting energy needs with as little proliferation as possible.
But we should recognize that this is only one aspect of energy in
the communique as Prime Minister Fukuda pointed out. In addition
the EC has some competence. We should come back tomorrow with
some acceptable wording on this.
Genscher: We should make certain that the task force sees its goals
as achievement of a system of safeguards against proliferation. We
should say we are studying these conclusions but that before final deci-
sions are made we will discuss them with the London Supplier Group.
This will avoid any misunderstandings.
Giscard: The public will misunderstand if we say we are studying
methods of non-proliferation. We should say that because of diffi-
culties in the energy area we find it indispensable to develop nuclear
energy. It should be on the basis of our energy requirements that we
base our study.
Callaghan: We should try to meet our energy requirements with as
little proliferation as possible. That is what I believe we agree we are
trying to achieve.7
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
7 At the conclusion of the G–7 Summit, the members nations issued a declaration
covering a range of issues. Regarding energy and nonproliferation, the nations pledged
to “further conserve energy and increase and diversify energy production, so that we re-
duce our dependence on oil. We agree on the need to increase nuclear energy to help
meet the world’s energy requirements. We commit ourselves to do this while reducing
the risks of nuclear proliferation. We are launching an urgent study to determine how

Non-Proliferation
343.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Storage of Foreign Spent Nuclear Fuel
While we were in London, the NSC Interagency Group on Prolifer-
ation was completing the last three major studies assigned by you in
PD–8. One of these concerns spent fuel storage. The report is the result
of an intensive six-week effort, and contains recommendations which
are unanimously supported by State, ACDA and ERDA—an unusual
situation on this issue. The conclusion is that the US will have to accept
foreign spent fuel as a key incentive if other countries are to agree to
forego reprocessing.
Quoting from the summary paper (Tab B):2
“Indefinite deferral of reprocessing within the US and our policy
initiatives for other countries to join in this deferral will require a signif-
icant increase in spent fuel storage capacity . . .
“The overall concept we envisage is to provide short-term storage
for existing reactors (i.e. for approximately ten years) through more ef-
ficient use of existing reactor basin storage and through existing or
planned away-from-reactor storage facilities. Long-term storage (i.e.
after about ten years of out-of-reactor storage) would be provided in re-
gional, international storage facilities; one for the EC area, one for Japan
and Pacific Basin, and one for US utilities and US foreign customers, as
needed. To bring this about, the US Government will have to (1) take
the lead in working with foreign customers to expand capacity of ex-
isting reactor storage basins; (2) make provisions for US and foreign
near-term storage shortfalls in the US; (3) develop long-term storage fa-
cilities in the US that will handle fuel from foreign as well as US util-
ities; and, (4) initiate concrete steps to establish other international
storage areas.”
While you may not choose to approve all of the options the Group has rec-
ommended, it does seem clear that until you have had an opportunity to study
their proposals, we should not lock ourselves into a public position which
would rule out any storage of foreign spent fuel in the US. Therefore, I have
drafted for your approval (Tab A),3 a proposed response should this
[1]. No classification marking. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the
memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig. Get me a brief memo—perhaps with photos or
sketches & maps showing me what we’re doing now with wastes. JC.”
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
issue arise at your press conference today. It leaves you flexibility for
whatever policy you may subsequently adopt.
One final note, concerning the political acceptability of receiving
foreign spent fuel. You may be interested in the memorandum of con-
versation at Tab C.4 It summarizes the results of a meeting between
members of the Executive Branch, and environmentalist and anti-
nuclear leaders. This is the group which would lead any opposition on
this issue. As you can see, they generally support the idea of such a
policy as a favorable tradeoff against reprocessing.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the formulation at Tab A for public treatment of
this issue for the immediate future.
4 Not attached.
344.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Japanese Nuclear Talks—Negotiating Guidance
A Japanese delegation arrives for talks on June 2, 3 on the Tokai re-
processing issue. The memorandum at Tab A—prepared by the NSC
Interagency Group on Proliferation—seeks your instructions for these
talks.
This meeting is being held at Japanese insistence. The U.S. tried
unsuccessfully to postpone it, feeling that very little has changed since
the last round.2 Also, the timing of these talks is bad for us since, as you
know, Vance has been discussing with Ambassador Gerard Smith the
possibility of his assuming overall responsibility for proliferation nego-
tiations. Smith’s presence would provide us with the negotiating expe-
[1]. Confidential. Sent for action.

Non-Proliferation
rience that has been so noticeably lacking in previous proliferation
talks.
This memorandum raises some issues not treated in the intera-
gency paper, summarizes the views of the five lead agencies—State,
Defense, ERDA, ACDA, and Schlesinger—and sets forth the options
available to you.
OPTIONS AND ARGUMENTS
Option 1: Permit reprocessing at Tokai on a provisional, experimental,
multinational basis involving IAEA participation to test safeguards.
As you know, Tokai cannot operate commercially without a prior
finding of safeguardability by the U.S. We wish to avoid such a finding
since our policy is based on the premise that reprocessing by its very
nature cannot be adequately safeguarded. This option assumes that
Tokai could be allowed to operate experimentally without the finding of
safeguardability. However there is some question as to whether that
could in fact be done without opening the USG to legal challenge. State
and ERDA both believe that Option 1 should be authorized as a fallback
option available to the U.S. delegation should Option 3 and 2 prove
non-negotiable. ACDA and Defense disagree. Schlesinger believes that it
could be seen as inconsistent with domestic policies.
We expect that the Japanese will table some version of this option.
Option 2: Explore through expert consultation the feasibility of alter-
ing Tokai so that it could operate to test both reprocessing and partial
coprocessing.
As you know, partial coprocessing produces a mixed product of
uranium and plutonium “spiked” with highly radioactive waste prod-
ucts which make the mixture dangerous and expensive to handle.
State believes that this should be the second allowed position.
ERDA agrees. ACDA on the other hand feels that in some respects Op-
tion 2 is the least preferable option, in that—unlike Option 3—it estab-
lishes a precedent for reprocessing. Nor does it have the advantage of
Option 1 of avoiding discrimination of treatment between the Japanese
and FRG (which also has an experimental reprocessing plant).3
Option 3: Explore the possibility of operating Tokai only with a modified
process that does not produce pure separated plutonium (i.e., some form of par-
tial coprocessing).
All agencies agree that some version of this option is most pre-
ferable but they differ in their expectations of its acceptability to the
Japanese. Defense and ACDA believe that only this option should be au-
3 With the appointment of Spurgeon Keeny, who was the director of the Ford/
Mitre study, [on nuclear power and issues] ACDA now has a strong expertise on this
issue. ACDA’s comments, which raise several important points, are attached at Tab B for
your information. [Footnote is in the original.] Tab B is not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
thorized for negotiations, while State and ERDA believe that fallback
options will be necessary.
Also, both Defense and ACDA believe that the U.S. should not offer
to provide plutonium for the Japanese breeder, as proposed in the in-
teragency paper. ACDA has calculated that reprocessing of the British-
supplied fuel from the Magnox reactor at Tokai can provide sufficient
plutonium to meet Japanese needs.
Schlesinger supports, but did not choose between, some version of
Options 2 or 3.
Option 4: Seek Japanese agreement to defer running the Tokai plant for a
fixed period of time, offering an incentives package in exchange.
All agencies agree that this option is likely to be non-negotiable.
SUGGESTED U.S. STRATEGY
All agencies are agreed that we should seek agreement on Option
3. They differ over whether we should offer to provide plutonium, and
as to how far we should fallback in this meeting. Our strategy clearly
should be to avoid the political damage that would result if the Japa-
nese prove adamant against Option 3 and the talks reach a deadlock. At
the same time, we want to avoid damaging U.S. non-proliferation ob-
jectives through showing so much flexibility (i.e., interest in Option 1)
that the Japanese return home encouraged to maintain a rigid position.
Therefore, I recommend that the delegation be instructed to nego-
tiate with a view to reaching agreement on Option 3, as modified to bar
an offer of U.S.-supplied plutonium. In addition, if no progress can be
made, and the Japanese propose some version of Option 1, the delega-
tion should be instructed to respond by drawing them out on the details
of their proposal. Our delegation should make it explicit however that
the Japanese should not read into our response any expectation of
eventual U.S. approval of such an option.
YOUR DECISION
1. Our Basic Position
Option 3 (State, ERDA)
OR
Option 3—no plutonium (DoD, ACDA, NSC)
4 Carter did not indicate which option he preferred.

Non-Proliferation
2. Fallback—in order of increasing flexibility.
None (DoD, ACDA)
Respond to Option 1, but do not offer it (NSC)
Option 2 (State)
Option 2 and 1 (ERDA)
Attachment
Memorandum Prepared by the NSC Interagency Group on
Proliferation6
Washington, undated
NON-PROLIFERATION AND REPROCESSING IN JAPAN
Based on the President’s instructions to listen to Japanese views on
how to deal with the pilot reprocessing plant at Tokai, U.S. repre-
sentatives from State, ACDA and ERDA met with a visiting Japanese
delegation between April 5 and 15. At the closing session it was agreed
that another meeting would take place in which the U.S. and Japan
would offer new proposals. This memorandum seeks your guid-
ance and instructions for discussions scheduled on June 2 and 3 in
Washington.
Japanese spokesmen consistently have stressed that because
members of the European Community including West Germany can
reprocess U.S.-origin fuel under the U.S.–EURATOM agreement with-
out prior U.S. approval, while Japan cannot, Japan is effectively being
discriminated against with regard to plutonium technology develop-
ment and breeder-related research. In this context they have argued
that under the U.S.-Japan agreement our rights are limited to allowing
us to make a determination as to whether safeguards can effectively be
applied to the facility and that it is inappropriate for the U.S. to employ
them to force alterations in the Japanese program.
The Tokai issue has become one of the major campaign issues in
the forthcoming Upper House elections. Prime Minister Fukuda is
deeply concerned about the political consequences of this issue. In sup-
port of their case for proceeding to operate Tokai as initially intended,
5 Carter did not indicate which option he preferred.
6 Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Japanese officials have referred to the President’s April 77 and May 28
press conference remarks citing Japan as one of the countries which
have “a perfect right to go ahead and continue their own reprocessing.”
They aver that the President reaffirmed that position in private discus-
sions at London with Prime Minister Fukuda.9
Japanese spokesmen have proposed that resolution of the Tokai
issue be placed in the context of a broad political understanding in
which Japan would publicly support our nuclear fuel cycle evaluation
program and our position on the security risks inherent in plutonium
production. They also appear ready to support our conclusion that re-
cycling plutonium for light water reactors is neither necessary nor eco-
nomically justified. In return the United States would affirm that it does
not intend to discriminate against Japan and, until such time as a viable
alternative to a plutonium fuel cycle may be established, that it will
grant approvals of transfers of spent fuel for reprocessing elsewhere,
and avoid invoking provisions in the U.S.-Japanese bilateral agreement
in such a way as to jeopardize Japan’s long-term nuclear strategy. Ad-
ditionally the United States would seek to facilitate Japanese access to
assured supplies of low enriched uranium and Japanese interest in be-
coming a supplier of enriched uranium.
United States non-proliferation policies have been articulated in
the President’s public statements, PDM–8 decisions and proposed leg-
islation. Any decision on Tokai must bear in mind not only the high po-
litical importance of that issue to the Japanese, but our own interests as
well. A Tokai decision would be the first, by this Administration, on a
foreign reprocessing facility. Although the facility, and its context, are
somewhat unique, a U.S. decision could set precedents. The manner in
which the U.S. exercises its rights could affect European Community
willingness to renegotiate reprocessing rights they now have under the
U.S.–EURATOM agreement for cooperation.
7 On April 7, Carter told reporters that he recognized that it “would be impossible,
counterproductive, and ill-advised for us to try to prevent other countries that need it
from having the capability to produce electricity from atomic power” and that the “one
difference that has been very sensitive as it relates to, say, Germany, Japan, and others, is
that they fear that our unilateral action in renouncing the reprocessing of spent fuels to
produce plutonium might imply that we prohibit them or criticize them severely because
of their own need for reprocessing. This is not the case. They have a perfect right to go
ahead and continue with their own reprocessing efforts. But we hope they’ll join with us
in eliminating in the future additional countries that might have had this capability
8 On May 2, Carter told European journalists that he favored “the supply of ade-
quate nuclear fuel to nations for power production” but was “heavily committed to the
prevention of the capability of non-nuclear nations from developing explosives, atomic
9 No record of this conversation has been found.

Non-Proliferation
There are four general options available under the existing
circumstances:
Option 1: Permit reprocessing at Tokai on a provisional, experimental,
multinational basis involving IAEA participation to test safeguards. Oper-
ating on the assumption that one of the outcomes of the fuel cycle eval-
uation program might be the continued use of plutonium in some nu-
clear programs, this Option would permit exploration of various
safeguards, surveillance, containment and accounting procedures—
and multilateral plant concepts—with a view to ensuring that any
eventual reprocessing would be carried out only under the most strin-
gent and acceptable conditions. The operations would not involve a de-
termination that reprocessing plants can be safeguarded. They would
be of limited duration, entail a limited number of reprocessing cam-
paigns and would be cast explicitly in the context of test activities to
cover the contingency that a restricted number of reprocessing facilities
might emerge in the longer term. The derived plutonium would be em-
ployed in the Japanese advanced reactor programs.
This alternative would in all likelihood be acceptable to Japan, al-
though it would beg the question of whether and when Tokai could op-
erate commercially. However, it could establish a presumption that re-
processing is “safeguardable” and signal to other nations that national
reprocessing is acceptable. Those risks could be reduced by explicitly
linking the Tokai safeguards test activities to the possibility of the even-
tual emergence of a limited number of carefully sited multinational
reprocessing facilities. Furthermore, the notion that improved surveil-
lance, containment and accountability resolve the problem of pluto-
nium stockpiling and abrogation of safeguards agreements would be
explicitly rejected. This Option could be seen as inconsistent with the
U.S. policy of indefinite deferral of commercial reprocessing. On the
other hand, a major advantage of this option is that it reduces the pres-
sure we will otherwise face to supply plutonium for Japan’s experi-
mental breeder program.
Option 2: Explore through expert consultation the feasibility of altering
Tokai so that it could operate to test both reprocessing and partial copro-
cessing. This option would involve reorienting the Tokai facility to test
alternative methods of extracting value from spent fuel without sepa-
rating plutonium such as partial coprocessing. In addition it would
permit a limited amount of conventional reprocessing in order to de-
rive information regarding safeguards accounting and surveillance
techniques.
Criteria
would
be
established
to
assess
the
non-
proliferation value of the selected technology. While this solution
would permit some traditional experimental reprocessing, it would be
compatible with our international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation pro-
gram, give tangible international content to our evaluation program

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with leadership assumed by a major nuclear-user state, and enable the
Japanese to start up the Tokai facility in a manner reasonably consistent
with our non-proliferation objectives. Furthermore, a safeguardability
determination would not be required.
Although there could be some political sensitivity in Japan, this is
fairly close to what they already have proposed informally and should
defuse the immediate issue between us. On the other hand, it must be
recognized that this option would entail significant modification of
Tokai without assuring the continuing operation of the plant or an out-
come consistent with long-term nuclear planning and could be re-
garded by the Japanese as a threat to their fast breeder reactor program.
To alleviate this concern, we believe this option would have to be ac-
companied by U.S. offers to make available to Japan, directly or indi-
rectly, the plutonium necessary to the continuation of their breeder re-
search program.
Option 3: Explore the possibility of operating Tokai only with a modified
process that does not produce pure separated plutonium based on a program
worked out through expert consultations with the United States. This alter-
native is similar to Option 2 but excludes the possibility of running
Tokai in a manner that would produce pure plutonium. While partial
coprocessing might be the selected alternative technology, final selec-
tion of an operating process would depend on the conclusions of an ex-
pert committee of Japanese and U.S. nuclear experts. As in Option 2 the
non-proliferation value of the selected technology would be assessed
according to specified criteria. In order to facilitate continuation of the
Japanese advanced reactor research program, the U.S. would under-
take to provide the required plutonium directly or indirectly and
would facilitate Japanese access to ensured supplies of low enriched
uranium and uranium feed.
The Japanese might regard this proposal as discriminatory in view
of the fact that European countries are engaged in conventional reproc-
essing. The U.S. would have to facilitate Japanese access to plutonium
for their experimental breeder program along the lines noted in Option
2. Depending on the quantities involved, our nuclear agreement might
have to be modified for this purpose.
The U.S. also might be faced with Japanese requests to contribute
substantially to the cost of the Tokai modification. The time needed to
implement this Option (possibly as much as three years) and other re-
lated uncertainties is not likely to make it very appealing to the Japa-
nese. However, this alternative could satisfy the letter and spirit of U.S.
policy on deferring conventional reprocessing while offering the Japa-
nese a technical solution for running the Tokai plant.
Option 4: Seek Japanese agreement to defer running the Tokai plant for a
fixed period of time, offering an incentives package in exchange. Under this

Non-Proliferation
Option the U.S. would seek Japanese agreement to defer start-up of the
Tokai plant during the evaluation period. In exchange, the U.S. would
offer to provide the plutonium necessary for continuation of the Japa-
nese advanced reactor programs, facilitate Japanese access to assured
supplies of uranium ore, take measures to provide forward deliveries
of low enriched uranium for the Japanese LWR reactors permitting the
creation of a three-year advance LEU stockpile on Japanese territory.
The Japanese asked for these assurances during the first round of dis-
cussions. If the circumstances so dictated, the U.S. would seek to facili-
tate Japanese participation through equity sharing or involvement in
U.S. multinational enrichment facilities, or in enrichment activities
elsewhere.
This Option would prevent the start-up of a new reprocessing fa-
cility but, as in Option 3, would require us to either deliver substantial
quantities of plutonium or to approve sustained transfers of irradiated
fuel from Japan to France or the United Kingdom for reprocessing and
to authorize the return to Japan of separated plutonium. The latter
course could lead to establishing undesirable precedents. This Option
also might entail facilitating the sharing of technology for enrichment
purposes. The Option would undoubtedly be received very negatively
in Japan because of the political implications of Japan acceding to U.S.
demands on Tokai as well as its obvious discriminatory features
vis-a-vis West Germany and the European Community.
345.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Japan1
130632. Subject: U.S.-Japan Nuclear Talks.
1. During series of talks just concluded major attention was de-
voted to drafting agreed principles in the context of which operation of
cret; Immediate. Drafted by William Sherman (EA/J); cleared by Louis Scheinman (T),
James Bonight (OES), Harold Benglesdorf (ERDA), Marvin Moss (ACDA), Michael Ar-
macost (NSC), and Sydney Goldsmith (S/S); and approved by William Gleysteen (EA).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the Tokai facility using U.S. origin fuel might be worked out. Full text
follows Septel.2 Essence of these principles was:
A. U.S. recognized importance of nuclear energy development to
Japan, supported continued development of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and committed itself not to jeopardize Japan’s long-term energy
strategy, including its breeder research and development program,
promised to work with Japan and other countries to establish assured
supplies of uranium ore and lightly enriched uranium, and reaffirmed
that it had no intention of discriminating against Japan in area of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
B. Japan stated its support and intention to cooperate in INFOP,
and said it shared concern regarding proliferation dangers stemming
from utilizing plutonium. It stated its view that plutonium recycling in
LWR’s could be a useful technological option if it could be made suffi-
ciently proliferation-resistant; however, it took due note of U.S. conclu-
sion that such recycling is neither economically justified nor necessary.
Japan also is of view that plutonium recycling in LWR’s is not yet ready
for commercialization.
C. It was agreed that operation of Tokai facility would be worked
out on basis of these principles. U.S. and Japanese experts agreed con-
sult to develop solution whereby the Tokai facility is operated initially
in a manner that would provide new information of significant non-
proliferation value.
2. With respect to U.S. team of experts, GOJ negotiators stipulated
that team should prepare joint report with Japanese colleagues, that re-
port be submitted to both governments as quickly as possible, and that,
if practicable, it be submitted while team was still in Japan.
3. At this stage, GOJ negotiators did not rpt not wish to allude to
fact that principles had been agreed upon and wished avoid any refer-
ence to existence of document in discussing negotiations with press.
U.S. side agreed. At same time, negotiators agreed ask their gov-
ernments to consider making text of agreed principles public at later
date.
4. Negotiators also agreed on terms of reference for joint technical
team visit to Tokai-Mura. In brief, mandate of team is to:
A. Examine degree of proliferation resistance of various methods
of operating facility, explore methods of reducing proliferation danger,
including improving safeguards effectiveness.

Non-Proliferation
B. Explore alternative methods of operation (e.g., some sort of co-
processing) and assess the impact of such alternatives on cost, storage
tank availability and lead time, schedule delays, etc.
C. Recommend preferred modes of operation, both interim and
long term.
5. Dept believes this round of negotiations was successful in out-
lining a general framework for a mutually acceptable outcome and in
providing a suitable basis for further discussion. We still do not, how-
ever, have resolution on a mode of operation of Tokai-Mura that would
be acceptable to both sides and we would expect the U.S. team to probe
with the Japanese the extent to which they are prepared to operate on a
basis not involving production of weapons-usable material. While dif-
ficult negotiations still lie ahead, some genuine agreement has been
achieved on general principles and the issue has been somewhat
defused.
Vance
346.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
133712. Paris for Nye and Nosenzo, Vienna for IAEA. Subject: In-
ternational Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation.
1. Following is paper outlining the International Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Evaluation Program.
2. Begin text. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (a
possible approach).
A. The objectives of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evalu-
ation are to:
—Enhance international cooperation in dealing with common con-
cerns related to the use of nuclear power for civil purposes and provide
a forum for exchange of views and voluntary harmonization of policy;
and
Confidential. Sent for information to Paris and Vienna. Drafted by Samuel Fromowitz
(EUR/EE); cleared by James Devine (OES/NET), Edward McGaffigan (T), and Louis No-
senzo (OES/NET); and approved by John Armitage (EUR).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Provide information to guide the development of alternative
nuclear power systems that minimize potential proliferation while as-
suring reliable economic and environmentally acceptable energy sup-
plies for each nation. The Program will identify and assess the feasi-
bility of alternate systems to meet energy needs on a timely basis.
B. Each participating country and international organization
would contribute to the objectives set forth in paragraph 1 above by ap-
plying scientific, technical and financial resources, alone or in coopera-
tion with others as it deems appropriate, to programs and projects com-
monly identified as useful in the Evaluation.
C. The participants could designate national agencies or other
public or private organizations as the vehicle for their contribution to
the Evaluation.
D. The Evaluation Program will consist of a number of coordi-
nated research and study programs related to existing fuel cycles and
future cycle alternatives. Countries and international organizations in-
terested in participating in research and evaluation in a particular area
will work together. One or more of the participants, as agreed among
themselves, would be designated as the lead participants, i.e. respon-
sible for arranging meetings and coordinating work in the particular
area. The overall evaluation will be coordinated through participation
in a steering committee which would meet to launch the Program and
periodically to assess progress. The steering committee can consist of
representatives of lead participants and other participating countries as
well as representatives of international organizations with a major in-
terest in the Evaluation.
E. Discussion of an overall INFCE plan and schedule should take
place in the next few months. We would hope that identification of lead
participants and joint examination of a work plan for each major area
could proceed in parallel, with work implementation in some areas be-
ginning in early fall. At this juncture, the U.S. believes there would be
merit in launching the Program through a steering committee meeting
that would direct various technical working groups to define and de-
velop areas of mutual interest. These groups would report back to the
steering committee. We would expect the general review of results and
discussion of further work in about two years. Including a possible
prioritizing of items for further development.
F. The work of the Evaluation would be coordinated with and
make use of the capabilities of the IAEA. The IAEA could be repre-
sented on the steering committee. The results of working groups would
be fed into the IAEA program through symposia and publications.
IAEA experts could participate in working groups and might function
as lead participants in some areas. Periodic overall reviews could take
place under IAEA auspices. The capabilities of other organizations
could be applied as appropriate.

Non-Proliferation
G. Participating nations would, in accordance with their own in-
terests and programs, undertake and coordinate research and evalu-
ation in the following specific areas, and others as identified by the
participants.
(1) An international assessment of uranium availability and de-
mand taking into account the work already being performed by the
IEA and NEA. This would include consideration of coordinated explo-
ration, joint resource development, and measures to facilitate export/
import arrangements consistent with prudent non-proliferation condi-
tions. Differing market regimes and interaction with commercial issues
would be taken into account. A parallel study on thorium could also be
undertaken.
(2) Investigation of sound mining techniques for recovery of lower
grade ores.
(3) An evaluation among interested states of uranium enrichment
requirements and projected capacity. This would include consideration
of joint planning to ensure adequate capacity and of collaborative in-
vestment opportunities.
(4) An examination of possible institutional arrangements de-
signed to assure long-term fuel supply. This will include analyses of
such arrangements as bilateral supplier-consumer guarantees, multina-
tional arrangements that would permit consumer investment in enrich-
ment services, and fuel pooling, all aimed at insuring access on a
non-discriminatory basis to reactor fuel to countries meeting mutually
agreed non-proliferation constraints.
(5) An examination of demand and assured supply arrangements
for heavy water.
(6) Coordinated research, information exchange and technical aid
in fostering near-term options for increasing spent fuel storage in-
cluding technologies for more efficient utilization of existing spent fuel
capacity (e.g. neutron absorbing racks) and technologies for rapidly in-
stalling additional capacity. Studies designed to facilitate the safe and
economical transportation of spent fuel and radioactive wastes.
(7) Possible establishment of international spent fuel repositories,
including studies on a regional basis to assess sites for such repositories
and develop legal, financial and institutional frameworks for bringing
such repositories into existence.
(8) Studies on long-term retrievable storage. This would include
consideration of various research concepts and comparison of experi-
mental results on ongoing research on retrievable storage technologies.
(9) Work on the technology for permanent storage of spent fuel or
high level waste, including disposal canister design and testing. Joint
consideration of international repositories would also be undertaken.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(10) A systematic assessment of the comparative advantages of
various reactor and fuel cycle concepts, taking into account relevant cri-
teria pertaining to non-proliferation benefits, technical feasibility, eco-
nomic implications, and prospective usefulness in meeting energy needs.
(11) Research on various technical methods to increase once-
through uranium utilization in LWRS and HWRS, such as optimized
fuel and loading designs and spectral shift modifications that would
significantly increase fuel utilization and reactor efficiency.
(12) Research programs on advanced reactors, breeder alternatives
and thorium use, including:
—HTR once-through applications using low-enriched uranium;
—HTR thorium/uranium denatured fuel cycle applications;
—Various breeder concepts, including light water, thorium, so-
dium, and gas-cooled breeders, particularly those concepts which,
while requiring sensitive fuels and fuel cycle elements, would also sup-
port existing or future non-sensitive reactor cycles;
—Other advanced reactor concepts, including research on reactor
possibilities that are in the conceptual rather than experimental stage,
such as particle accelerator/reactor concepts, homogeneous reactors,
plasma reactors and hybrid fission/fusion reactor concepts.
(13) Efforts in the area of reprocessing and related technical alter-
natives including:
—Analytical studies of the economic and environmental aspects of
reprocessing and recycle, including the results of extensive recent U.S.
work on the economic and environmental affects of reprocessing and
recycle;
—Technical alternatives to reprocessing techniques which pro-
duce plutonium in a pure form, to include international evaluation of
the non-proliferation, safeguards, physical protection and economic
implications of techniques such as uranium separation only; Various
coprocessing modes, pyro-chemical processing, and THOREX reproc-
essing evaluation; (The non-proliferation and other implications of the
use of conventional reprocessing and plutonium-handling techniques
would be employed as a frame of reference in assessing the value of
alternatives.)
—With regard to reprocessing or other processes involving pro-
duction and use of weapons-usable material, an examination of the
problems associated with attempting to safeguard or better protect
them and evaluation of possible future international arrangements to
reduce proliferation risks associated with abrogation or termination of
safeguards. End text.
Vance

Non-Proliferation
347.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Reply to Giscard
President Giscard has sent you (at Tab B)2 a letter on proliferation.
(It is not really a personal letter but rather one prepared by the bureauc-
racy.) In the letter, he asserts that a misunderstanding occurred re-
garding the objectives of the nuclear experts meeting in Paris on June
fuel cycle study; we and everyone else thought that issue was settled
and used the Experts’ Meeting to draft terms of reference for the study.
Giscard’s letter suggests that the French now are going back on
what appeared at the Summit to be a commitment to participate in our
proposed international fuel cycle evaluation. He expresses his belief
that the experts should meet again to undertake the preliminary study
commissioned in London.
Attached at Tab A4 is a proposed response to President Giscard
that urges the French to get back on board with respect to the evalu-
ation, while making some accommodation for the apparent “misunder-
standing.” It also takes advantage of Giscard’s opening to you to raise
our two key issues with the French:
—Adoption of full scope safeguards: We have made startling progress
in the past two months on full scope safeguards: the Canadians already
practice them unilaterally; the British, Germans and Soviets have stated
clear support for them as joint supplier policy. The only remaining bar-
rier to their formal adoption at the fall London Suppliers meeting is
France.
—The Pakistani deal: We want to take this opportunity again to
bring up the Pakistan issue with Giscard. A complimentary reference to
Giscard’s efforts to delay deliveries to Pakistan and mention of the po-
tentially positive effect on Pakistan of the attitude of the new Indian
File, Box 12, France: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter initialed the top of the
memorandum.
2 The Giscard letter was not attached but is available in telegram 147101 to Paris,
3 Not found.
4 Tab A was not attached. Carter’s response is available in telegram 147101 to Paris.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Government should encourage Giscard to feel more like a partner in
these efforts and would tie the Pakistan issue into the overall picture in
a low-key way.
The French concerns, mentioned in paragraph 2 of your reply,
refer to: French demands that for the duration of the fuel cycle study
(1) the U.S. allow all reprocessing of U.S.-supplied fuel from third coun-
tries, and (2) the U.S. agree not to renegotiate the U.S.–EURATOM
Agreement for Cooperation.5 While both of these positions are in con-
flict with your expressed policy, there is modest room for maneuver.
Specifically, State and ERDA propose the following steps referred to in
the response.
1. That we agree to begin renegotiation of those elements of the
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement that are not controversial, and that we
agree not to take up, for the period of the first two-year phase of the fuel
cycle evaluation, the controversial elements relating to disposition of
spent fuel within the European Economic Community, including both
reprocessing and retransfer.
2. That we indicate that we are prepared to consider favorably U.S.
approval for reprocessing sufficient amounts of spent fuel during the
period of the evaluation to ensure that the capacities of existing French
facilities are met, but not agree to any long-term contract for repro-
cessing of spent fuel (particularly from Japan) that would be used to fi-
nance the construction of new French reprocessing facilities.
Finally, I believe we can use the response to Giscard to good effect
by noting that Gerry Smith will soon be available to meet with appro-
priate officials of the French Government to explain your views in
greater detail. This reference to Gerry’s role should help open a useful
channel of communications at a level between the technical experts and
direct contact between you and Giscard. The French have been ex-
ploiting this gap up until now.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the draft response.6
That you approve the negotiating positions outlined here, to be
proposed to the French by Smith as soon as possible.7
approval” of an agreement between the United States government and the six EU-
RATOM countries—Belgium, France, the FRG, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Nether-
lands—to cooperate to produce and use nuclear energy in Western Europe. (See “Presi-
dent Asks for Congressional Approval of Agreement with European Atomic Energy
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “as amended” in the right-hand
margin.
7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “Be firm—C” in the right-hand
margin.

Non-Proliferation
348.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
156342. USEEC, USIAEA. Subject: US–USSR Non-proliferation
Discussions—June 17.
1. Summary. Morokhov made lengthy statement including many
points contained in statement at last London meeting.2 Major new
point was proposal for joint top level US–USSR declaration outlined
below. Nye deferred answer on top level declaration question but sug-
gested London guidelines could be common suppliers declaration
when guidelines finalized and publicized.3 US raised protocol II of
treaty of Tlatelolco, pointing out relevance of Soviet action to possible
movement by Brazil.4 Full scope safeguards were discussed and Nye
urged USSR to announce a unilateral policy similar to US. Nye sug-
gested Soviet proposals on stockpile limits and regional centers be con-
sidered in INFCE. Highlights follow. Full report will be pouched.5 End
summary.
2. US team headed by ACDA Director Warnke and Deputy Under
Secretary Nye met for 4½ hours June 17 with Soviet Delegation headed
by Morokhov. Warnke opened meeting by referring to March agree-
ment in Moscow to hold regular nonproliferation discussions,6 briefly
reviewed several agenda items, reemphasized relevance of a CTB with
no PNE loophole to non-proliferation, and asked Nye to handle de-
Confidential. Sent for Information to Paris, London, Bonn, Brasilia, Brussels, and Vienna.
Drafted by Rust (ACDA/NP/NX); cleared by Nye, Louis Nosenzo (OES), Oplinger,
Nelson Sievering (ERDA), William Salisbury (EUR/RPE), Jon Glassman (EUR/SOV),
and Giles Harlow (DOD); and approved by Charles Van Doren (ACDA/NP).
Central Foreign Policy File, D770166–0383)
lines for which nuclear supplies could not be exported to Non-Nuclear Weapons States
by members of the Group. These guidelines came from Article III of the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, which said that “source or special fissionable material and equip-
ment or material especially designed or prepared for the processing, use or production of
special fissionable material, to any non-nuclear weapon State for special purposes, unless
the source or fissionable material shall be subjected to the safeguards required by this Ar-
4 Protocol II calls upon nuclear-weapon states to agree to respect the obligations set
forth in the Treaty and to promise not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
Contracting Parties to the Treaty. See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XI, Arms Control
and Disarmament, Document 226.
5 Not found.
6 See Document 332.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tailed discussions. Following Nye’s introductory remarks Morokhov
delivered a lengthy statement (para 3 and 4).
3. Morokhov mentioned Brezhnev’s May 297 call for maximum
non-proliferation effort and identified the following areas for joint
US–USSR consideration:
—Enhancement of NPT; suggested joint action to encourage ad-
herence by several conspicuous non-parties;
—Promotion of full scope safeguards as condition of supply, in-
cluding efforts to secure such a condition on part of potential exporters
of source material; (there was discussion of how to deal with French on
this question);
—Moratorium on sensitive transfers—Morokhov said USSR sup-
ports and stressed that fuel services should be offered; USSR can ex-
pand enrichment capacity;
—Agreement among exporters on sanctions; suppliers should con-
sult if recipient defaults on IAEA obligation including exploding nu-
clear device; exports should be halted and issue raised at IAEA and
UN; USSR also ready to consider other sanctions;
—Limits on stockpiles of weapons usable material by requiring
spent fuel return to supplier or to regional center; could be additional
provision in London guidelines;
—Multinational centers for spent fuel storage and reprocessing;
—Regular bilateral and multilateral supplier consultations espe-
cially in cases of large transfers or when major new assistance is under-
taken; also suppliers could exchange trigger list information;
—Strengthening IAEA safeguards; mentioned carrying out ex-
perts’ recommendation of safeguards evaluation unit, and urged
stronger US support; said USSR puzzled by US “passivity” on ensuring
effective agreements with EURATOM and Japan; suggested encour-
aging NPT parties to conclude agreements, and discussed SAGSI;
—Promotion of physical security convention; USSR studying US
draft;8
—Suggestion of US–USSR declaration to be signed at top levels
calling for universal nonproliferation regime, supporting peaceful in-
ternational nuclear cooperation not contributing to explosive spread,
full scope safeguards and additional NPT adherence and other supplier
group type issues on sensitive transfers, sanctions, physical security;
support for IAEA safeguards. Morokhov stressed that list of topics was
suggestive only; essential element is joint character of declaration at
highest levels.
4. Morokhov concluded statement by saying INFCE proposal will
contribute to nonproliferation and USSR has no objection to pro-
gram. They will consider participation of Soviet experts in technical
discussions.
7 See “Address by General Secretary Brezhnev on French Television [Extract],” May
8 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
5. Initial Nye comment on Soviet proposal for joint declaration was
to defer any response re issuance at top level. Since list of topics par-
allels suppliers guidelines, he suggested that this purpose could be
served by the joint suppliers declaration when guidelines finalized
and published. Morokhov indicated proposed declaration would pre-
cede further and complement existing suppliers efforts and be wider in
scope.
6. NPT and Treaty of Tlatelolco: Nye noted President Carter sup-
port for universal NPT adherence, but mentioned full scope safeguards
and Tlatelolco as partial steps which are useful in specific situations
(i.e. in India and Latin America). Nye reported some indications In-
dians may be willing to consider full scope safeguards and US impres-
sion Brazil might waive entry-into-force provisions of Tlatelolco if
USSR signed Protocol II. Nye repeated US request for USSR to recon-
sider their Protocol II position. Soviets responded by reiterating their
support for full scope safeguards and NPT. Timerbaev (USSR) said
Protocol II position is being studied but remains unchanged for now.
He suggested Tlatelolco approach too complicated to obtain full scope
safeguards. Nye reported some preliminary indications Argentina
might move towards acceptance of full scope safeguards.
7. Morokhov reiterated the suggestion for joint messages—per-
haps along with UK—encouraging NPT adherence. NYE said US fully
accepts spirit of this suggestion but sometimes best diplomacy lies not
in such joint approaches, but in exchanges of information—such as
the present one—regarding measures to strengthen nonproliferation
regime.
8. EURATOM and NPT Safeguards Agreement: Morokhov said
situation was dangerous,9 represented clear cut NPT violation, and
asked if US would consider joint action at September board to urge
EURATOM to conclude this matter speedily. Nye said US also con-
cerned, that we have indicated our concern to EURATOM, and are pre-
pared to do so again, but did not indicate willingness to act in IAEA
board.
9. Full Scope Safeguards: To Soviet question on French position
Nye said may have to consider fall-back in September if their position
is clearly negative. Nye encouraged USSR to make public statement
similar to US and others as way of moving French in this direction. Mo-
continue to be reports of major obstacles to the implementation by the IAEA of effective
safeguards in EC NNWS [European Community Non-Nuclear-Weapon States]. In partic-
ular, there appears to be a continued unwillingness on the part of EURATOM to fully
allow the independent verification activities by the IAEA which are called for in the
IAEA/EURATOM safeguards agreement and which are essential for effective IAEA safe-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
rokhov said such a unilateral approach is no problem but they doubt it
would be effective. He said perhaps French could approach this like
NPT, i.e. not a party officially but act as if they were. He indicated FRG
waiting for French. Also said any hope of retroactive application un-
realistic and should be abandoned.
10. Moratorium on Sensitive Transfers: Nye said US position to get
statements country-by-country has some chance of success. Morokhov
said while practicing such a policy they prefer to press for formal adop-
tion in suppliers guidelines. He indicated French statement was not
specific enough.10 Nye questioned whether full suppliers group was
appropriate for this purpose since only a few members were suppliers
of sensitive items.
11. Nuclear Materials Stockpiles and Regional Centers: Nye said
these questions ought to be considered in INFCE rather than in London
group. He elaborated on INFCE rationale and asked Morokhov for
specific suggestions or reactions to US evaluation proposal, e.g.
how should it relate to IAEA and should any of technical features
be changed? Morokhov suggested this be deferred to next round of
consultations.
12. Libya: Morokhov assured US Delegation that the fuel was en-
riched to only 20 and that all spent fuel would have to be returned.
13. Timerbaev announced that he and Warnke had come to agree-
ment on opening of CTB talks in Geneva on July 13, and that there
should be further nonproliferation bilaterals before September sup-
pliers’ meeting. Soviets appear to have had impression that such talks
might be in Geneva following CTB, but Warnke did not make this
commitment.
Vance
10 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
349.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, July 8, 1977
[Omitted here is material unrelated to non-proliferation.]
4. Gerard Smith’s Meetings in Paris: Gerard Smith has just completed
an initial day of consultations in Paris with Foreign Minister de Guirin-
gaud and other key officials on non-proliferation and nuclear policy
questions.2 The French reiterated strongly the importance they attach
to their present nuclear power program.3
The discussion produced understandings on spent fuel retransfers,
and on renegotiation of the US/EURATOM agreement. The under-
standings remove these issues as impediments to French participation
in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE). However,
the French indicated great distress over Canada’s insistence that it have
a veto over reprocessing of any fuel Canada supplies. It is not yet clear
whether the French participation in INFCE will be conditioned on solu-
tion of this problem. The French government will make its decision
after the next experts meeting, now scheduled for the end of July.
Ambassador Smith also reiterated our concern over the reproc-
essing plant sale to Pakistan and our interest in full-scope safeguards.
There is no new French position on these issues yet.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to non-proliferation.]
memorandum, Carter wrote “Cy, J.”
2 The Embassy transmitted a report of the meeting in telegram 19861 from Paris,
3 In the left-hand margin, Carter wrote “We’ll form a policy, along with others, ei-
ther with or without the French.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
350.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
22983. For the Acting Secretary from the Ambassador. Subject:
French Reprocessing Plant for Pakistan.
1. On August 8 de Guiringaud told me in strict confidence how the
French government intends to proceed on the Pakistani reprocessing
issue in hopes of (A) buying a substantial amount of additional time
and (B) putting the Pakistanis in a position in which they will have to
accept a plant not capable of producing plutonium. De Guiringaud ex-
plained that he was giving US this highly sensitive information in ad-
vance because we would have a crucial role to play after rpt after the
French make their move. Meanwhile, he would like to know our reac-
tion. Obviously, any leak of the French intention would almost cer-
tainly blow up the whole operation, causing a crisis in French-Pakistani
relations and putting us in considerable difficulty with the French. I
therefore request that this be held on the strictest need to know basis.
2. After summarizing the history of this subject, going back to 1972,
and implying that neither he nor Giscard would have moved in this di-
rection, de Guiringaud explained that France has thus far turned aside
repeated overtures by Agha Shahi to come to Paris to seek reconfirma-
tion of French willingness to proceed with the contract. De Guiringaud,
however, decided to delay seeing Agha Shahi until after the Seven
Power meeting in Paris and French acceptance of INFCE had generated
the necessary momentum and created a new situation. This, according
to de Guiringaud, has given the new basis for international efforts on
non-proliferation and, indeed, changed the atmosphere for interna-
tional discussions.
3. Accordingly, de Guiringaud is sending word to the Pakistani
government that he is prepared to see Agha Shahi sometime between
about Sept 5 and Sept 15.
4. De Guiringaud’s plan is to make a presentation along the fol-
lowing lines:
—France has signed a contract and it intends to honor its
commitment.
cret; Immediate; Cherokee; Nodis. The message was forwarded to Brzezinski in telegram
File, N770004–0680)

Non-Proliferation
—However, since French-Pakistani talks first began on the matter
in 1972 (contract signed in 1974) the relevant techniques have substan-
tially changed.
—France, therefore, proposes to revise the plans for the reproc-
essing plant so that it will furnish a product which, perhaps with some
supplemental treatment, can be used [garble] only as reactor fuel.
—French and Pakistani experts should review the entire matter
and reach agreement on revision of plans for the plant. Meanwhile,
however, the French would send no more equipment based on old
plans.
5. Irrespective of how the Pakistanis might really feel about that—
and whatever the internal pressures might be from the military or other
elements of the power structure in Pakistan—the Pakistanis would
have to limit their outward protest: otherwise they would be, in effect,
admitting to the world that they want the reprocessing plant in order to
obtain plutonium. In such an eventuality, de Guiringaud is confident
that he can persuade Giscard to cancel the contract.
6. De Guiringaud believes it more likely that the Pakistanis will
protest on grounds of increased cost rather than a change in the char-
acter of the product to be produced by the reprocessing plant. The
French say there would indeed be an increase in cost, perhaps on the
order of some $10–12 million. (Comment: It was clear in context of the
conversation that this was a very rough estimate and we should not
take it as a firm figure.)
7. After he has made his pitch to Agha Shahi, de Guiringaud
would like us to follow up with the Pakistanis to reassure them that
Paris is offering an honorable way out: that acceptance of the French
offer would put them clear of the Symington Amendment;2 and that the
US would be willing to help with the supplementary costs. With regard
to cost, de Guiringaud emphasized that neither the French government
nor private company (St. Gobain) would be in a position to pay. More-
over, he interprets his previous understandings with Secretary Kissin-
ger on this subject to be still in force; [garble] that we would be pre-
pared to help with the supplementary financial costs if a way out could
be found to meet our desiderata on non-proliferation.
8. Whatever the ultimate outcome, de Guiringaud does not seem to
anticipate an immediate, flat Pakistani rejection. He considers it more
likely that the Pakistanis would go along with some bilateral experts’
review which ought at the very least to take about six months. By then,
Pakistan would be heavily engaged in INFCE which should put them
under additional pressure not to go too far.
U.S. economic, military assistance, and export credits to countries that deliver or receive,
acquire or transfer nuclear enrichment technology when they do not comply with IAEA
regulations and inspections.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
9. I asked whether the French are truly confident that different
technology would get around the danger of producing weapons grade
material. De Guiringaud repeated that he believes French technology
can give the Pakistanis a plant producing an enriched material which,
with some supplementary treatment and shaping into fuel rods, could
be used only as reactor fuel. For the Pakistanis to take the product of
this plant and turn it into plutonium would be technically possible but
would require an entire additional plant whose construction would be
easily detectable.
10. Prior to this exchange, I had briefly outlined our suspicions
about Pakistani intentions. Locke will now follow up in more detail
with de Laboulaye. I sensed that French welcome this information be-
cause some of them at any rate have had their own suspicions. Thus the
emphasis in the new proposal on testing Pakistani intent.
11. Once again let me emphasize sensitivity of these discussions. In
addition to reaction we might have, it is clear to me that at some point
prior [to] French talk with Pakistanis we would wish to agree on exact
nature of our intervention and perhaps also have very discreet talk
about technical details of French plan.
12. Other parts of my conversation are being transmitted
separately.3
Hartman
standard but strong French concerns on arms control and strategic issues, particularly

Non-Proliferation
351.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance1
Tosec 90128. 202154. Subject: Tokai Mura Decision.
1. Following is text of memorandum for the Secretary from Dr.
Zbigniew Brzezinski. Begin quote. The President has considered U.S.
policy options with respect to the Tokai reprocessing plant issue, and
instructs the U.S. negotiator to seek early resolution of the Tokai issue
with Japanese authorities along the line of State’s proposed model
agreement (attached).2 In particular, the agreement should include
these essential elements:
2. (1) Japanese government acceptance of these undertakings:
—Public agreement that recycling in light water reactors is
premature.
—Active support for INFCE and other U.S. non-proliferation
objectives.
—Limitation of any operation of Tokai involving plutonium
separation to meet actual plutonium needs for advanced reactor
development.
—Postponement of any major moves toward a follow-on 1500 ton
reprocessing plant during INFCE.
—Consultations with U.S. regarding the results of INFCE and the
appropriateness of multinational alternatives to a national reprocessing
facility as well as spent fuel storage possibilities.
—Affording the IAEA maximum opportunity, including con-
tinuous inspection, to apply safeguards during experimental opera-
tions on Tokai.
3. (2) Approval for the start-up of the Tokai facility for reproc-
essing in the scheduled mode, but with a limited amount of irradiated
fuel, coupled with Japanese agreement to undertake a mutually accept-
able major coprocessing experiment subsequently.
4. (3) The negotiator is further authorized to seek, but not insist
upon, the addition of advanced safeguards testing and the requirement
for a blended product. End quote.
Christopher
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Stephen Ecton (EA/J) (text as received by the
White House); cleared by Eric Fleischer (S/SO); and approved by Robert Oakley (EA).
Vance was in the People’s Republic of China August 20–26.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
352.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Gerard Smith, Ambassador-at-Large for U.S. Nuclear Proliferation Matters
Michael Armacost, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Smith indicated that he wished to talk briefly about
what he might face in the negotiations with Japan over the Tokai issue.
He noted that one should not expect them to return from this round of
talks with an agreement signed and sealed—with which the President
readily agreed. The Japanese, Smith said, are likely to raise a number of
specific questions which will require a U.S. response; above all,
whether we will be prepared to assist them in obtaining plutonium to
meet their advanced reactor requirements by shipping plutonium di-
rectly or approving shipments from the UK or France. In addition, the
Japanese will face difficulties in determining what type of conversion
plant to build since different facilities would be required to handle the
product of conventional reprocessing on the one hand and a co-
processed product on the other.
The President emphasized that Congress at present feels very
strongly about limiting U.S. exports of plutonium. Therefore, Smith
should indicate to Fukuda and other Japanese representatives that we
cannot guarantee Congressional approval for any arrangements which
would provide for U.S. exports of plutonium. The President replied
that he would be prepared to join Smith in discussing this matter with
Congressional leaders to insure that the legislation makes provisions to
handle Japan’s unique problem. He indicated that Smith could tell Fu-
kuda that he would undertake such efforts with the leadership on the
Hill.
Smith then noted that we are asking the Japanese to undertake a
very large-scale safeguard experiment, the cost of which may run as
high as $15 million. He asked the President whether as the negotiator,
he had any leeway to accept some sharing of these costs. The President
indicated that this would be very hard to sell with Congress and the
public in view of the fact that we have been doing major experimenta-
tion in this field for years without requesting others to share the finan-
cial burden. Smith suggested that one step short of direct cost-sharing
would involve transfer by the U.S. of some advanced instrumentation
Non-Proliferation
to the IAEA which in turn could make it available for us by the Japa-
nese at Tokai. The President indicated that he would have no difficulty
with this sort of arrangement.
353.
Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, August 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Current Tokai Negotiations
Gerard Smith is now in Tokyo negotiating the conditions under
which the Japanese prototype reprocessing facility at Tokai may re-
process US-origin fuel. His negotiating instructions are set forth in
Attachment 1.2
Gerry Smith has obtained Japanese agreement to all the under-
takings we requested with one exception: the Japanese have said they
now can give us only an assurance of their intention to go to co-
processing after two years, because they cannot agree to a commitment
which would require Diet ratification. Gerry has cabled us asking for
authority to reach an ad referendum agreement on this revised basis
this week (Attachment 2).3
With your approval, we would propose to cable Gerry tomorrow
to modify his instructions along the lines he and Ambassador Mans-
field have recommended, for the following reasons:
1. Japanese acceptance of our position on deferral of recycling of
plutonium in light water reactors is an important support for our non-
proliferation policy, and is particularly useful coming on the eve of the
launching of the INFCEP program.
2. We believe that the commitments that the Japanese have made
are more important than the question of when a technically marginal
procedure such as co-processing would commence at Tokai. We still re-
tain the option to insist on co-processing after two years.
Secret; Nodis.
2 See Document 354.
tral Foreign Policy File, N770005–0443.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. It is important to maintain a close working relationship with
Japan in the nuclear area, and Ambassador Mansfield has warned that
further delay may not work in our favor. Political developments could
complicate our relationship and threaten gains already made.
You should be aware that Smith’s recommended solution may
be criticized by some in Congress. However, the pending non-
proliferation legislation would cause difficulties for any of our pro-
posed solutions, and the problem may be exacerbated by further delay.
In any case, consultations with Congress will be crucial. Ambassador
Mansfield should be able to help.
ACDA agrees with this recommendation.
Attachments:
1. Memorandum from Dr. Brzezinski.
2. Telegram from Ambassador Smith.
354.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Tokai Decision
Ambassador Smith is standing by for your decision regarding the
proposal summarized below. Given the extraordinary importance and
public visibility of this issue in Japan, it will be preferable to have a res-
olution of this issue prior to Smith’s departure from Tokyo in roughly
12 hours from now.
The memorandum from Warren Christopher2 contains a recom-
mendation, supported by ACDA, that the changes proposed by Smith
be accepted. The brief cable from Smith, marked by me,3 summarizes
the key elements of the proposed deal, while his longer cable explains
Box 4. Secret. A handwritten “C” in the upper right corner indicates that Carter saw the
memorandum.
2 See Document 353.

Non-Proliferation
the significance of the Japanese offer to delay construction of the pluto-
nium conversion plant.4
In essence, the Japanese (1) want to defer decision on coprocessing
for two years, subject to successful R&D and INFCEP; (2) recognize that
U.S. originated fuel will not be available beyond the two-year period
unless they then accept coprocessing; and (3) are willing to impose
a voluntary deferment on the construction of their proposed pluto-
nium conversion plant, despite their existing financial commitments to
proceed.
I have asked for comments, as you instructed, from Jessica Tuch-
man and Kitty Schirmer. Their reactions are as follows:
Schirmer: “I concur with the Christopher memo and Brzezinski’s
recommendation to accept; in our public announcement we should
stress the major commitments the Japanese have made at our behest.”
Tuchman feels that we should insist on a commitment from the
Japanese to go into coprocessing unless it is agreed by both sides that it
is technically infeasible or ineffective; in effect, our original position.
Her view is that the implied commitment by them, implicit in the
two-year deferral, will be viewed by Congress and elsewhere as an ex-
cessive concession.
On balance, having had extensive consultations with Gerry Smith,
Joe Nye, Christopher, and others, I feel that we should authorize Smith
to proceed as urged by him.5
J.C.
5 Underneath the last sentence, Carter wrote “ok. J.C.” On September 12, the United
States and Japan announced that they would “cooperate in evaluating the nuclear fuel
cycle and the future role of plutonium” and would “defer decisions relating to the com-
mercial use of plutonium in light water reactors at least during” the INFCE program over

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
355.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with French Prime Minister Raymond Barre
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Alec Toumayan, Department of State Interpreter
Raymond Barre, Prime Minister of the French Republic
Louis de Guiringaud, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, Ambassador of France to the United States
Francois de Laboulaye, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Jean-Claude Paye, Advisor to the Prime Minister on International Affairs
The President and the Prime Minister met alone in the Oval Office
Cabinet Room until 12:50 p.m., as follows.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
The President said that this is a legitimate reason. He appreciates
France’s taking part in the fuel cycle evaluation. There had been some
problems, and he hopes that we have accommodated to France’s con-
cerns. When the U.S., Canada, and Australia decide on a policy, he
wants to understand France’s needs. We never try not to let others get
the breeder reactor. We are working on one, too. We should share expe-
riences on questions like the origin of uranium ore, and how to mini-
mize the “refining” of it for explosives. It would strengthen our hand in
the proliferation field, and our decision will not affect France ad-
versely. The fuel cycle meeting will be on October 21.
The Prime Minister said that the French position was decided in
their nuclear council by Giscard last October, and in December we
knew about it; Giscard talked about it clearly. France appreciated the
discussions to prepare the evaluation program. But they have some
conditions. First, there should be useful discussions with the Soviet
File, Box 12, France: 1977. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.

Non-Proliferation
Union. Second, the study should be more at the level of experts than an
“integral” conference. That is, not governments—they have already
talked about it.
Third is this: there is a need to keep up freedom of supply, to all
countries, for specific purposes. Therefore, renewing the EURATOM-
Canadian agreement would be useful.2
There are long-term problems. France is against the military uses
of atomic energy. It will take all measures to avoid proliferation. If it
works on breeders, it is because energy progress is essential: they have
no coal, oil, or gas. They are the fourth largest importer (of oil?) in the
world. They cannot maintain the correct working of their economy
without energy progress: including new forms of energy, breeders, and
reactors for electricity. They will take all measures to avoid diversion to
military uses.
The Foreign Minister said that when the fuel cycle program next
meets in Washington, it will be a governmental meeting, to evaluate
progress. After that experts should meet, in different groups, with dif-
ferent ideas—such as waste products, breeders, etc. They would like
one group in Paris: reprocessing. (Both the President and Secretary Vance
said “uh huh.”)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
2 Canada and EURATOM signed an agreement similar to that of the U.S.–
EURATOM agreement on October 6, 1959.
356.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
French Proliferation Policy
Ambassador Hartman, Farley, Nye, and NSC staff met this morn-
ing to discuss the important issues raised yesterday by the French on
Office File, Box 12, France: 1977. Secret. Hunter initialed the memorandum for Brzezinski.
Carter initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nuclear matters: (1) concerning their new conditions for participation in
INFCE; and (2) the news, conveyed by cable, that they are trying to use
INFCE as a means to disband the London Suppliers Group arguing that
INFCE makes the London Group redundent. This is particularly dis-
turbing because we believe that we are close to finally achieving a con-
sensus in London on full-scope safeguards—one of our top proliferation
goals. The consensus of all those at this meeting was that if time
permits today, it would be very important if you could raise the fol-
lowing points with Barre:
—I’d like to just take a minute to return to the questions you raised
yesterday on the subject of nuclear proliferation.
—We are pleased that we can reiterate the three assurances you
raised on the subject of French participation in INFCE.
• We understand the Soviets will participate.
• We are agreed that the purpose of INFCE is to work out at the ex-
pert level a new consensus on the nuclear fuel cycle.
• Thirdly, as Ambassador Smith said in Paris, we can agree with
you that INFCE should not be used to prejudge other nuclear issues in-
cluding those of nuclear supply.
—In this regard, let me also say that we believe that INFCE is not a
reason to curtail our fruitful cooperation in the London Suppliers Group
where there is still useful work to be done. In particular, I hope your
government will look again at some formula by which we can reach
agreement on comprehensive safeguards.2
2 In their final meeting on September 16, Carter told Barre that the United States
“will not prejudge issues. We also do not consider the study to be a substitute for the
London Suppliers’ Group.” (Memorandum of Conversation, September 16; ibid.)

Non-Proliferation
357.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 16, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
US
FRANCE
The Secretary
Louis de Guiringaud
Under Secretary Philip Habib
Foreign Minister
Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman
Francois de Laboulaye
Assistant Secretary George S. Vest
Political Director
James F. Dobbins, EUR/WE
(Notetaker)
Pakistan and Non-Proliferation
De Guiringaud related that, in a meeting on September 8 with Pak-
istani Foreign Minister Aga Shahi, he had told Aga Shahi that France
had a contract to furnish Pakistan with a plant which was capable of re-
processing used nuclear fuel in a manner that would enable it to be
used again to fuel reactors. He had then proposed to have plans for this
plant restructured, along the lines de Guiringaud had earlier discussed
with Ambassador Hartman. De Guiringaud told Aga Shahi that the
French government would, in due course, open conversations with
Pakistan to rewrite certain parts of the agreement.
Aga Shahi had been very surprised, de Guiringaud said. De Guir-
ingaud had been forced to endure an hour-long series of complaints
about discrimination against Pakistan, vis-a-vis India, in the nuclear
field. Aga Shahi had talked about the Canadian and US assistance to
India in the nuclear field, including assistance on breeder technology.
He claimed that India had been able to become a nuclear power as a re-
sult of such assistance. He had insisted that Pakistan must receive treat-
ment comparable to that given India. Something must be done for Pak-
istan or assistance to India must be cut back.
De Guiringaud said that he had, as a result of this conversation,
initiated a study of France’s nuclear relationship with India. The Secre-
tary said that he would have a paper prepared for de Guiringaud out-
lining the current state of the US nuclear relationship with India. He
said that the United States had agreed to provide a certain amount of
fuel for the Tarapur reactor. The United States had also talked to India
about the need to accept full-scope safeguards. The Indians had agreed
to consider this seriously. Habib added that there had been some gen-
proved by David Anderson (S/S) on October 11. The meeting took place in Vance’s
office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eral discussion on this issue with Desai who had indicated that the In-
dians would not conduct further nuclear tests. The Secretary said that
Desai personally had been clear on this, and that he rejected testing. De
Guiringaud noted, however, that not all of Desai’s subordinates were
in agreement with his position, nor was Desai necessarily capable of
controlling these people.
De Guiringaud said that Aga Shahi had asked, during the period
before the Pakistani elections, that the French government not do any-
thing to give the impression that the contract was not going forward
without change. De Guiringaud had agreed to this request. He agreed
that if it became known that pressure was being applied on Pakistan
this would become an election issue which Bhutto might well make use
of. (De Guiringaud also said that Aga Shahi had conveyed a clear im-
pression that he felt that some of the charges against Bhutto, including
one of murder, were not without substance.)
De Guiringaud asked that the contents of this conversation with
Aga Shahi be kept absolutely confidential. The Secretary promised to
do so.
De Guiringaud recalled that Ambassador Hartman had asked
whether there had been any transfers from France of equipment for the
Pakistani reprocessing plant after August 4. He said that the French
government had last authorized transfers of such equipment on July
16. Such authorizations were valid for six months, and there was no
way of determining within that period when items authorized were
shipped.
The Secretary expressed the hope that the French government
would continue to consider agreeing to full-scope safeguards at the
London Suppliers Meeting. De Guiringaud replied that this issue had
come before France’s Foreign Nuclear Policy Council, but no decision
had been made to date. There would, he said, be another meeting of the
Council at the end of September. He assured the Secretary that the
French government was aware of US concerns in this matter.
De Guiringaud inquired about the status of the Brazil/German re-
processing contract. The Secretary replied that the US position had not
changed. The US had indicated to Brazil that it wished to continue to
discuss this matter. President Carter would be sending a letter to Bra-
zilian President Geisel in the near future. In his letter he would suggest
follow-up discussions. The Secretary said he would be going to Brazil
the end of October to meet the Foreign Minister.
De Guiringaud asked whether the US was also working with Ar-
gentina. Vance said it was. He had spoken to the Argentine Foreign
Minister and would be visiting there when he visited Brazil. The Ar-
gentines had explained their need for nuclear power but seemed quite
cooperative.

Non-Proliferation
De Guiringaud asked whether the US was aware that Germany
had concluded an agreement to supply Brazil with conventional arms.
The Secretary said he was not, but would check. De Guiringaud also
raised the activities of the German company which was constructing a
missile test site in southeastern Zaire. He asked whether the US had
any information on the range of these missiles. The Secretary said that
he would check and provide the French government with what infor-
mation was available. De Laboulaye noted the coincidence between the
location of the German test site and the area of the recent problems in
Shaba.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
358.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 7, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Fuel Assurances
Your April 7 statement on nuclear proliferation policy2 identified
• assured access to nuclear fuel supplies
• assistance with spent fuel storage
as the key areas in which the US would develop programs to encourage
other nations to adhere to our new, rigorous, non-proliferation policies.
Such incentives will be particularly important in the many cases where
we will be asking other nations to renegotiate existing Agreements for
Cooperation to meet our new standards.
You have already approved a program for spent fuel storage.3 This
memorandum asks for your approval of several measures to provide
assured access to fuel supplies. These measures have been developed
during a lengthy interagency study (Tab B)4 by the NSC Ad Hoc Group
on Proliferation (hereinafter, “the Group”). This paper substitutes for a
[4]. Confidential. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum,
Brzezinski wrote “RI [Rick Inderfurth] JT [Jessica Tuchman]. Implement. ZB.”
3 Not found.
4 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
longer decision memorandum (Tab A)5 submitted by the Group which
you need not read. In general, the recommendations have the support
of all members of the Group (State, ERDA, DOD, ACDA, NRC, CIA,
CEQ, FEA, EPA, OSTP, Schlesinger, Eizenstat, OMB and NSC) except
where important differences are noted.
Assured access to nuclear fuel has two distinct components:
—access to uranium ore
—access to enrichment services
To be fully satisfactory to recipients, a program must provide
access to both of these on a timely basis, in adequate quantity, and in a
fully reliable manner. Your decisions on the following measures will be
provided as guidance to the agencies:
1. Parity pricing and non-discriminatory terms in US fuel supply con-
tracts for nations meeting non-proliferation standards. The Group recom-
mends that you approve a policy under which nations that meet our
higher standards—as embodied in new or amended Agreements for
Cooperation—would receive nuclear fuel at the same price and under
the same conditions as domestic customers. Such parity pricing and
non-discriminatory terms will assure foreign customers of the impor-
tance we attach both to non-proliferation and to ensuring that legiti-
mate energy needs are met. The Group believes that a standard of
pricing that differentiates between domestic and foreign customers
would undermine our efforts to achieve parallel policies among all fuel
supplier nations.6
2. Contribution to International Uranium Resource Exploration.
Perhaps the most critical issue in the plutonium/breeder debate is
whether there is enough uranium to supply the world’s needs through
the fission age without the necessity of recourse to the breeder. The US
has recently stepped up its own uranium resource evaluation program,
and has encouraged the international community to do likewise. The
International Energy Agency (IEA) is currently doing paper studies
preparatory to actual field exploration of international uranium re-
serves. The Group recommends that you authorize it to prepare op-
tions to provide increased US technical and financial assistance in sup-
port of the IEA’s activities.7
3. Explore the Possibilities of Foreign Investment in US Enrichment
Plants. Even under the most attractive terms, foreign countries hesitate
to place their reliance in a fuel supply contract, since the supplier has
5 Attached but not printed.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “Prices
should equal costs. Do they? J”
7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”

Non-Proliferation
full control over its implementation, and could, under unforeseen cir-
cumstances cut off their fuel supply. One way to alleviate these fears
would be to offer foreign nations part ownership in new US enrichment
plants under terms which would guarantee their access to some of the
plant’s output. For our part, we would insist on terms that would as-
sure our control of plant operations, and fully protect classified data
and technology. Such an investment plan could reduce foreign incen-
tives to construct their own enrichment facilities, and could establish
a basis for truely multinational fuel cycle cooperation. The Group
requests your authorization to undertake ad referendum discus-
sions with other nations to explore the prospects for such investment
arrangements. Any resultant proposals would be submitted for
approval.8
4. Discussions of Possible Multilateral Programs with Other Uranium
and Enrichment Suppliers. Eventually, multilateral programs of assured
fuel supply, would be preferable to bilateral ones, since they would en-
sure that proliferation goals were not undercut by commercial competi-
tion among suppliers, and because the US cannot expect to meet all
foreign needs on its own. Accordingly, the Group requests your autho-
rization of discussions and preliminary negotiations with other ura-
nium producers, and enrichment service suppliers to explore: (1) the es-
tablishment of a secure uranium supply base, through various measures
including possible guarantees by uranium producers; (2) a variety of
possible investment arrangements between the US and others, including
unilateral, cross-investment and barter plans; and (3) the establishment of
multilateral pooling or collective guarantee arrangements involving joint
planning, fuel sharing and back-up arrangements among suppliers. All
of these arrangements would only be offered to nations which are sup-
portive of our non-proliferation goals. In all cases, these discussions
will be exploratory9—no commitments will be made without your
prior approval.10
5. Internationally Owned Fuel Supply—The Fuel Bank. Over the long
term, the ultimate in fuel dependability would be provided by an ar-
rangement in which nuclear fuel supply is owned and sold by an inter-
national entity—as opposed to nationally owned resources subject to
multilateral guarantees or management. One possibility is an interna-
tional fuel bank. Such a bank would own supplies of both uranium and
enrichment capacity (as measured in SWUs, Separative Work Units)
and any nation which adhered to certain non-proliferation standards
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “ex-
plore idea only. J.”
9 Carter underlined the word “exploratory” in this paragraph.
10 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
would be eligible to participate. The purpose of such an arrangement
would be that the bank acts as an insurance policy, protecting cus-
tomers from arbitrary political actions by suppliers. There is a great
deal of Congressional interest in this idea, and our preliminary investi-
gation concludes that it has significant merit.
All agencies except OMB and the NRC recommend that you autho-
rize consultations with other countries and international agencies on
the desirability and feasibility of such a fuel bank, including an indica-
tion of our willingness to make a contribution of enriched fuel from the
US stockpile (subject to a determination that DOD’s stockpile require-
ments will not be adversely affected). We would indicate that, if satis-
factory arrangements were made, the US would be prepared to make
an initial contribution sufficient for ten large reactors for five years (or 5
million SWU), and that we would work with other uranium producers
to provide uranium supplies for the bank.11 OMB and NRC on the other
hand, believe that more analysis is needed before any specific indica-
tion is made of the size of the potential US contribution.12
There is virtue in both positions. Further analysis of the idea is
clearly needed, but I believe that we would learn a great deal from con-
sultations with others that would contribute to such an analysis. I see
no harm in proceeding with consultations in which we would indicate
that we are prepared to make a “substantial” contribution—without
mentioning any number which could be taken as an implied commit-
ment. I therefore recommend that you authorize talks along these lines,
and a subsequent analysis to be submitted for your decision.13
Alternatively that 5 million SWUs be mentioned as the possible
contribution.
Alternatively that no mention be made of the size of a possible US
contribution.
11 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “100,000/reactor.”
12 OMB explanation of their position is at Tab C. [Footnote is in the original. Tab C is
attached but not printed.]
13 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”

Non-Proliferation
359.
Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State1
4402. USIAEA. Subject: 32nd UNGA: Non-proliferation—Visit of
Deputy Under Secretary Nye to USUN. Ref: USUN 4350.2
1. Summary: In Nov 3 visit to USUN, Deputy Under Secretary Nye
met with 19 representatives, mainly from developing countries to de-
scribe our non-proliferation objectives and review purpose and goals
of the INFCE conference. In addition, he discussed the draft res on
“Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Develop-
ment” in bilaterals with Yugoslavs and Pakistanis (Reftel, paras 4–7).
Mission and Disarmament Del believed Nye visit was timely and valu-
able, enabling us to explain our policy in greater depth to UN Dels and
also providing opportunity for them to express their concerns and aspi-
rations directly to Nye. Comment by participating Delegations has
been uniformly favorable. End summary.
2. In afternoon session at US Mission, Nye presented a summary of
US non-proliferation policy to 19 UN Delegations including a question
and answer period. The following states attended: Algeria, Australia,
Argentina, Bahamas, Brazil, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia,
Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Singa-
pore, Sweden, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
3. Nye briefly outlined the origins and general philosophy of our
non-proliferation policy, emphasizing our concerns to maintain an ap-
propriate balance between the objectives of non-proliferation and
access to nuclear materials and technology for peaceful purposes in de-
veloping countries, and the complexities created by the emergence of
new nuclear technologies since the 1950’s. The Carter administration,
he said, was committed to stopping both vertical and horizontal prolif-
eration. He outlined the purpose and goals of the INFCE conference:
Indicated our interest in opening up the London Suppliers Club to
other participants.
Confidential. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Vienna.
planned to introduce two resolutions in the UN General Assembly. The first would
amend a Malaysian, West German, and Czechoslovakian draft resolution “inviting IAEA
to increase the representation of developing countries on its board of governors.” The
second would “table Yugoslav/Pakistani draft resolution (with additional co-sponsors)
‘on the peaceful use of nuclear energy for economic and social development.’ After state-
ments by 10–12 countries, consideration of both resolutions will be deferred pending fur-
ther consultations and negotiations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770406–0432)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4. Nye also stressed the importance of balanced UNGA resolutions
on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, noting that the Congress and US
public opinion could be expected to react adversely to virtually unqual-
ified UN endorsement of transfer of nuclear technology to developing
countries. A major US objective at INFCE was to develop new safe-
guardable technologies which would be both proliferation-resistant
and economical. UN actions and decisions should be closely coordi-
nated, he said, with the INFCE and IAEA work in this field.
5. The questions, asked mainly by the reps from Argentina, Brazil,
Pakistan, and Yugoslavia, reflected many of the concerns raised in the
first committee by the developing countries. They included the fol-
lowing: (A) Why has the London Club not been opened to recipients
and what will happen to it during the INFCE? (B) Are the developing
countries expected to postpone their nuclear programs based on old
technologies pending the outcome of the INFCE? (C) How long will it
take to develop and prove the new technologies? (D) What will be the
implication of these new technologies for our commitment to nuclear
disarmament? (E) Is the US prepared to consider stopping its R&D for
weapons development, or is it only asking NNWS to accept more strin-
gent safeguards while going ahead with its own program? (F) If a CTB
is attained, will nuclear safeguards apply to nuclear weapons states as
well as to nonnuclear weapon states? (G) Will comprehensive safe-
guards in the US be retrospective or applied only to new facilities?
6. At the end of the one and one-half-hour program, Argentina
Perm-Rep Ortiz de Rozas expressed on behalf of the group apprecia-
tion to Nye and his hope that the Carter administration would indeed
move ahead in positive spirit to finding viable answers acceptable to
both developing and developed countries in reconciling the objectives
of non-proliferation and energy for development.
7. In the late afternoon Nye met separately with Yugoslav and Pak-
istani UN Dels to discuss the non-aligned draft resolution on “The
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Develop-
ment”. While indicating US readiness to seek to work out an acceptable
text he highlighted our difficulties with the latest version. He empha-
sized our concern that only safeguardable nuclear technologies should
be transferred to developing countries as well as our doubts about a
UN conference (Reftel).
8. We believe Nye visit provided timely and useful opportunity for
US to restate and clarify our non-proliferation objectives to a number of
important UN Delegations. Moreover, we believe that Nye was able to
convey our concerns to Yugoslavia and Pakistan in constructive spirit
while highlighting the implications for their own interests in an unbal-
anced UNGA resolution. The Mission and Disarmament Del expressed
their appreciation to Nye for his efforts.

Non-Proliferation
360.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
12375. USEEC USIAEA. Subject: Consultations With the Soviets on
EURATOM/IAEA Agreement and Other Matters. Ref: Geneva 12348
1. In view of Morokhov’s responsibilities in non-proliferation area,
Amb Warnke took opportunity of Morokhov’s presence in Geneva for
CTB negotiations to raise question of Soviet adherence to Protocol II of
Treaty of Tlatelolco at a bilateral meeting Dec 15 (reported Reftel). After
concluding discussion of Tlatelolco, Morokhov delivered a lengthy
complaint about EURATOM resistance to IAEA safeguards,3 about the
light water reactor safeguards situation,4 about lack of coordination be-
tween US and USSR Missions in Vienna, and about management of the
IAEA safeguards department, particularly role of IAEA Deputy Di-
rector Rometsch. Text of Morokhov comments (which were handed
over as a Non-Paper)5 being hand-carried to department by Boright.
2. In a separate evening session with Belov and Kalinkin, Boright
(US) described in detail US reasoning on the LWR compromise and on
importance of other safeguards issues, and noted complexity of safe-
guards issues and need for some flexibility. Soviets were apparently re-
ceptive to these arguments, and appreciative of reassurances as to US
desire for continued consultations.
3. At subsequent bilateral meeting with Soviets Dec 16, Morokhov
expressed satisfaction with discussions of previous day, calling them
useful and timely. He appreciated that US and USSR both attach excep-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Moscow, Vienna, and Brussels. On
December 15, the Department of State had instructed the Mission in Geneva to sound out
Morokhov about the Soviet position on safeguards on nuclear power reactors. (Telegram
298736 to the Mission in Geneva; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
2 See Document 428.
viets had criticized EURATOM’s “failure to bring into force safeguards agreement with
IAEA.” The Soviets also worried that “safeguards evaluation section be given resources
and authority sufficient to carry out its task.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770335–0485)
strong pressure on Agency to be less flexible regarding acceptance of validity of cas-
settes” of the surveillance equipment on each light-water reactor “brought out by EU-
RATOM inspectors alone.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
5 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tionally great importance to nuclear non-proliferation and are aware
that further joint actions, both in IAEA and elsewhere, are essential.
4. On EURATOM, Morokhov said that, during Dec 15 discussions,
two sides had reached the understanding that it is necessary to work
out stringent verification provisions in complete accordance with
model IAEA safeguards agreement. Both sides also concluded that it is
necessary for IAEA–EURATOM agreement to be implemented in very
near future because large number of materials and facilities, including
sensitive ones, are involved.
5. He said Soviets were willing to hold consultations with US Mis-
sion on number of technical questions related to application of safe-
guards to light water reactors and to chemical reprocessing plants. Ap-
propriate instructions would be given to Soviet IAEA Mission, and he
expected US Mission to receive instructions as well. Soviet side was
prepared to discuss jointly the measures which must be taken by board
of governors, but this must be done very soon, so that board can adopt
appropriate recommendations in February.
6. Warnke said that we agreed entirely with the Soviet side on the
importance of IAEA safeguards. We further agreed on the central im-
portance of independent verification by the IAEA, and we believed this
should apply in EURATOM as elsewhere. Warnke continued that we
were generally in agreement with Soviet view that the IAEA inspec-
torate staff should be increased, and evaluation functions strength-
ened. We were aware that management of the safeguards department
had not always been optimal, but this was due to many factors, and not
to a single individual. He agreed on importance of post of Deputy Di-
rector General, and said we should think carefully and well in advance
about a proper replacement when Mr. Rometsch leaves the agency.
7. With regard to light water reactor safeguards, Warnke main-
tained that the compromise proposal under consideration would allow
the IAEA to do its basic independent verification with an acceptable
three month timeliness of verification. We hoped that the Soviet side
would not take a rigid position on this point, since that could delay
agreement unnecessarily and endanger more important safeguards
issues.
8. Warnke added that we regarded safeguards principles for sensi-
tive facilities to be very important. On this matter, EURATOM had ac-
cepted the agency’s proposal for continuous inspection. We should
consider how the board might provide some guidance on timeliness of
detection for such facilities.
9. Warnke concluded that, in view of shared objectives on non-
proliferation matters, US and USSR should work closely together in
that field, and he agreed that our IAEA missions should consult on
safeguards and other matters.
Warnke

Non-Proliferation
361.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with French President Valery Giscard
d’Estaing
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France (Notetaker)
President Valery Giscard d’Estaing
Foreign Minister Louis de Guiringaud
Secretary General Jean Francois-Poncet
Ambassador Francois de Laboulaye, French Ambassador to the United States
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
Non-Proliferation
President Giscard said that he was making progress in the develop-
ment of his views on this subject and he hoped that we could exchange
views from time to time on the problem. He welcomed the INFCE
study and hoped that there would be no modification of supply pol-
icies by the United States and Canada during the period of the study.
The President commented that, in his discussions with the Indians,
Desai had said that he could not accept full scope safeguards.2 The
President explained to him that Congress might soon pass a law which
would prevent us from shipping any nuclear material to any country
which does not accept such safeguards. The President said he asked
Desai that, if we and the Soviets should sign a CTB agreement, could
India then accept the same kind of safeguards as non-nuclear powers
such as Germany, Canada and Japan have accepted? Desai thought that
this would be reasonable. The President went on to say that, while he
understood there were some technical problems, he was anxious for
France to accede to the Protocol to the Treaty of Tlatelolco which pro-
vides for a nuclear free zone in Latin America. He said that Argentina
now agrees to accede. He said that we understand that France has a
problem because certain of the French Departments are in the area and
between Bayeux and Paris. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
we had in effect to face the same problem with Puerto Rico. He said that
transitting nuclear material was still permitted according to our inter-
pretation but de Guiringaud said that under certain circumstances he
understood that that interpretation could be changed and this would
present a problem for France.
President Giscard said that he would not authorize the shipment of
sensitive material to Pakistan but that this matter presented great diffi-
culties for him internally. The Pakistanis are pressing for deliveries
under the contract and he wished to avoid any explanation of this
problem at the present time. He recalled that an offer had been made to
the Pakistanis to build a different kind of plant which would involve
only co-processing and that these discussions were in effect continuing.
He said that if he was asked if this problem had been discussed with us
he would say no.
The President said that it appeared Desai had been informed of this
French position and President Giscard confirmed that this was the case.
The President also reported that Brazil was now having second
thoughts about its reprocessing plant which they now saw as too ex-
pensive and perhaps not very effective. He said that this was a real
turning point and we should take advantage of it.
The meeting ended at 4:30 p.m.
362.
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative
for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 13, 1978
Dear Zbig:
I believe it is essential that the President approve these shipments
of highly-enriched uranium to Europe quickly. All of these cases repre-
sent US commitments to existing projects. They are not new commit-
ments which our policy seeks to avoid. As you know, the Europeans
are extremely sensitive to any signs that the US is using its nuclear fuel
as pressure to achieve US objectives in INFCE or to force them to rene-
gotiate the US–EURATOM Agreement. While I have tried to assure the
[4]. Confidential.

Non-Proliferation
French and others that this is not the case, the Europeans read the al-
ready long delay associated with HEU approvals (none since last May)
as US pressure tactics. Our non-proliferation efforts, as well as our
overall political relationships with alliance countries, would be best
served by prompt approval.
The Romanian case is also significant in view of our efforts to im-
prove relations with Eastern Europe. In my view the proliferation risk
here is negligible. Also, this case involves a firm US commitment.
Sincerely,
Gerard Smith2
2 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry Smith.”
363.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
1680. Pass to DOE. Brussels for EC. Subject: Soviet Non-Paper on
IAEA Matters February 3.
1. At Soviet request, Ambassador Warnke met with Soviet CTB
Rep Morokhov on Feb 3 for a follow-up discussion of the IAEA and
non-proliferation issues
which had
been raised
during
similar
Morokhov-Warnke conversations in December.2 Non-Paper read by
Morokhov on instructions urged following actions:
A. Appropriate steps by U.S. to ensure a favorable decision by Feb
7 EC–9 Council of Ministers on issue of inspections of light-water
power reactors in EURATOM countries, in light of efforts by certain
EURATOM countries, particularly the FRG, to revise present compro-
mise proposal.
B. Coordinated action by U.S. and Soviet missions in Vienna to
ensure implementation of effective IAEA safeguards, in particular
continuous inspection, of reprocessing and enrichment facilities in
cret; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Vienna and Moscow. Sent for information
to Brussels and Bonn.
2 See Document 360.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
EURATOM countries, and to bring about a radical increase in the effec-
tiveness of IAEA safeguards.
C. U.S. support for candidacy of Jeniken (Canada) to replace re-
tiring Deputy Director General for safeguards Romech. (Text of
Non-Paper is given para 4 below.)
2. Turning to separate issue, Morokhov urged that U.S. and USSR
exchange views and act jointly to ensure the adoption as a guideline by
the next meeting of nuclear exporters of the principle of full-scope safe-
guards in recipient States. (Text of Morokhov’s remarks on full-scope
safeguards to be supplied).
3. Action requested: Instructions regarding reply, if any, that
should be given to Soviets here.
4. Following is text of Soviet Non-Paper given Feb 3:
Begin text: We should like, first of all, to note with satisfaction that
the meeting we held last December at which we discussed a wide range
of questions related to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in the implementation of non-proliferation safeguards was
most useful. That meeting showed that our countries act essentially in
an agreed manner on questions of non-proliferation of nuclear weap-
ons, including issues pertaining to practical implementation of IAEA
safeguards. The time elapsed since that meeting has shown that our
Missions in Vienna have begun to cooperate more, and they have been
able to influence the leadership of the Secretariat of IAEA in the proper
direction. As a result of joint efforts, it has become possible to ensure
that the leadership of the IAEA at present is taking what is, on the
whole, a correct position.
At the same time, despite the work which has been done, we have
not succeeded in solving one of the principal issues of IAEA safeguard
activities, namely, the issue of application of IAEA safeguards to the
nuclear activities of the Non-Nuclear Member States of EURATOM. As
you recall, one of the questions that we discussed was the question of
application of IAEA safeguards to light water power reactors in the
EURATOM countries. At that time we agreed on joint measures to
properly influence resolution of this question. The Soviet Union in par-
ticular supported the US compromise proposal for carrying out in-
spections of this type of facility four times a year. The Delegation of
EURATOM which recently held talks with the IAEA secretariat on this
subject has, in principle, accepted this compromise proposal. However,
according to the information available to the IAEA secretariat, some
EURATOM countries, above all the FRG, are attempting to revise that
agreement. It is expected that the council of ministers of the European
Community will make a final decision on this question at its meeting
February 7. Under these circumstances it is urgently necessary, in our

Non-Proliferation
view, to exert appropriate influence in order to ensure the adoption of
the needed decision by the Council of Ministers of the European Com-
munity. We hope that the U.S. side will take the necessary steps in this
matter.
We believe it necessary to call to the attention of the U.S. side the
fact that, along with resolution of matters pertaining to ensuring ade-
quate safeguards for light water reactors in the EURATOM countries, it
is necessary to seek the earliest resolution of the question of implemen-
tation of effective IAEA safeguards for other nuclear facilities, above all
for nuclear fuel processing plants. At present, the main principle con-
cerning implementation of safeguards on these facilities, that is, the
principle of continuous inspection, has been preliminarily agreed. Rep-
resentatives of EURATOM, while formally supporting this principle,
are in effect working toward undermining it in developing the practical
provisions. Resolution of this question calls for adoption of effective
agreed measures. In this connection we would deem it advisable for
our Missions in Vienna to give highest priority to the solution of this
matter.
As before, the question of a radical increase in the effectiveness of
IAEA safeguards remains unresolved. The measures taken by the Sec-
retariat upon the recommendations of the USSR and U.S. have not
brought the necessary results.3 As yet, work on evaluating the effec-
tiveness of safeguards has not been properly organized. This task also
requires agreed action by our Missions in Vienna.
In this connection we should again like to call the attention of the
U.S. side to the need to replace Deputy Director General for Safeguards
Romech. As a result of our consultations, a decision was made to the ef-
fect that Romech would leave his post in May of this year. The question
of choosing a candidate for this post now arises. As you know, we sup-
ported the nomination of Jenikens, a Canadian, who, as we understand
it, is also supported by the U.S. our Missions in Vienna would now be
well advised to work without delay in support of this candidate. End
text.
Warnke
ported that “responding to U.S. initiatives, IAEA Secretariat is trying to implement more
stringent non-proliferation safeguards measures” but noted that the Secretariat “antici-
pates considerable difficulty in achieving this upgrading in view of opposition by EU-
RATOM and certain important governments and need for Board of Governors to provide
necessary manpower and other resource approvals.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770465–1102)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
364.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, February 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Policy Progress Report
The following non-proliferation progress report covers the period
since your speech last October before the organizing conference of the
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE).2
Where Are We After the First Year?
Your non-proliferation policy has challenged the conventional
wisdom surrounding the nuclear fuel cycle and progress has been
made towards key objectives. International attention to the prolifera-
tion risk of sensitive nuclear technologies has increased. A more coop-
erative assessment of the problems is underway. Opposition remains
and tensions with some nations persist, but our intentions and actions
are better understood, received with less suspicion and have greater
credibility.
The London Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines were published
in early January, publicly establishing minimum conditions for nuclear
technology exports to which all Suppliers have agreed.3 By submitting
them to the IAEA and publishing them we reduced institutional ten-
sions between the Suppliers Group and the IAEA.
Following your opening of the INFCE, its constituent working
groups have begun substantive work. The polemics we feared could
hamper the Evaluation’s progress have been minor and a number of
nations see real value in such a comprehensive examination of the nu-
clear fuel cycle. It will take time but our purpose is to develop a con-
sensus, not to solve immediate problems.
hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Good report. J.”
“eager to cooperate as a nation which is a consumer and also as a supplier. We want to
ensure that where there is a legitimate need and where there’s mutually agreed upon
nonproliferation restraint, that there be an adequate supply of nuclear fuel.” (Public
3 The updated Guidelines applied to nuclear transfers for peaceful purposes to help
ensure that such transfers would not be diverted to unsafeguarded nuclear fuel cycle or

Non-Proliferation
The French decision to seek to amend the reprocessing plant con-
tract with Pakistan moves France somewhat closer to your policy, but
we are still uncertain about the firmness of the decision and the type of
modifications the French are proposing. The FRG agreement to export
to Brazil a complete fuel cycle remains essentially intact, but the size of
the enrichment facility reportedly will be reduced, and there appears to
be some dissension in the Brazilian nuclear community concerning the
technological and economic value of the deal.
Your visit to India,4 while it did not lead to Indian acceptance of
full-scope safeguards, reinforced the dialogue and underscored for
Prime Minister Desai the importance you attach to non-proliferation
measures. In Iran, your talks with the Shah5 resulted in agreement in
principle on the terms for a new Agreement for Cooperation, but differ-
ences of interpretation of the agreement in principle still exist.
The new Non-Proliferation legislation6 tightens criteria for nuclear
cooperation but does not call for moratoria on exports. Likewise, the
Administration’s conditions for new highly enriched uranium (HEU)
exports7 are stringent, but exports under existing agreements are not
embargoed.
It is increasingly evident abroad that the United States has a long-
term commitment to a stronger international nuclear community based
upon a viable non-proliferation regime. We must recognize, however,
that while we have sensitized the international community to the
dangers of proliferation, we remain essentially isolated (with Canada
and Australia) among the major industrialized states in questioning the
inevitability of moving toward reprocessing and early commercializa-
tion of breeder technology. The prevailing attitude remains that
non-proliferation goals can be pursued without conflict with perceived
nuclear energy needs if reliance is placed on political and safeguards
arrangements rather than limits on technology. The success of our
policy will depend to a great extent on our ability to reconcile these dif-
ferences. Cooperation towards this end is increasing. Our objectives
will not be reached quickly but the strategy is sound.
Specific progress in key areas of the policy is outlined in the
attachment.
6 The Carter administration submitted the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act to
Congress in January. Carter signed it into law on March 10, 1978.
7 The Carter administration established the Reduced Enrichment for Research and
Test Reactors (RERTR) Program in 1977 to develop the technical means to use Low-
Enriched Uranium (LEU) instead of HEU in research reactors, while ensuring no signifi-
cant loss of performance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State8
Washington, undated
Non-Proliferation Progress
1. Safeguards
The Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines set important minimum
standards requiring safeguards on all transferred and by-product nu-
clear exports. The new legislation retains the provision you called for
last April9 which would require full-scope safeguards in all new and
existing agreements, allowing an 18-month negotiation period for ex-
isting agreements.
Only six non-nuclear weapons states are known to have unsafe-
guarded nuclear facilities—Spain, Egypt, Israel, Argentina, South Af-
rica and India. We expect to begin renegotiation shortly of our agree-
ment for cooperation with Spain. Egypt has indicated its willingness to
accept full-scope safeguards if Israel is held to the same standard. We
are exploring ways of providing such assurances. Argentina has indi-
cated some willingness to accept full-scope safeguards in return for
fuller nuclear cooperation. A technical team is traveling to Pretoria this
month to begin talks on how the Valindaba enrichment plant could be
brought under safeguards. The political sensitivity of our overall nu-
clear relationship with South Africa is aggravated by continuing uncer-
tainties [1 line not declassified] We will also have problems convincing
South Africa that safeguards on Valindaba will not expose proprietary
commercial information.
Your visit to India extended the rapport with the Indians, and PM
Desai declared India’s willingness to accept full-scope safeguards if a
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) were concluded and if the nuclear
weapons states were to dedicate themselves to stopping “vertical” pro-
liferation by halting the production of nuclear weapons and reducing
their nuclear stockpiles. We are exploring ways to ensure that the In-
dians do not define these conditions in ways that would be impossible
for us to meet.
We have begun a program to renegotiate old agreements and ne-
gotiate new ones that incorporate the newly legislated criteria. In rene-
gotiating the EURATOM agreement we face serious political and legal
problems on issues other than safeguards, and these could affect our
8 Secret.

Non-Proliferation
other negotiations. Sensitive political problems remain to be solved in
South Africa and Argentina, but we will continue a dialogue aimed at
getting safeguards on all of their facilities.
2. Restraints on Sensitive Transfers
The informal assurances we received from the Germans and the
French of a de facto moratorium on new agreements to transfer repro-
cessing facilities bolster the Guidelines, which call for restraint in ex-
port of sensitive technology. Efforts to extend restraints retroactively to
the FRG/Brazil deal have failed so far but the Brazilian projects them-
selves are shaky. [2 lines not declassified] Elements of the Brazilian scien-
tific community are pushing for modifications of the agreement. We
have repeatedly spelled out our views against reprocessing. Now that
the French are seeking to modify their contract to transfer a repro-
cessing facility to Pakistan, and are pressing the Germans to follow suit,
the Germans are more isolated. Until after the French elections10 we are
reluctant to press the French on what “modifications” they will actually
agree to with Pakistan. Should simple co-processing be involved we see
little non-proliferation benefit.
We will urge the French to continue their efforts to convince the
Germans of the regional security implications of Brazil’s having a re-
processing capability. Mutual deferral of reprocessing in Argentina
and Brazil will be sought: in Brazil, we plan to focus our efforts on Pres-
ident Geisel’s successor, who will not be as personally committed to the
deal; Argentina has indicated privately that it would consider deferring
its own reprocessing plant only if Brazil were to do so. We have said
that we would consider providing heavy water production technol-
ogy that Argentina wants only if it deferred reprocessing, as well as
adopted full-scope safeguards.
Planning on how to control the diffusion of sensitive centrifuge
and other enrichment technology is now underway, and we will con-
sider various institutional frameworks to ensure control of the front
end of the fuel cycle.
3. Incentives
We are working to implement foreign aspects of the spent fuel
storage policy Secretary Schlesinger announced last October.11 Several
11 The proposal, which was actually first announced by Schlesinger’s aide John
Ahearne during an October 18, 1977 press conference, would allow the U.S. Government
to “acquire and store the spent nuclear fuel that’s piling up at the nation’s utilities.”
(“President Proposes U.S. Acquire and Store Spent Nuclear Fuel,” Wall Street Journal, Oc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
countries (Sweden, India, Austria, Switzerland, Denmark) have indi-
cated interest.
The $5 million non-nuclear energy alternatives program12 is start-
ing with initial data collection and resource assessment in four less de-
veloped countries. We have designed the use of this limited budget so
as to affect directly countries that are on the threshold of moving
towards nuclear power programs.
Planning for a three-level system of fuel assurances is proceeding.
Very recently the DOE published its proposed new terms and condi-
tions for enrichment service contracting with the United States Govern-
ment. In addition, the potential for cross-investment among supplier
countries in enrichment facilities and other possible multilateral fuel
assurance measures involving suppliers and consumers are also being
examined. Finally, we are exploring the possibility of an International
Nuclear Fuel Bank and will use INFCE to obtain the views of others.
4. Building Consensus on the Structure of the Fuel Cycle
On October 19, you opened the organizing conference of the
INFCE by calling on nations to cooperate in the search for solutions to
the proliferation problem. Nearly fifty countries and four international
organizations are now participating actively in the various INFCE
working groups, all of which have begun substantive work. Despite the
sometimes stiff bilateral opposition to our non-proliferation policy, the
INFCE participants have focused their attention within a multilateral
context on the technical aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle and its prolifer-
ation risks. Maintaining a constructive atmosphere in the INFCE and
directing its work towards a consensus on the particularly sensitive
parts of the fuel cycle (reprocessing and enrichment) remain key tasks.
We will need to develop plans on how to utilize the INFCE results in
defining and implementing future elements of our policy.
5. Domestic Policy and Legislation
Legislation consistent with your proposals of last April has passed
both houses of Congress by overwhelming majorities. Our program to
renegotiate existing agreements for cooperation and negotiate new
ones will proceed according to the newly legislated criteria.
In addition to your decision to veto the ERDA authorization bill
containing funds for the Clinch River Breeder Reactor, we have restruc-
tured the FY–1978 work program at Barnwell reprocessing plant so as
to remove the possibility of any reprocessing there. However, we fore-
see continuing Congressional pressures to use the Barnwell plant in
12 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
FY–1979 in a way that would be perceived by other nations as incon-
sistent with policies we are urging on them.
We are working closely with DOE in examining and assessing
various alternative nuclear technologies and their proliferation resist-
ance. The results of DOE’s Non-Proliferation Alternative System As-
sessment Program13 will be prepared for foreign dissemination in
INFCE and elsewhere. As these efforts develop, they will support our
calls for other nations to study more proliferation-resistant fuel cycles.
6. Measures to Affect Motivations to Develop Explosives
Portugal recently ratified the NPT, bringing to 103 the number of
parties. Indonesia appears prepared to ratify. We will continue to press
for South Africa’s accession. India, Brazil, France, and China still op-
pose the Treaty as discriminatory.
During Secretary Vance’s trip to Latin America,14 Argentina de-
clared its intent to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Recent reporting,
however, suggests that Argentina’s intentions regarding ratification
are still uncertain. Assuming Argentina does ratify the Treaty, only
Cuban, French, Russian and US (on Protocol I)15 actions would then re-
main to bring the Treaty into effect for Brazil and Argentina. We have
urged all of them to act and our ratification of Protocol I is ready for
submission to the Senate.
A Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty may be concluded this year. A
CTB will be a concrete expression of our intent to curb the nuclear arms
race. If the CTB contains no exceptions for weapons states and excludes
all nuclear explosions, it will be an important tool in our efforts to for-
malize PM Desai’s pledge to forswear any further peaceful nuclear ex-
plosions (PNEs) and to move India towards full-scope safeguards.
Your decision to strengthen NATO by the addition of more troops
will serve to reinforce our security guarantees in this area. On the other
hand, we must work carefully to minimize the regional political-
military implications of our withdrawal from East Asia. We are particu-
larly concerned about the intentions of Taiwan and South Korea.
We are also studying the relation between our arms transfer pol-
icies and non-proliferation.
13 Not found.
1977–1980, vol. XXIV, South America; Latin America Regional.
15 Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco bound overseas nations with territories in
Latin America—the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands—to
the terms of the treaty, which prohibited the manufacture, testing, storage, and use of nu-
clear weapons in Latin America.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
365.
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative
for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to President Carter1
Washington, February 27, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
In Europe for the IAEA Board of Governors meeting, I also talked
with Chancellor Kreisky and Foreign Ministers David Owen (UK), de
Guiringaud (France) and Simonet (Belgium), several EC Commis-
sioners and PermReps, and a number of atomic energy officials. I was
the first American allowed to inspect the French military gaseous diffu-
sion plant (Pierrelatte) and the huge civil enrichment plant under con-
struction (Tricastin).
I got the following impressions:
1. There is respect for INFCE which is a “going concern”, but
INFCE is being used as a rationale to try to defer hard decisions—like
EURATOM’s agreeing to renegotiate its supply arrangements with
the U.S. (Under the nonproliferation legislation, EURATOM must so
agree in order to avoid a U.S. embargo on nuclear exports.) I think
EURATOM will agree. But there are feelings of resentment at what is
seen as U.S. duress and a breach of international obligations by do-
mestic legislation.
2. Europeans are used to depending on the U.S. for nuclear deter-
rence but they seem determined to keep to a minimum their peaceful
nuclear energy dependence on the U.S. The British and French empha-
sized their disagreement with our policy to defer reprocessing and fast
breeder commercialization. Europeans don’t want to give us a veto
over reprocessing of U.S.-origin spent fuel because that would place
decisions as to their energy programs in our hands. Expect long, tough
negotiations over this issue, since energy dependence is a lively fear in
Europe (and Japan).
3. The non-weapons states are especially sensitive to signs of
American discrimination in its nonproliferation policy in favor of the
UK and France.
4. Kreisky is hurting politically because his government cannot
find a way to assure Austrians that reactor spent fuel can be securely
stored. I explained your foreign spent fuel storage policy and stressed
zinski wrote “Mr. President, A concise and informative report from Gerry Smith. Given
your interest in the issue, it might be useful to have him call on you. Zbig.” Carter under-
lined the words “call on you,” drew an arrow pointing to them, and wrote “not now. C.”

Non-Proliferation
its numerous conditions precedent.2 He asked me to tell you of his full
support for your nonproliferation policy.
5. Conversation with the Argentine Governor at IAEA indicates
that they are not about to fulfill the agreement reached last November
with Secretary Vance to ratify Tlatelolco.
Respectfully,
Gerard Smith3
2 Not found.
3 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry Smith.”
366.
Editorial Note
On March 10, 1978, President Jimmy Carter signed the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (NNPA) during a White House cere-
mony. In his remarks, Carter said that “This legislation takes a major
step forward in clarifying our Nation’s policy. I think it would be a
much more predictable factor in the decisions made by foreign nations.
It will give guidance to me, to the Congress, to the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, and to the Department of Energy and other agencies in
our Federal Government who deal with this sensitive subject.” He also
noted that “with the assistance of our European allies,” an International
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation study had been created “to inventory
existing nuclear fuels in the form of ore, both uranium, thorium, and
others, to assess the quality and capability of enrichment facilities and
to deal with the proper distribution of nuclear fuels to those who don’t
have supplies in their own country—-with international safeguards
and constraints being adequate; and at the same time, to deal with the
unsolved question of the disposition of spent nuclear fuels. This is one
of the most complicated questions that presents itself to the interna-
tional community. I think it is accurate to say that some of our friends
abroad will have to readjust their policy.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978,
In his memoirs, the President’s Assistant for National Security Af-
fairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, recalled that Congress had grown increas-
ingly concerned with the proliferation of nuclear materials after India’s
1974 explosion of a nuclear weapon. The Carter administration, how-
ever, worried that various draft bills “were excessively tough. To head
them off and to prevent further legislative initiatives, we introduced

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
our own bill, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act, which was passed in
March 1978 with overwhelming majorities in both houses. The Act set
the criteria for licensing the export of nuclear material, and prohibited
U.S. export to any country not accepting international safeguards on all
of its plans.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 132–133)
In his memoirs, the Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representa-
tive for Non-Proliferation Matters, Gerard Smith, recalled that while
the Act “gave the United States veto rights over reprocessing of spent
fuel it provided to foreign countries, called for renegotiation of existing
contracts and agreements, tightened export license criteria, and prohi-
bited U.S. export of fuel to any nation not accepting so-called ‘full-
scope’ safeguards,” the Act could not prevent other nations from
finding “other sources of supply for their fuel.” He recalled “When the
President signed the bill into law and photos were taken in the White
House, I stood to one side despite Brzezinski’s protest that I should be
in the middle of the picture. I was determined not to be associated with
this legislation, although as Carter’s Special Assistant, I was bound to
uphold it.” Ultimately, Smith said “as things developed, I took it as my
principal mission to roam the globe trying to cut down on the bitterness
about our new policies and to mend fences with both allies and
‘threshold,’ or potential nuclear, states.” (Smith, Disarming Diplomat,
367.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 15, 1978
SUBJECT
EURATOM–IAEA Safeguards
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
Philip J. Farley, S/AS
Alexander Bessmertnykh,
William R. Salisbury, EUR/RPE
Counselor of Soviet Embassy
(notetaker)
in Washington
bury (EUR/RPE). The meeting took place at the Department of State.

Non-Proliferation
SUMMARY: Farley handed Bessmertnykh US reply (attached)2 to
the March 3 Soviet text3 on this subject. Farley stressed US belief that
EURATOM members are working in good faith toward an acceptable
implementation arrangement. Bessmertnykh said that this is not pri-
marily a technical issue but a political one, and that EURATOM
members should set a better example for others. End summary.
Mr. Farley handed Counselor Bessmertnykh the attached text and
went over its points orally. Bessmertnykh thanked him for the presen-
tation, agreed that the US and USSR are largely in accord on non-
proliferation issues, but noted that we seem to disagree on the analysis
of the EURATOM–IAEA situation. All the information available to the
Soviets indicates that the FRG in particular is doing its utmost not to
have strict IAEA safeguards made effective within EURATOM. Bess-
mertnykh said he agrees with our assertion that EURATOM acknowl-
edges as a general matter the necessity of IAEA safeguards, but that the
point is how those safeguards are applied in practice. The Soviets had
not been sure where the US stands on this, since when Morokhov
raised it in Geneva with Warnke as a bilateral matter there was no sub-
stantive response, only a promise to forward it to Washington, and the
US was silent at the February IAEA Board meeting on this issue and on
the necessity of an April Board meeting to resolve it.
Bessmertnykh said he was pleased that our March 15 text con-
cluded with an assurance that we would continue to urge completion
of the EURATOM–IAEA arrangements. The Soviets do not see this as
basically a technical issue but a political one which raises particularly
serious concerns in the context of such events as FRG-Brazil nuclear co-
operation. For this reason, the Soviets see a need for more effort on the
part of like-thinking nations in the non-proliferation field.
Farley agreed that there were currently difficult situations re-
garding non-proliferation, and that developments in Latin America
were one. But we do not see the same kind of problem in Western Eu-
rope, and see no indication that the FRG or others in EURATOM are
trying to evade IAEA standards. We think the EC is moving in good
faith toward a satisfactory solution, and that the problems have been
essentially technical in nature.
On the procedural question of US channels for discussion, Farley
noted that Warnke is not directly involved in these safeguards issues
2 Attached but not printed.
3 The note relayed Moscow’s concern about “the especially active opposition of the
FRG to the control by the IAEA of its nuclear activities. We would like to know what
steps the US Government has in mind to take to help the IAEA in solving that problem.”
The complete text of the note is in telegram 57425 to Brussels, March 7. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
but that Ambassador Smith—who, of course, is the US Representative
to the IAEA—is the primary source. Either he or Farley will go to the
April meeting of the Board, and would be happy to talk with the So-
viets if they wish. We do hope to see this issue resolved in April.
Bessmertnykh said that, while Farley may be right in saying that
the situation in Western Europe on non-proliferation is different than
that elsewhere, EURATOM should not be setting a bad example for
others, but on the contrary should be out front in accepting a maximal
IAEA role. Farley noted the high degree of nuclear energy develop-
ment in the EC, the preexistence of EURATOM safeguards and the
technical complexities involved, and expressed doubt that others could
credibly point to the EURATOM–IAEA situation as a precedent for na-
tional situations elsewhere.
The two agreed to stay in touch on non-proliferation issues, partic-
ularly where IAEA-related.
After the meeting, Bessmertnykh told Salisbury he agreed that EU-
RATOM–IAEA arrangements were nearing a satisfactory conclusion,
but repeated that he is concerned at the precedential effect, and at the
prospect that general US-Soviet agreement on non-proliferation goals
will diverge in specific cases because of “other factors” present in such
cases.
368.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 1978
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty:
Looking Toward the 1980 Review Conference
Key Judgments
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), an important bul-
wark against the spread of nuclear weapons, will receive its second
five-year review at a conference to be held in 1980. Forces operating
outside the treaty—especially the security concerns and regional ri-
valries of nonnuclear weapons states—will continue to be the main de-
terminants of the scope and rate of the proliferation process. But the
Non-Proliferation
NPT, if it remains at its present level of effectiveness, will provide sig-
nificant political, legal, and moral constraints on the behavior of ad-
herents (over 100 countries) and nonadherents alike.
The Second NPT Review Conference is likely to reveal a number of
concerns and misgivings about the operation of the treaty. It may also
give an opportunity to some states to criticize US nonproliferation
policy, which has relied heavily on the NPT and its International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system. The following crit-
ical questions will probably dominate the review conference agenda:
• Have the nuclear supplier states allowed “the fullest possible”
flow of nuclear technology and goods for peaceful uses to NPT ad-
herents, as promised?
• Have the nuclear weapons states delivered on their pledge to
seek “in good faith” nuclear and general disarmament?
• Are IAEA safeguards adequate to protect against violations of
the letter and spirit of the treaty?
The conference may also debate such sensitive political issues as
whether or not adherents should continue nuclear cooperation with
“pariah” states, such as Chile, Israel, South Africa, and Taiwan.
The ability of the NPT to attract additional adherents and keep
those it has—and even its long-term viability—will hinge, in part, on
how successfully these questions are addressed, not only at the review
conference, but also in other international forums, as well as on the gen-
eral course of the proliferation process.
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
369.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
Netherlands, Japan, France, Canada, the Soviet Union, and
Australia1
258208. Subject: Nuclear Suppliers Group: Policy on Transfers of
Enrichment Technology.
Confidential. Drafted by Allen Locke (PM/NPP); cleared by Marilyn Meyers (EA/J),
Rust Deming (OES/NET), Carol Stocker (EUR/RPE), Frank Bennett (EA/ANZ), Charles
Van Doren (ACDA), Ronald Bettauer (L/N), Robert Kelley (S/AS), and Marvin Hum-
phreys (PM/NPP); and approved by Nye.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Embassies should present to appropriate host government offi-
cials the Non-Paper in para 2, drawing orally on background informa-
tion in para 3. We are seeking preliminary reactions of key Nuclear
Supplier Governments to our approach to and proposed language for
clarification of the restraint in export of uranium enrichment tech-
nology called for in the Nuclear Supplier Group guidelines. Host au-
thorities should be clear that we are not seeking to establish any forms
of restraint beyond those already provided for in the guidelines. At the
same time, you should stress that the US, for its part, has never trans-
ferred enrichment technology under its agreements for cooperation in
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and does not foresee any circum-
stances likely to arise in the near future which would occasion a change
in this policy.
2. Text of Non-Paper follows: Begin text: transfers of enrichment
technology. In recent months, the US has held informal consultations
with several Nuclear Supplier Group members on the question of
adopting further restraints in the area of enrichment technology ex-
ports. We have found the view to be generally held that the relevant
suppliers might usefully adopt additional restraint in this area. At the
same time, we have concluded that a formal meeting of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group and formal amendment of the Nuclear Supplier
Group guidelines would not be feasible at this time. Accordingly, we
are considering adopting the following principle as US policy.
“In applying Article 7 of the guidelines, the Government of the US
recognizes the need for special restraint in the transfer of enrichment
technology and for early consultations before making any commit-
ments in this field. As stated in Article 7, the US believes that any such
transfer should be under arrangements that include supplier involve-
ment and/or multinational participation, and believe it desirable to
continue supplier consultations regarding the characteristics of such ar-
rangements which will reinforce international safeguards.
“We would appreciate governments’ comments on this approach
and indications of whether governments would be prepared to adopt
similar policies for future commitments.” End text.
3. Following background information may also be drawn upon in
discussing above presentation with host authorities. NSG guidelines
call for “restraint” in export of sensitive fuel reprocessing and uranium
enrichment technologies, but do not incorporate any understandings as
to the circumstances under which such exports might be appropriate.
With respect to reprocessing, several key relevant suppliers have ad-
ditionally undertaken, unilaterally, further voluntary restraint on ex-
ports. FRG and France, for example, have publicly indicated their in-
tention not to enter into new arrangements for transfer of reprocessing
technology. The US is strongly of the view that similar policies are also

Non-Proliferation
necessary with respect to enrichment technologies. We have over the
past months informally consulted with the governments of the UK,
France, the FRG, and the USSR concerning the approach incorporated
in the above note. On the substance of our approach to special restraint
in enrichment exports, it should also be noted that: (a) restraint should
cover all present enrichment technologies, and not only those men-
tioned in the NSG guidelines: (b) at the same time, we recognize that
additional, more stringent, controls may prove necessary in the future
regarding advanced isotopic separation technologies such as laser iso-
tope separation: (c) supplier consultations would not be intended or
used for commercial advantage. We would not intend to make any
public announcement of this policy.
4. For Paris. We have made a particular effort to shape the above
text to take into account the exchange Nye had with Bujon (CEA) and
Louet (MFA) in late May.2 If the French question whether the proposed
principle would apply to their chemical process, you should say that
processes that are demonstrated to be particularly attractive with re-
spect to difficulty of producing HEU and ease of material accountancy
could be treated in a less stringent manner.
5. For Bonn. We have also sought to shape our approach according
to the views expressed by Dittman, et al, when they met with Nye in
Bonn in late May.3 If the Germans raise the question of transfer of en-
richment technology under the FRG-Brazil deal, you should say that
text does not envision any retroactive application of the proposed prin-
ciple. Our previously-stated concern on the transfer of sensitive tech-
nologies under the FRG-Brazil deal remains unchanged.
6. For London. Proposed language of suppliers undertaking is that
agreed upon by Nye and Moberly.4 British are thoroughly familiar with
the proposed approach. You should share this instruction with FCO, to
keep them informed of steps we are taking.
7. For Moscow. Our basic approach on this issue was discussed
most recently with the Soviets in Vienna on September 19, when Am-
bassador Gerard Smith briefed Morokhov (Vienna 8485)5 subject was
also discussed in May, when Nye met in Geneva with Timerbaev.6 So-
viets seemed generally sympathetic to the need for further restraints on
2 Not found.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
Delegation to the IAEA General Conference, Morokhov, “welcomed briefing by Gerard
Smith on status of London Suppliers Conference, saying Soviet and US interests were
‘identical’ in non-proliferation.” Smith called this comment “significant.” (National Ar-
6 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
enrichment exports, and Timerbaev was particularly concerned that
the NSG continue to show signs of life, preferably through a meeting of
the 15. In the absence of an opportunity to convene such a meeting of
the NSG, we see an advantage to early and positive action on the
present proposal as an alternative means of demonstrating continued
vigor of the NSG effort.
8. For Canberra. You should provide the informal note and back-
ground info for the GOA’s background only, noting our desire to keep
the Australians fully and currently informed of supplier issues that im-
pinge directly on their interests. With reference to recent US-Australian
exchanges involving Nye on the subject of multinational enrichment
ventures, you should ensure that GOA understands that our approach
is consistent with the possibility of establishing a multinational enrich-
ment plant in Australia and in no way seeks to undercut any Australian
aspirations in this regard. Neither is this initiative intended to press
GOA in any way for a public statement on multinational control of en-
richment facilities (State 244023).7
9. Department would appreciate early initial reactions to this
approach.
Vance
curred with the Embassy’s judgment “not to push for a public GOA statement” favoring
multinational control of enrichment and processing facilities “at this time.” (National Ar-

Non-Proliferation
370.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, November 16, 1978
THE POLITICS OF INFCE2
The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) represents
one of the most ambitious and complex ventures undertaken in the field of in-
ternational diplomacy. This two-year program, launched by a US initiative,
seeks to construct a consensus among industrial and developing nations on the
future role of nuclear energy. In this effort, the Evaluation takes into account
not only national economic requirements but also the global political objective
of reducing, to the maximum extent possible, the dangers of nuclear weapons
proliferation.
The Evaluation has stimulated a higher degree of awareness concerning
the dangers inherent in the spread of advanced nuclear technology and of US
policy objectives in this sensitive area. It has also identified the major obstacles
to a new consensus on the future role of nuclear energy. As it enters its second
and final year, INFCE is beset by a fundamental dispute among the partici-
pating countries—indeed, it has been hampered from the start by the difficulty
of reconciling US non-proliferation policy with the priority resource-poor
nations attach to energy-security. Many of the advanced industrial nations
believe that a plutonium-based fuel cycle will reduce their dependence on
external energy resources. Their desire to proceed with the “plutonium
economy” despite its associated proliferation hazards has been amply demon-
strated in the INFCE working groups. These nations, along with the LDCs,
justify their resistance to US non-proliferation policy on the basis of:
—Conservative estimates of the size of world uranium reserves, coupled
with high projections of the need for nuclear power;
—Claims that the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel and its recycle in
power reactors offers an effective program for dealing with anticipated energy
vulnerabilities; and
—Assertions that the fast breeder reactor will eventually lead to a self-
contained fuel cycle that will help eliminate the problems associated with en-
ergy dependence.
the top of the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote “FYI—slow read.”
2 This memorandum was prepared by the International Issues Division of the Office of Re-
gional and Political Analysis and was coordinated with the relevant Divisions of the Office of Re-
gional and Political Analysis, the Office of Economic Research, and the Office of Scientific Intelli-
gence. Comments and Questions should be addressed to [less than 1 line not declassified].
[Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Efforts by the United States and other major uranium suppliers to formu-
late an effective alternative to the plutonium economy lack credibility in the
eyes of energy-dependent nations. INFCE is unlikely to resolve this conflict be-
cause there are
—Serious doubts about the United States as a reliable uranium supplier,
reinforced by the 1978 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act that requires the review
and possible revision of supply contracts, and
—Few, if any, political guarantees or technical fixes that will satisfy those
nations with the greatest need for assured access to nuclear fuel.
Underlying reservations about US non-proliferation policies have
prompted the advanced industrial nations to conduct a damage limitation ex-
ercise in INFCE. Even in its most positive sense, the Evaluation for these na-
tions represents primarily an opportunity to reaffirm the long-term benefits of
the plutonium economy in the face of US criticism. The less developed nations,
for their part, see INFCE as a chance to voice once again their demands for the
unrestricted transfer of nuclear technology rather than as an opportunity to
join the search for a more proliferation resistant nuclear regime.
Representatives of the nearly 60 governments and international organi-
zations participating in the Evaluation are scheduled to hold a plenary session
in Vienna from 27 November to 1 December to review progress to date. Thus
far, the working groups have assembled technical data that will serve as the
basis for their formal reports, which are to be completed within the next six
months.
The success of INFCE cannot, however, be measured only in terms of
these technical studies or the final report that will probably be drafted from
them. Indeed, INFCE has no formal binding authority on its participants. As a
US initiative, it is only one part of Washington’s broad policy to slow the pace
of nuclear proliferation. Consequently, developments relating to nuclear en-
ergy and technology outside the Evaluation will have an impact on its out-
come. For example, bilateral consultations between the United States and
INFCE participants concerning the implementation of the 1978 Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Act could have a decisive influence on the degree of coopera-
tion exhibited during the concluding year of the Evaluation.
One factor that might overshadow the Evaluation is the second NPT Re-
view Conference. The Conference is scheduled to begin only three months after
the Evaluation ends in February 1980. At a minimum, preparation for the Re-
view Conference preparation will divert the attention of nuclear policy makers
and experts from many developing countries which consider it a more effective
political forum to criticize supplier states attempting to curb the transfer of
nuclear technology.
Shifting the focus of the debate to a new arena may make it easier to draft
an INFCE report. Nonetheless, the extent to which a final re-port represents a
resolution rather than an effort to paper over the disagreement between those
who place the highest priority on non-proliferation and those who are preoccu-

Non-Proliferation
pied with energy security would appear at this juncture to depend more on per-
ceptions by the energy-poor nations of greater flexibility in US policy than on
any substantial compromises on what they see as essential national interests.
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
371.
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative
for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to President Carter1
Washington, January 17, 1979
Dear Mr. President:
I understand that Schmidt referred to your non-proliferation pol-
icy at Guadalupe2 and according to the report I had from State Secre-
tary Hermes in Bonn last week Schmidt expressed concern about a pos-
sible U.S.-Canadian-Australian uranium cartel.3 On this score during
these Bonn discussions the Germans, while saying there was much
agreement between the U.S. and German positions on nonproliferation,
also said our legislation was discriminatory and they felt that the
United States was now a less reliable supplier than before the
legislation.
In subsequent talks at Paris with my opposite number, Andre Ja-
comet, he reported that the Germans had said they were tempted to
support the position of the Group of 77 who apparently believe that the
United States is not living up to its NPT commitment to assure a full
flow of nuclear technology and material to the non-weapon states.4 I
think this reported attitude is more a matter of “letting off steam” than
a real German position but it suggests that nonproliferation can be a
highly divisive issue in relations with the Federal Republic.
The French also reported that the Italians were bitter about having
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty and apparently are sympathetic to
cret. Copies were sent to Brzezinski and Vance. Stamped notations at the top of the letter
read “JTM has seen” and “LD has seen.”
3 Smith, Hermes, and other U.S. and FRG officials met in Bonn on January 10. A re-
port on this meeting is in telegram 1254 from Paris, January 12. (National Archives, RG
4 A report of the Smith-Jacomet discussion is in telegram 1423 from Paris, January

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the developing countries’ position that renunciation of weapons plus
acceptance of safeguards is adequate assurance against the spread of
nuclear weapons.5
Jacomet also said that Hermes (FRG) reported that the U.S. was
now in agreement with the FRG on the Brazilian deal.6 We are asking
Ambassador Stoessel to correct this impression.
As evidence of how ticklish the domestic nuclear situation is in
Germany—we were advised that if the recent vote on going ahead with
the Kalkar breeder had not passed the Bundestag “owing to 6 absten-
tions”, the breeder issue could have “toppled the government”.
Respectfully,
Gerard Smith7
5 Ibid.
7 Smith signed the letter “Gerry.”
372.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
STATUS REPORT FOR THE PRESIDENT ON
NON-PROLIFERATION POLICY/NUCLEAR FUEL
CYCLE INITIATIVES
Events of the past several months—particularly the INFCE ple-
nary last November and the bilateral talks with our major nuclear co-
operation partners in November and January, as well as our talks with
India and Pakistan on nuclear issues—allow us to take a broad look at
the progress and prospects of our non-proliferation policy, especially
our initiatives on managing the nuclear fuel cycle.
In the two years since your April 1977 non-proliferation policy
announcements,2 we have clearly achieved a heightened sensitivity
20 memorandum from Vance to Carter.

Non-Proliferation
abroad to the dangers that nuclear proliferation would pose and to the
importance of deterring proliferation. We have also made progress in
renegotiating some of our nuclear cooperation agreements, gained new
adherents to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and won limited
support from other nuclear suppliers for restraints on sensitive nuclear
exports, particularly in the case of exports to Pakistan.
At the same time, and especially because of the insecurity of global
energy supply that was accentuated by events in Iran,3 our efforts to
restrain the use and transfer of sensitive nuclear technologies and ma-
terials are still viewed by many governments as an unacceptable in-
fringement on their nuclear energy development plans. These gov-
ernments defend their nuclear energy plans primarily on political
grounds, specifically on their right to increase their energy independ-
ence and to undertake related technological development.
As a result, although our INFCE consultations show a growing
consensus between ourselves and several of our industrialized partners
on most issues concerning the nuclear fuel cycle and sensitive tech-
nology transfers, we have not been able to win many other govern-
ments’ support for our fundamental position: that non-proliferation
concerns, as well as technical and economic factors, indicate that the
transfer and use of sensitive technologies should be significantly re-
strained and delayed.
In talks with us even the Canadians, whom we view as close allies
in our non-proliferation effort, have voiced doubts about the effective-
ness of an attempt to deny sensitive technologies to the developing
states even if they accept safeguards and give other non-proliferation
assurances. Canadians argue that such a discriminatory approach
could weaken the NPT. They also stress their interest in maintaining an
option for Canadian enrichment and reprocessing facilities.
If the problems of access to peaceful nuclear technology and nu-
clear arms control cause a serious confrontation at the June 1980 NPT
Review Conference, the NPT regime, which has served us so well over
the last decade, could be significantly undercut. The situation would be
even more acrimonious if the outcome of INFCE appears discrimina-
tory or if SALT II and a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty are not con-
cluded before the conference. We are currently consulting with the
other NPT depositary states (UK and USSR) and other key countries to
promote a more productive atmosphere at the conference.
3 In the wake of the Shah’s decision to leave Iran, the nation’s new government sus-
pended oil exports, which affected the world’s energy supply. See Foreign Relations,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
As an outcome of INFCE, we look forward to a reasonably bal-
anced technical analysis of fuel cycle issues in the final INFCE report
in February 1980. But we do not expect to achieve a formal new in-
ternational regime under which governments are committed to a set
of norms and rules corresponding to our policy preferences. Rather,
alongside the INFCE process, we hope to achieve a growing informal
consensus among the major industrial countries on a set of general
principles for nuclear commerce and fuel cycle management that can
serve as a guide for national policies. To reach even an informal under-
standing, we will have to make some compromises. We also believe
that such a consensus among suppliers may evoke a strong negative re-
action on the part of many developing countries, although we are
trying to bring them into the consensus as well.
We have begun to develop certain illustrative elements of the con-
sensus we hope to achieve. These include strictly limiting and multina-
tionalizing new enrichment and reprocessing plants; using plutonium
only for research, development, and deployment in breeders and ad-
vanced thermal reactors; no recycling of plutonium in current genera-
tion thermal reactors; and pacing construction of any new reprocessing
plants to meet only breeder and advanced reactor requirements and to
avoid stockpiling of plutonium. We have also encouraged multina-
tional safeguarded interim spent fuel repositories.
We hope that restraints of these kinds can be made acceptable on
the basis of an evolutionary principle: that is, that various nuclear tech-
nologies and facilities may be transferred to developing countries but
only when their energy needs and electric grids would support such
transfers. However, we expect that a number of developing countries
will resist this approach because they want complete access now to all
nuclear technologies and will resent in principle a formula that dis-
criminates between states on the basis of level of development.
In the near term, we will have to compromise on some of our illus-
trative elements in relation to the advanced countries. In particular,
West Germany, Japan and Canada want to pursue, or to retain the op-
tion for, national enrichment and reprocessing programs. Winning
their agreement to place such sensitive facilities under multinational
auspices will require efforts that continue beyond the conclusion of
INFCE. Also, West Germany and Belgium (and possibly Japan) are not
likely to be dissuaded from their programs for research and develop-
ment for thermal recycle of plutonium, although they may agree not to
enlarge such programs for at least a decade.
To reach a consensus on fuel cycle issues, we believe that we will
have to move beyond our present case-by-case consideration of ap-
provals of retransfers of US-supplied fuel for reprocessing because this
confronts our nuclear partners with uncertainties they believe they

Non-Proliferation
cannot manage. We believe it may be possible to deal with such ap-
provals on a generic basis within the framework of the restriction on re-
processing that we are now considering proposing.
Our approval right on reprocessing is the main issue in the renego-
tiation of our nuclear cooperation agreements. We have signed a new
agreement with Australia and initialed one with Norway.4 Our negoti-
ations are well under way with Finland and several other countries.
Reaching agreed conditions on reprocessing would allow us to move
forward with our renegotiation program in particular with EURATOM
and Japan.
Beyond the fuel cycle consensus we are seeking, we also face cer-
tain critical cases posing a high risk of proliferation. Pakistan’s sensitive
nuclear programs aim at achieving an explosives capability, directly
challenging efforts to restrain proliferation. We are working with other
suppliers to restrain sensitive exports to Pakistan, while exploring
internally and with other governments various approaches to the
problem.
At the same time, we do not believe that India will agree to place
all its peaceful nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards by March 1980
as the law requires for continued US cooperation, and the collapse of
the Desai Government raises new uncertainties about India’s future nu-
clear course.5 We have not been successful in gaining South Africa’s
agreement to adhere to the NPT or to accept IAEA safeguards on its en-
richment activities. Meanwhile, we believe South Africa is already pro-
ducing weapons-grade enriched uranium. Finally, the FRG contract
with Brazil for the transfer of sensitive nuclear technology, while en-
countering some delays and difficulties, remains intact with sensitive
facilities planned to come online in Brazil in the mid-to-late 1980’s. This
situation is complicated by Argentina’s plans for the indigenous devel-
opment of a reprocessing facility.
All these critical cases pose difficult challenges for us this year and
beyond. On other non-proliferation issues, we also foresee a difficult
1980 scenario that we believe we should signal to you. The following
sequence is likely:
—A final INFCE conference in February whose formal results are
extremely modest in comparison to the hopes we originally enter-
tained, but which may still discomfit many of our nuclear partners, es-
pecially the developing countries.
4 The United States signed an agreement concerning the peaceful use of nuclear en-
ergy with Australia on July 5 and initialed an agreement with Norway on nuclear cooper-
ation on May 11.
5 Indian Prime Minister Moraji Desai resigned, July 15, after Deputy Prime Minister
Charan Singh and Minister of Health Raj Narain withdrew from his ruling Janata Party.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—A March 10 US embargo on nuclear supply to non-nuclear
weapon states that have not placed all their peaceful nuclear facilities
under IAEA safeguards (this is likely to affect India in particular).
—In the case of EURATOM, a need for you to extend for one year
the March 10 deadline for obtaining their agreement to grant the US the
right to veto reprocessing of spent US-supplied fuel.
—A June Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference marked by
challenges on the part of countries which believe the nuclear-weapon
states have not fulfilled their NPT obligations to transfer nuclear tech-
nology for peaceful uses and to reduce their own nuclear weapons
forces.
—An industrialized-nation summit in which we, as well as our
partners, may be called upon to make certain explicit concessions (for
example with regard to the agreed conditions under which repro-
cessing of spent US-supplied fuel will normally be approved).
On these and other issues, our leverage is limited and declining.
We are not the only supplier of essential nuclear materials, equipment,
or services, and some countries will be willing to forego our nuclear
supplies despite the value they place on good overall relations with us.
Also, it is not likely that the principles we hope to establish will re-
ceive early formal approval internationally or be reflected in new insti-
tutions in the near term. However, we believe that the potential
problems can be moderated if we use a more informal and flexible ap-
proach to our non-proliferation goals, especially because other gov-
ernments will accept significant restraints on their nuclear activities far
more readily in practice than in principle.
We also believe that achieving an effective global consensus on
non-proliferation policy, and especially on managing the nuclear fuel
cycle, will require a continuing effort through the 1980s and beyond.
Even if the process we foresee moves forward reasonably successfully,
we must expect that some “problem states” will elect to remain outside
the consensus that begins to develop and that we will, on occasion,
be
confronted
with
difficult
dilemmas
in
restraining
potential
proliferators.

Non-Proliferation
373.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
President Carter1
Washington, July 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation
I.
The Secretary of State’s July 20 Nonproliferation Status Report2 to
you indicates the following:
—The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) will
end in February 1980 with only modest results.
—We face critical decisions by mid-1980: waiver of the deadline
for renegotiation of our agreement with the European Community as
the Europeans will continue to refuse us a reprocessing veto; possible
cut-offs of nuclear exports to India and South Africa; and a major issue
with Japan if we insist on continuance of case-by-case review of pro-
posals for reprocessing of US-origin spent fuel and continued deferral
of the Japanese planned reprocessing program.
—We will in addition face criticism at the NPT Review Conference
in June 1980.
Further, our task of working out acceptable new international ar-
rangements is complicated by the legislative requirement for changes
in existing supply commitments and the shift of the nuclear export li-
censing function to the NRC.
II.
We are now beginning a thorough and systematic exploration of
international nuclear policy in the post-INFCE period. An interagency
group will be getting under way. Other countries are looking for a de-
gree of harmonization of nuclear policies in the aftermath of INFCE. In-
ternational explorations on a more specific basis than in the past are
called for. Unless otherwise directed, I propose to go forward with the
efforts outlined in this memorandum on the basis of the following
observations.
1. Although there is enhanced concern in various industrial coun-
tries and to some extent in developing countries about the nuclear pro-
liferation threat (largely owing to your initiative, but reinforced by de-
2 See Document 372.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
velopments in Pakistan),3 many nuclear nations view U.S. policy as an
effort to deny them autonomy (however unrealistic that possibility
may be in some cases). There is a widespread belief, and it is notable
that even Canada may be moving in this direction, that restrictions
on sensitive facilities are likely to become less effective or even coun-
terproductive where countries in which they are located or planned
agree to IAEA safeguards on all their civil nuclear facilities (full-scope
safeguards).
2. There is fairly wide acceptance, largely as a result of efforts in
INFCE and elsewhere, of the views that (a) the economic advantage of
recycling of plutonium in thermal reactors is marginal, at best; and
(b) reprocessing is not a necessary precondition for waste disposal.
3. There is substantial acceptance in Japan, France, the UK, the
FRG, other European nations, and the USSR, of the need to prevent
widespread construction of national enrichment and reprocessing
plants and the spread of plutonium and high enriched uranium. But
none of these countries is prepared to imitate the U.S. by foreswearing
reprocessing (although the FRG has been forced by domestic pressures
to accept deferral of their proposed major commercial facility). While
the first four agree that multinational approaches to sensitive facilities
and materials are of interest for nonproliferation reasons, they, like the
U.S., resist acceptance of dependence on multinational plants.
4. INFCE will not come up with either fuel cycle or hardware
“fixes” which will significantly reduce the potential for diversions to
weapons programs.
5. With demands for nuclear power much reduced and sources of
nuclear equipment and enrichment services increasing, U.S. ability to
influence the conditions of international nuclear trade has greatly di-
minished. It is likely to diminish further.
III.
In light of these observations and in order not to be further isolated
from influencing nuclear developments abroad, we need to develop
new approaches (reflecting the incentives and institutions foreshad-
owed in your 1977 speech and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
(NNPA)) designed to achieve our basic nonproliferation objectives.
Our best hope lies in developing a consensus among the Summit 7, cer-
tain other important industrialized countries and some key LDC’s.
I propose, in both internal efforts and in exploratory talks with
other governments, to explore a range of possibilities building on NPT
and IAEA safeguards, while maintaining to the extent possible supplier
restraints. These possibilities would be based on the following:
3 On June 25, Smith informed IAEA Director General Eklund about “the seri-
ousness with which the United States viewed” the “evidence” that Pakistan “was pur-
suing a nuclear explosive program, mentioning activity in reprocessing, gas centrifuge
enrichment and nuclear explosive design.” (Telegram 178818 to Vienna, July 11; National

Non-Proliferation
1. An understanding with the major industrial states that we would not
exercise a veto on nuclear trade among them or on their development of sensi-
tive facilities involving materials of U.S. origin; provided (i) they accept
full-scope and improved safeguards on all civil nuclear facilities and an appro-
priate institutional framework for their operation and the management of the
materials they produce, and (ii) they have a reasonable economic case for
building sensitive plants. We would interpret reprocessing in order to ob-
tain plutonium for certain research, for breeders and for other ad-
vanced reactors as “reasonable” for countries with large programs, but
not in the near to medium term for the recycle in conventional thermal
reactors or as a precursor to waste disposal. (Eventual U.S. agreement
to this point could require legislative changes; our exploratory talks
would note this fact.)
2. The development of international and multinational institutions as
a further means of reducing the likelihood that critical materials will be di-
verted to making weapons. This would include (as foreshadowed in the
NNPA) willingness to consider foreign participation in U.S. enrich-
ment capacity.
3. As a part of such institutional development, early establishment of an
effective international plutonium storage/management system. Since accu-
mulation of substantial stocks of plutonium by some countries is inevi-
table, nuclear cooperation with them and other nations which might ac-
quire or produce plutonium should be conditioned on their willingness
to place excess civil plutonium stocks under international control. This
should include U.S. willingness (as proposed by the Ford Administra-
tion) to place U.S. excess civil plutonium in an effective control system.
4. Short- and long-term measures to provide greater assurance of fuel
supply, especially to countries stopping short of full fuel cycles.
5. Technical cooperation and assistance regarding (i) three major
problems of nuclear power (safety, spent fuel disposition and waste
disposal) and where appropriate (ii) research and development on
breeders and other advanced nuclear technologies.
6. Improved safeguards for enrichment, reprocessing and MOX fabri-
cation plants, and undertakings to limit new enrichment capacity to
low enrichment.
In sum, we plan to begin exploration of what post-INFCE regimes
might look like. Hopefully, we will as a result be able to provide you
with a realistic assessment of the best possible alternatives which could
be negotiable with other countries. You would then be in a better posi-
tion to establish post-INFCE U.S. policy.
I am taking the liberty of sending a copy of this memorandum to
the Secretaries of State and Energy, and the Director of ACDA.
Gerard Smith4
4 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
374.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Ambassador-at-Large and
Special Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith1
Washington, August 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Negotiations (U)
I do not believe that the President should be asked to address the
question of exploring the post-INFCE proposals outlined in your mem-
orandum of July 27 until they have been developed in considerably
more detail and specificity.2 Some of them would appear to require sig-
nificant changes in the policy decisions made in 1977,3 and several
might require new or amended legislation. Without a detailed analysis
of what we would be proposing in each area, and an assessment of the
impact of the whole package on our objectives, it would be difficult for
the President to make a judgment on the acceptability of this approach.
I suggest that the post-INFCE planning group which you have recently
established prepare a paper on each of the six possibilities, including
specific proposals which might be explored with other governments,
required changes in existing legislation and policy guidelines, and
an overall assessment of how the package might affect the pace of re-
processing and breeder deployment in countries participating in the ar-
rangement and our ability to restrain sensitive activities in other na-
tions. These papers should be reviewed by the PRC before the President
is asked to authorize explorations with other governments. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 See Document 373.

Non-Proliferation
375.
Memorandum of Conversations1
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Gerard Smith, S/AS
Ambassador Henry Owen, White House
Mr. Robert Bowie
Mr. Abraham Chayes
Dr. Albert Carnesale
Mr. Phillip Farley
Dr. George Rathjens, S/AS
Mr. F.S.M. Hodsoll, S/AS
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Nonproliferation Regime and 1980 Summit
The following ideas were expressed:
1. Smith should explore this Fall with key industrialized countries
(Japan, UK, France, FRG, Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, Italy, Can-
ada, and possibly Australia) views on the framework for a Post-INFCE
Nonproliferation Regime (including multinational arrangements).
2. It is understood that there will be organized this Fall a nongov-
ernmental meeting on post-INFCE institions; this would include key
developing, as well as developed, countries. Ian Smart (UK) could be a
principal organizer of this effort.
3. The purpose of these efforts would be to provide a basis for
(i) developing recommendations for the President on post-INFCE U.S.
policy, and (ii) talks next year leading hopefully to a consensus among
the Summit 7 plus Belgium, the Netherlands and Sweden on the basic
elements of post-INFCE civil nuclear arrangements. We would attempt
to achieve this consensus in time so that appropriate initiatives could
be undertaken in June 1980 at the Venice Summit; Summit discussions
and actions should avoid a developing country perception of the “Big
Boys” ganging up on them.
4. In parallel with the talks referred to in 3 above, we should ar-
range to begin a dialogue with key developing countries who have par-
ticipated actively in the INFCE TCC (Egypt, India, Philippines, Argen-
tina, Korea, Romania, Brazil, Mexico, and Yugoslavia). The purpose
would be to develop a degree of understanding, if not consensus, prior
cret. Drafted by Francis Hodsoll (S/AS) on August 30. The conversations took place in
Smith’s office at the Department of State.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to the 1980 NPT Review Conference. A number of these countries
should be worked in as a part of the Smith exploratory trip (perhaps
India, Korea, Argentina, and Romania, which are active members of the
TCC).
5. As agreed with Dr. Brzezinski, to provide USG authority for the
Fall explorations, Smith should meet with Secretaries Vance, Brown
and Duncan and Dr. Brzezinski shortly after Labor Day. For this pur-
pose, a memorandum would be prepared outlining (i) the nature of the
non-proliferation policy problem and (ii) the general thrust of ideas
which we believe should be explored with other countries. The memo-
randum would indicate that it is too soon to consider actual policy
changes, but that the explorations would provide a basis for formu-
lating realistic proposals for the President’s consideration. It would
also suggest a communication signaling the Smith explorations and the
President’s interest in reaching resolution of outstanding civil nuclear
issues.
6. Prior to the Fall explorations, the interagency group requested
by the NSC should develop back-up analytical papers on key elements
of the post-INFCE regime (e.g., plutonium management, research, etc.).
On the basis of these papers, country specific papers will be prepared
(including analysis of carrots and sticks to achieve our objective).
7. Also prior to the Fall explorations, Smith should consult with
key Congressional leaders (Church, Jackson, Glenn, Percy, and
McClure on the Senate side; and Zablocki, Bingham and Findley on the
House side).
8. The USSR and PRC probably will not be major factors in a post-
INFCE regime including multinational arrangements. Nonetheless,
their participation should be sought.
9. Consideration should be given to raising the Pakistan issue at
the 1980 Summit.

Non-Proliferation
376.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to Denis Clift of the National
Security Council Staff1
Washington, October 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Status Report on Current Non-Proliferation Issues
In response to your request,2 we have prepared the following brief
summary of current non-proliferation issues. Please let me know if you
wish further elaboration on any of these issues.
Pakistan (Secret/Nodis)
Pakistan continues to pursue a nuclear explosive capability, in-
cluding development of enrichment and reprocessing facilities to ac-
quire weapons useable material and development of the non-nuclear
elements of a nuclear explosive device. We believe that Pakistan will
not be able to accumulate enough fissile material from its enrichment
and reprocessing activities for a nuclear explosive for at least two to
three years, but there are recurring reports that Pakistan might test a
device within the next six months, perhaps with material acquired
from abroad. We cannot exclude this possibility.
We have terminated foreign assistance to Pakistan in accordance
with the Symington amendment3 (PL–480 continues), and we have re-
peatedly told high levels of the Pakistan government that we will not
be able to respond to its legitimate security and economic development
needs as long as it continues its present nuclear activities. Some of our
allies, the PRC and the Soviet Union have also expressed their concerns
to the GOP.
Foreign Affairs advisor Agha Shahi will be in Washington next
week for consultation on security questions, including the nuclear
issue. We are also consulting with our allies with a view to developing
a common approach to the Pakistan problem.
2 Not found.
3 The
Symington
amendment
introduced
by
Senator
Stuart
Symington
(D-Missouri) required the President, when furnishing development assistance under the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and making sales under the Agricultural Trade Develop-
ment and Assistance Act of 1954, to take into account (1) “the percentage of the recipient
or purchasing country’s budget which is devoted to military purposes, and (2) the degree
to which the recipient or purchasing country is using its foreign exchange resources to ac-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
[Pages 2 and 3 of this document are missing] conclusively what has
taken place. We have informed key Allies of these indications and are
now attempting to verify the indications by independent means. This
information is being very closely held.
This development complicates an already difficult situation in re-
gard to South Africa’s nuclear activities. South Africa has not moved
forward with a package settlement we proposed last year by which it
would place its enrichment facility (which is capable of producing
weapons-useable material) under safeguards and adhere to the NPT in
return for resumed US supply of fuel for its research reactor and fulfill-
ment of our commitment to supply fuel for the two power reactors it is
acquiring from France.
We have prodded South Africa toward resolutions of the nuclear
issue and have also discussed the problem with France, the only other
state with leverage in the nuclear area with South Africa. France has in-
formed South Africa that it will not undercut the position we have
taken. We are now considering internally additional steps that might
be taken.
Harmonization of Policies with Key States on the Nuclear Fuel Cycle
(Confidential)
The International Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) will formally end
next February but most of its reports have been written. INFCE has
played a useful role in developing a basis for fuel cycle decisions, but it
is a technical study, not a negotiation, and as such will not, in itself, re-
solve differences on fuel cycle issues. It has, however, provided for a
pause and a number of useful conclusions from a non-proliferation
point of view.
We have begun informal consultations with key countries (pri-
marily France, UK, FRG and Japan) on developing common ap-
proaches to outstanding nuclear issues. The key issues involve ground
rules and institutions for sensitive nuclear facilities and material, par-
ticularly reprocessing plants and plutonium. Most of the other major
countries are also now looking for ways to resolve remaining issues,
and we need to accelerate our discussions if we are to have maximum
impact.
We are seeking a consensus including (1) plutonium use is appro-
priate in breeder and advanced reactor development in states with
large electrical grids; (2) recycle of plutonium in light water reactors
should be avoided because it is only marginally economic and poses a
serious proliferation risk (it could result in early separation and use of
plutonium in any state with a reactor); (3) development of new repro-
cessing capacity should thus be limited to the requirements for pluto-
nium for breeder and advanced reactor R&D and development of both

Non-Proliferation
enrichment and reprocessing facilities should be related to interna-
tional capacity rather than strictly national needs; and (4) sensitive fa-
cilities be subject to appropriate institutional arrangements and incor-
porate feasible technical barriers to misuse and improved safeguards.
We are making progress, but key issues remain to be resolved.
Ambassador Gerard Smith is planning shortly to begin consultations
with key countries on a post-INFCE framework. We hope to reach
agreement on elements of such a framework before the seven-nation
Summit next summer in Venice.
Peter Tarnoff4
Executive Secretary
4 Tarnoff signed the memorandum “Peter.”
377.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 20, 1979
Recent Consultations in Europe on Nonproliferation
After visiting FRG, France, UK, Belgium and The Netherlands
(and consulting the Japanese in Washington),2 our impressions about
realistic post-INFCE possibilities are:
sent to Christopher, Benson, Pickering, Duncan, and Owen.
Paris,
November
(National
Archives,
RG
59,
Central
Foreign
Policy
File,
from The Hague, November 6; (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790525–0776)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Although these countries are more sensitive to the risks of prolifer-
ation than two years ago, they seem more set than we on giving their
own energy needs first priority. They are concerned about spread of re-
processing and enrichment plants and weapons-grade materials. But,
they believe we place too much emphasis on risks of diversion from nu-
clear power programs as compared with dedicated production pro-
grams, and that we are over-emphasizing the risks of plutonium sepa-
ration and use as compared with risks from spread of enrichment
facilities and accumulation of spent fuel.
Our allies are very much concerned about the lack of predictability
of supplier states’ actions, especially the United States, primarily with
respect to approving the reprocessing of spent fuel and use of pluto-
nium. There is still general disapproval of and resentment against the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Act of 1978 because of its requirements on
these points. The prevailing view is that these requirements are more
likely to be a stimulus, than an impediment, to the spread of sensitive
facilities and materials.
On breeders, thermal recycle of plutonium and the need for repro-
cessing for waste disposal, there is some convergence of American and
other advanced countries’ views.
All believe it necessary for advanced states to continue R&D on
breeders as a high priority. With fewer energy options, the others feel
this more strongly than we do. But none—not even the French—are
prepared now to make a flat commitment to breeder commercializa-
tion, although they and the Japanese expect to do so within the next
decade.
They all accept that the economic advantage of thermal recycle is
at present marginal, at best, and that decisions about recycle will be
made on other grounds—assurance of supply and the perceived ad-
vantage by some of reprocessing for waste disposal and the need in this
case to burn up the resulting plutonium.
The Germans are committed in principle to reprocessing as a pre-
condition to waste disposal and feel that reopening the question would
jeopardize their already politically fragile nuclear power program.
However, there is increasing acknowledgment that reprocessing is not
required to dispose of waste safely. In fact, in the Free World, except for
France and UK, there is likely to be little commercial reprocessing of
spent fuel for years.
With the end of INFCE approaching and the NPT Review Confer-
ence in August 1980, our major problem will be to deal with pressures

Non-Proliferation
for a general agreement on conditions for nuclear supply. There is a
risk that others will favor conditions which would be so permissive as
to seriously undercut our nonproliferation efforts. If, on the other hand,
the conditions appear discriminatory, it will be a formidable problem
to gain their acceptance by states other than those favored. Acceptance
will have to be based on common approaches, at least among key sup-
pliers and consumers, since our leverage as a supplier has diminished.
If we can make some accommodations, a consensus may develop
among the advanced countries that will be acceptable to most devel-
oping states and assist us and other suppliers in dealing with the coun-
tries of greatest concern from a nonproliferation point of view. We
envisage an evolutionary, or building-block, process—not a grand
design.
The two most promising prospects appear to be full-scope safe-
guards (FSS) and an effective international plutonium storage (IPS)
system.
The French have so far blocked FSS as a norm for nuclear trade. It
may soon be possible to get them, and other major supplier nations, to
agree to condition exports on IAEA safeguards on all peaceful nuclear
activities, though the French may wish to withhold this step pending
resolution of our differences with respect to U.S. consent rights over
U.S. origin spent fuel reprocessed in EURATOM countries and over
plutonium derived therefrom.
An IAEA study is underway on an IPS and some Europeans are
committed to its early realization—with or without the U.S. There are
unresolved issues with respect to the extent of coverage (i.e., whether
IPS should follow plutonium from the time of separation until it is back
in a reactor), and on the question of authority for release of plutonium.
We can probably influence developments in ways consistent with our
nonproliferation objectives if we weigh in heavily and can hold out the
prospect that exercise of U.S. consent rights with respect to plutonium
release could be affected if the IPS has authority to prevent release in
the absence of a clear and reasonable need and satisfaction of other
agreed conditions.
As noted, our allies and others are very concerned about the lack of
predictability in our nuclear supply actions and the exercise of our con-
sent rights for reprocessing. Their attitude toward IPS can be influ-
enced by its relation to the exercise of these consent rights. To influence
the development of a post-INFCE consensus, we will need to work out
guidelines concerning the exercise of our consent rights.
Aside from IPS, there is little interest in the advanced countries in
early multinationalization of fuel cycle facilities, although the UK,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
France and Belgium have indicated willingness to consider some addi-
tive anti-proliferation measures beyond safeguards in order to set a de-
sirable precedent.
In order to meet possible criticism at the NPT Review Conference,
the UK and France indicated interest in exploring possible initiatives
prior to the Conference to provide further assistance to developing
countries in assessing their energy needs and dealing with the prob-
lems of nuclear power (e.g., reactor safety).
We will continue to consult these and other states, including devel-
oping countries. It seems unlikely that any new arrangements will be
ready for agreement next year.
378.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to French Foreign
Minister Franc¸ois-Poncet1
Washington, December 1, 1979
Dear Jean:
Ambassador Gerard Smith has reported to me on the useful dis-
cussions he recently held in Paris on finding common approaches to a
post-INFCE regime for international nuclear commerce.2 He advised
me that you are planning to consider this subject at an inter-Ministerial
meeting to be held on December 10. In that connection, I urge you to
give special consideration to the goal of achieving comprehensive,
full-scope international safeguards coverage in non-nuclear-weapon
states. We believe the urgency of achieving this goal has greatly in-
creased, and hope that France may now find it possible to adopt, in par-
allel with other major supplier states, a policy of making new commit-
ments for cooperation with non-nuclear-weapon states in the civil uses
of nuclear energy only with those that accept a binding obligation to
place all present and future nuclear facilities under international
safeguards.
2 See Document 377.

Non-Proliferation
In looking at the countries of special proliferation concern—in-
cluding India, Pakistan, Israel and South Africa—we find it striking
that each of them has endeavored to produce weapons-usable material
in unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. Thus they can proceed down the path
of nuclear explosive development, pointing out that they are violating
no international undertakings, while at the same time enjoying the ben-
efits of international cooperation with their nuclear power program.
We believe it is time to try to plug this loophole by facing them with a
choice.
We do not believe this would involve any serious sacrifice of
market opportunities, since the number of potential customers who
have not already agreed to accept full-scope safeguards has become
very small, and some of these are now moving toward such acceptance.
Moreover, a common policy requiring full-scope safeguards would
avoid the unfortunate type of situation we have been witnessing in the
competition for Argentine sales,3 where perceived differences in safe-
guards requirements appear to have influenced the award of the
contracts.
If you are prepared to move with us in this direction, we see more
advantage to having the supplier states who are members of the NPT
announce at the NPT Review Conference their adoption of full-scope
safeguards as a condition of future supply commitments. I believe this
would significantly strengthen support for the Treaty by defusing the
arguments of the developing world that NPT Parties derive no real
benefits and are, in fact, penalized with regard to conditions of nuclear
supply compared to non-NPT Parties. While we realize France is, of
course, not a party to the NPT, your support for this new policy would
be extremely important in bringing the NPT supplier states along, and
we hope you could take whatever parallel action seemed suitable to
make clear your approach at that time.
We understand the possible reluctance of a supplier state to re-
quire its customers to have safeguards on materials that are not trace-
able to its own exports. But we are convinced that this requirement is
necessary not only to prevent additional states from nuclear explo-
sive development but also to achieve effective safeguards on one’s own
exports. Examples of why we believe this is so are set forth in the
enclosure.4
As you know, President Carter attaches considerable importance
to this goal, and I would appreciate your calling this letter to the atten-
3 See Document 420.
4 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tion of President Giscard d’Estaing prior to the inter-Ministerial
meeting.
Sincerely,
Cy5
5 Vance signed the letter “Cy.”
379.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
President Carter1
Washington, February 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation Strategy for 1980 and Beyond
The purpose of this memorandum is to seek approval of a general
strategy to improve our nonproliferation policy in 1980. We will ask for
authority to make specific moves as required. The strategy in large part
makes elements of our current policy more detailed and specific. The
most critical issues involve (i) European and Japanese reprocessing of
U.S. origin material and use of the resulting plutonium and (ii) im-
provements to the nonproliferation regime. Nothing proposed for 1980
would require any change in the law.
At the start of your administration, it was important promptly to
increase awareness of the need to slow the spread of sensitive facilities
which were making control of nuclear proliferation more difficult.
Non-Proliferation. Secret. Sent under cover of a February 19 memorandum from Vance to
Carter. Vance advised Carter to approve “the general strategy he [Smith] is suggesting”
and noted that as the INFCE “draws to a close, it is important that we remove unneces-
sary causes of division with our Allies which do not help nonproliferation, and that we
begin to build a better international nonproliferation regime. An indispensable element is
that the U.S. be considered a reliable and predictable supplier.”

Non-Proliferation
Since 1977, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE),
which you initiated, and bilateral discussions have provided us and
others with better perceptions of both the problems and possible
solutions.
Several things have become clear:
1. We are seen to be an unreliable supplier and ambivalent about
nuclear power.2 Alternate suppliers are emerging and our influence
over nuclear trade and programs is becoming increasingly limited. Our
influence over reprocessing and plutonium use is particularly limited
in that we lack consent rights regarding EURATOM countries and
cannot politically treat Japan less favorably than Europe.
2. While for domestic reasons many nuclear programs have been
slowed in recent years and the proliferation dangers inherent in pluto-
nium based fuel cycles are now better perceived (in large part as a re-
sult of U.S. efforts), breeder and advanced reactor options are still per-
ceived to be of great importance by major countries in Europe and
Japan. These programs will continue even if we do not agree; their im-
portance is affirmed by INFCE. To the extent U.S. policy attempts to in-
terfere with these programs, it is seen to threaten these countries’ en-
ergy security.3
3. The NPT regime is the foundation of nonproliferation policy but
is increasingly attacked by countries who see nuclear suppliers as not
keeping their part of the bargain—“fullest possible exchange . . . for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.” U.S. policy is singled out as particu-
larly damaging.
4. We need to develop a joint strategy with the major suppliers
(our allies with the most advanced nuclear programs—UK, France,
FRG, Japan) to (a) improve the nonproliferation regime and (b) agree
on criteria for plutonium uses and related reprocessing.
5. We need also to make NPT or equivalent (Tlatelolco) obligations
more attractive, provide greater supply assurances to countries ac-
2 Vance underlined the phrase “an unreliable supplier and ambivalent about nu-
clear power” and wrote in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph: “You need to tell
us whether we are unreliable because of Exec. branch policy, because of Cong. legislation
or both—Being unreliable may not be as bad as giving materials which lead countries to
have capabilities without safeguards.”
3 Vance underlined the words “their importance is affirmed by INFCE” and “inter-
fere” in this paragraph. In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Vance wrote “in
preparation for this meeting you need a brief summary of INFCE conclusion and a com-
ment as to why we were not successful in convincing people of our views on the dangers.
This summary could either be a TAB, or if short enough in the talker. Do we now accept
the INFCE conclusion? Do we accept that interference threatens their energy security?”
An unknown hand wrote “in part.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
cepting these obligations, and isolate to a greater extent the problem
countries.4
We face major decisions in 1980 that were deferred for the period
of INFCE. These involve requests for consent to reprocessing of U.S. or-
igin fuel in France, the UK and Japan; the conditions of our consent to
the use of the resulting plutonium; and the EURATOM renegotiation
aimed at giving us such consent rights where we will have to specify
how we would exercise them. We also face decisions on implementa-
tion of the statutory requirement that countries with which we coop-
erate have safeguards on all their nuclear activities (full-scope safe-
guards). And, we face an NPT Review Conference in August, where
restraints on international nuclear cooperation will be a major issue.
Following INFCE’s concluding Plenary February 25–27, we should
demonstrate that its analysis is being taken into account in U.S. policy
and that we are willing to become a more reliable supplier. This is es-
sential if we are to limit the spread of sensitive facilities and stop the
current move towards multilateral negotiations of criteria for nuclear
trade which could result in U.S. isolation, North-South confrontation
and setbacks for our nonproliferation policy.5
Beyond 1980, we should consider amendment of the NNPA to
(i) eliminate its retroactive provisions, and (ii) if not already accom-
plished by reorganization plan, relieve the NRC of its role in export
control (except possibly with respect to safety). These issues need not,
however, now be resolved, and nothing proposed in this memorandum
limits your freedom of action here.
Any strategy to reduce proliferation risks associated with the fuel
cycle must begin with the other major suppliers. Without their support,
U.S. nonproliferation policy can have only limited effect.6
4 Vance underlined the phrase “greater supply assurances to countries accepting
these obligations, and isolate” and wrote in the left-hand margin “what is the example of
countries where we have not given supply assurances when they have accepted safe-
guards.” An unknown hand wrote: “NPA enjoins us to do better but we don’t;” “none;”
“case-by-case basis only and general policy;” “5 yr licensing recently. But most want link
licensing to life of reactor;” and “For breeder reactors (INFCE agrees only with lgr coun-
tries) can have [illegible] for govts using spent fuel for reprocessing now have [illegible]
consent (transfer or reprocess), Regularize. In return, defer thermal recycle. Breeders and
adv reactors are most.”
5 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph an unknown hand bracketed the
first sentence, drew a line toward the word “stop” and wrote “?”
6 An unknown hand bracketed this paragraph in the left-hand margin.

Non-Proliferation
These countries are allies, have accepted NPT or equivalent obliga-
tions, and have large electric grids and advanced nuclear programs.
Their investigation or pursuit of breeders and other advanced fuel
cycle option is understandable.
The proposed strategy involves private negotiations with these
countries aimed at achieving a bargain that helps meet their wish for
more predictable use of U.S. origin spent fuel, our wish to avoid prece-
dents which could lead to premature spread of plutonium, and our mu-
tual interest in an improved nonproliferation regime.7 In addition, the
strategy seeks to reduce apparent discrimination by providing (i) for
new benefits to those accepting NPT or equivalent obligations and
(ii) for the possibility of additional countries joining the preferred
group when their programs and nonproliferation assurances warrant.8
The highlights of the strategy are:9
1. To seek supplier and other support for (a) making NPT or equiv-
alent full-scope safeguards (FSS) a condition of new supply commit-
ments; (b) relating reprocessing and plutonium use to well defined,
reasonably safe and limited, programs (breeders and advanced re-
actors) and deferring commitments to commercial thermal recycle;
(c) an effective international plutonium storage (IPS) regime; and
(d) enhanced cooperation in dealing with countries posing significant
proliferation risks.10
2. To provide U.S. agreement for a period of years for the advanced
countries (in EURATOM and Japan) to reprocess U.S. origin spent fuel
and use the resulting plutonium in well defined breeder and advanced
reactor programs.
3. To provide new benefits, including longer term and possibly up
to “life-of-reactor” fuel assurance (LEU), to countries which accept
NPT or equivalent FSS and do not otherwise demonstrably pose a sig-
nificant proliferation risk.11
7 An unknown hand bracketed the first three lines of this paragraph in the left-hand
margin.
8 Vance underlined the words “new benefits to” and wrote in the left-hand margin
next to this paragraph “we move from sticks to carrots and back and forth, depending on
what has not worked recently.”
9 See Tab A for details. [Footnote is in the original.]
10 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph an unknown hand wrote “Do tab
on breeder thermal—Adv Reac.”
11 Vance bracketed the phrase “to countries which accept NPT or equivalent FSS
and do not otherwise demonstrably pose a significant risk” and wrote in the left-hand
margin “Who are these countries—I doubt they are the ones we should pay much atten-
tion to.” An unknown hand wrote “Korea, Yugoslavia, Rumania (politically important in
NPT context).”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Much of this proposed 1980 strategy is consistent with present
policy; none of it requires changes in law. The principal differences in-
volve (i) longer term and possibly up to “life-of-reactor” fuel assurance,
(ii) agreement for a period of years for the advanced countries to re-
process U.S. origin spent fuel and use the resulting plutonium for
breeder and advanced reactor RD&D, and (iii) support for an effective
IPS. (These differences and their rationale are discussed in Tabs C, G
and H.)12
I propose we:
1. Conduct negotiations along these lines in 1980.
2. Seek the support of other suppliers for increased fuel supply as-
surance and appropriate technical assistance and cooperation for NPT
or equivalent countries, particularly developing countries.13
Attachments:
Tab A - Summary of Strategy
Tab B - Country Distinction Analysis
Tab C - Major Differences Between Proposed Strategy and Current
Policy
Tab D - Foreign Reactions to U.S. Policy and Law
Tab E - Summary of INFCE Results
Tab F - Views on Major Problems and Opportunities for the Post-
INFCE Period
Tab G - Issues Paper on Approval of Reprocessing and Plutonium
Use
Tab H - Issues Paper on International Plutonium Storage14
12 Vance bracketed the phrase “countries to reprocess U.S. origin spent fuel and use
the resulting plutonium for breeder and advanced reactor RD&D, and (iii) support for an
effective IPS” and wrote in the left-hand margin “with limits on transfer?” An unknown
hand wrote “Yes. Negotiated.”
13 Carter did not indicate a preference with respect to the recommendation.
14 Tabs A–H are attached but not printed.

Non-Proliferation
380.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
Summary of INFCE
The President emphasized at INFCE’s 1977 opening session the
need for greater mutual understanding of nuclear fuel cycle problems
and opportunities with a view to finding “common ground” regarding
the role of nuclear energy and prevention of proliferation. It was
agreed by the participating countries to proceed with INFCE as a tech-
nical study which would not jeopardize their respective fuel cycle pol-
icies and not be binding on them.
INFCE is now completed with the following results:
1. Although it began with tension and suspicion of US motives, the
INFCE dialogue has eased tensions, eliminated misunderstandings re-
garding US policy, and provided a basis for common approaches.
INFCE reflects both varying views and “common ground”. The Presi-
dent has indicated we would take INFCE results into account; this is
consistent with the law which states that its provisions shall not preju-
dice objective consideration of these results.
2. There is now broad international acceptance of the proposition
that, while proliferation is basically a political problem, fuel cycle
weapons usable material (plutonium and high enriched uranium), and
technology from which it can be obtained, pose proliferation risks.
3. Different national situations (e.g., lack of energy resources or in-
digenous uranium) can lead to different fuel cycle choices. Although
views differ on timing, and INFCE is overly optimistic, regarding com-
mercialization, exploration of breeder and advanced reactor options
(using plutonium) is attractive to countries with large electric grids and
advanced nuclear programs. But recycle of plutonium in current gener-
ation reactors (thermal recycle) is economically marginal, although
some wish to preserve the option for energy security. These factors
could justify distinctions between breeder programs in advanced coun-
tries and widespread use of plutonium wherever there are reactors.
4. INFCE did not endorse any fuel cycle as being more prolifera-
tion resistant than another; nor did it identify any technical fix for pro-
liferation risks. It did single out the importance of improved IAEA safe-
guards; international plutonium storage; limits on, or multinational
approaches to, sensitive facilities (enrichment and reprocessing); and
Confidential. Sent under cover of a March 5 memorandum from Smith to Owen.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
reduced enrichment levels for research fuel. INFCE also concluded that
reprocessing was not a necessary precondition for waste disposal.
5. Based as they are on 1977 data, INFCE’s nuclear power projec-
tions are greatly exaggerated (the US component (50% of the total) is
now 30% lower for 1995); the low estimate looks more like a realistic
high. Under this low case, there will be more than enough uranium to
supply reactors well into the next century without breeders, and
present and planned enrichment capacity is sufficient to the end of the
century. This availability of uranium and enrichment services reduces
the urgency of breeders and thermal recycle.
6. While recognizing that nuclear supply assurance and nonproli-
feration assurance are complementary, INFCE expresses concern over
unpredictability in nuclear export policies and in the exercise of rights
regarding reprocessing and plutonium use (i.e., US and Canadian pol-
icies). INFCE notes that international nuclear markets have worked
reasonably well in the past, but asserts that continuing uncertainty in
supply policies could cause future damage to power programs. It urges
common approaches satisfactory to both suppliers and consumers.
7. INFCE is moderate on developing country needs and asserts
that nuclear power is not a panacea.
381.
Minutes of a Special Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Matters and Tarapur Fuel Licenses
PARTICIPANTS
White House
Mr. David Aaron
Ambassador Henry Owen
State
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
House Situation Room. The minutes devoted to Tarapur are scheduled to be printed in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Non-Proliferation
Ambassador Gerard Smith (Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative of
the President for Non-Proliferation)
Mr. Frank Hodsoll (Deputy Special US Representative for Non-Proliferation
Matters)
Ms. Jane Coon (Deputy Assistant Secretary) (Tarapur only)
OSD
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
Mr. Walter Slocombe (Deputy Under Secretary for Policy Planning)
Energy
Mr. Worth Bateman (Acting Under Secretary)
Deputy Secretary John Sawhill
Dr. George Cunningham (Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy)
JCS
General David Jones
Admiral Stansfield Turner
[name not declassified] (Special Assistant for Nuclear Proliferation Intelligence)
ACDA
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny (Deputy Director)
Mr. Charles Van Doren (Assistant Director, Non-Proliferation Bureau)
OSTP
Dr. Frank Press
Mr. Benjamin Huberman
OMB
Dr. John White
Mr. Dan Taft (Deputy Associate Director Special Studies Division)
CEQ
Mr. Gus Speth
Domestic Policy
Mr. Stuart Eizenstat
Ms. Kitty Schirmer
NSC
Dr. Lincoln Bloomfield
Mr. Jerry Oplinger
Mr. Thomas Thornton
Vance opened the meeting by stating that the objectives of the Pres-
ident’s 1977 non-proliferation policies remain valid. But do our as-
sumptions about how to achieve those objectives? Our policies have
not been as effective as we hoped, and have caused resentment with
our Allies. We have to respond to their energy needs, and this could
lead to a better non-proliferation regime. Smith’s proposals2 have been
approved by DoE and ACDA, and we should try to agree to send the
paper forward to the President as soon as possible. (S)
2 See Document 379.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Smith said that in preparing his paper, he did not want to demean
the President’s 1977 policies. Those policies have greatly increased in-
ternational awareness that the fuel cycle is a “dangerous beast.” Our
successes include persuading the FRG and France not to export sensi-
tive technologies, turning off dangerous developments in Korea and
Taiwan, and cancellation of the reprocessing contract in Pakistan.
INFCE came out better than expected. On MB–10 issues, while there
has been a fair amount of static, we did not turn any down. Our failures
include the FRG/Brazil deal, Argentina and our efforts to use orga-
nized sanctions in Pakistan. We have not made a dent on India, and
have not made much progress with South Africa, although we prob-
ably did manage to abort a test. (S)
We now face the problem of the post-INFCE period and the NPT
Review Conference. The law requires us to get consent rights over re-
processing in the US–EURATOM agreement. Europeans have hinted
that they might be willing to give us the juridical right if there were an
implied understanding on how we would exercise it. The Japanese plan
to build a large reprocessing plant; they want predictability in meeting
their plutonium requirements. (S)
Smith said that we have essentially three options: to continue on
our present course, which would not get us to our 1977 objectives; to
follow the course advocated by the UK (a universal code of nuclear
trade)3 which is dangerous, or to become more flexible and try to build
a better regime. The proposals put forward would not require a change
in the law, but he personally hoped that we would change it later. (S)
Smith defined the regime he seeks as including:
—full-scope safeguards as a common supplier requirement for
new export commitments;
—deferral of thermal recycle;
—IPS;
—reaffirmation and perhaps extension of FRG and French policies
not to export enrichment and reprocessing technology;
—enhanced cooperation in dealing with mavericks; and
—multinational auspices for sensitive facilities. (S)
Smith said that what he seeks now is approval of planning assump-
tions; i.e. authority to take soundings in some depth on the Hill and
abroad, particularly on the central question of relaxing our MB–10
policy to permit generic approval of reprocessing and plutonium use in
advanced countries. (S)
There was some discussion of which countries might qualify for
this treatment. Would Korea, for example, qualify? Smith said that the
3 Not found.

Non-Proliferation
scheme was intended to have an evolutionary character, if Korea and
Taiwan want in, it would be hard to say no. (S)
Smith said that he also wanted to offer long-term fuel licenses; for
NPT parties he would issue licenses for the life of the reactor. (S)
Smith said that if we fail to do something along these lines, our
policy would begin to fall apart. Other countries are turning to the So-
viets; Europe is currently doing more enrichment for Europe than the
US. They are also building their own enrichment plants. He did not
think that the changes would have any affect on domestic nuclear pro-
grams such as Barnwell and Clinch River. He had talked to Con-
gressman Bingham and other staffers; we would run into some static,
but there are other Congressmen who will believe the changes don’t go
far enough. (S)
Owen asked exactly what the President is being asked to decide;
would it be authority to open negotiations. Smith said it would be au-
thority to go ahead with Congress and Japan and Europe, with the
President’s approval to be sought before we get locked in. It is hard to
define when he would come back to the President; perhaps before we
give them specific proposals. But the President would be free to change
the timing or substance as we go along. (S)
Smith said that no concessions would be agreed until everything in
the package was agreed; the “deal” is a whole package. (S)
As for the risks of public perception of a major change, Smith said
that is why he regards his proposals as planning assumptions. At
the end of the negotiation, he felt that the public would accept the
Asked about the acceptability of relaxing our MB–10 policy only
for some countries, and not for advanced LDC’s like Brazil, Argentina
and Taiwan, Smith said Argentina won’t be producing plutonium in
quantities until the next decade. He could not predict the future,
but full-scope would help to prevent new deals without adequate
safeguards. (S)
Aaron said that what the US would give up is clear; it is not clear
what we would require in return. There would be increased flow on
plutonium, but the regime the flow goes into is not very clear. The goal
of better cooperation for problem countries may become a constantly
moving target; others will pocket our concessions but it is not clear we
will get the desired return. (S)
Smith said that if we only succeed in getting an effective IPS, we
would be better off than now. (S)
Eisenstat said he had real concerns on the signal this change would
send with regard to our position on Clinch River and domestic repro-
cessing; he wanted to consider this further and take Congressional

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
soundings. We have a great deal of water to carry on the Hill already
with energy matters and the NRC reorganization plan. He did not want
to set off a wave of indignation among those who have supported the
President. He reserved his position. (S)
Keeny agreed that Smith’s proposals would be helpful to non-
proliferation. We should be clear about the package of quids. Generic
approval of MB–10’s should not constrain us in arguing against prema-
ture plutonium commitments, and IPS should not be taken as a green
light for reprocessing. We should retain our bilateral approval rights in
establishing an IPS. (S)
Speth said that the effect of the proposals would be to put the US
stamp of approval on reprocessing and plutonium use. In the long run,
the policy would be based on an explicitly discriminatory regime. He
felt that the paper presented one point of view; the President needs to
hear the contrary case. He felt this might be presented by the NSC. He
was not optimistic that the line that we were not radically changing the
policy would wash, and felt that Bingham, Zablocki and others would
be very skeptical. (S)
Aaron said he had reservations about Congressional explorations.
That could trigger newspaper stories about a major change in policy.
He felt we need a systematic study of all options. Smith’s proposals
may be better than other ideas, but the questions of quids, other op-
tions, and the effect on near-proliferators needed to be closely ana-
lyzed. He also felt it was important to look at the question of timing. (S)
Claytor said he thought Smith was absolutely right and it was time
Jones also supported Smith. (S)
Vance said a working group would be established to produce a full
options paper in two weeks. (S)
[Omitted here is material related to Tarapur fuel licenses]

Non-Proliferation
382.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, April 18, 1980
SUBJECT
April 9 PRC on Non-Proliferation Issues (C)
The President has approved the PRC decision at the April 9
meeting that an interagency working group should prepare a paper
providing a systematic analysis of a full range of options for our post-
INFCE non-proliferation strategy. (S)
The analysis should include consideration of the following specifics:
—the criteria which would be used to distinguish FBR and ATR re-
search, development and demonstration programs from “commerciali-
zation” in approving requests for plutonium return and/or use;
—a quantitative analysis, through the year 2000, of projected accu-
mulations of separated plutonium, and of the requirements of breeder
and ATR programs in EURATOM and Japan, under each of the MB–10
options considered;
—how each MB–10 option would be applied to countries, other
than Japan and EURATOM, and the political and non-proliferation im-
plications of distinguishing between categories of countries. (S)
2. Quid Pro Quos
The analysis should consider a full range of non-proliferation com-
mitments which might be sought from EURATOM and Japan in return
for modifications of US MB–10 policy, including continued US prior
consent rights over the disposition of US supplied or derived materials
used in EURATOM and Japanese breeder and ATR programs. (S)
3. International Plutonium Storage
The paper should specify in some detail the characteristics of an
IPS regime which we would regard as effective, including the defini-
tion of “excess” plutonium, release conditions, and verification mecha-
nisms. In particular, it should discuss whether a negotiable IPS would
restrict plutonium release to certain countries (e.g. those meeting
agreed economic criteria) or end-uses, whether the US and other sup-
pliers would apply such restrictions to plutonium entering the IPS, and
Eizenstat, Christopher, Earle, Speth, Jones, Turner, and Press.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
how such restrictions, however applied, would affect the prospects for
acceptance of IPS by countries of proliferation concern. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
383.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Explorations by Gerry Smith
At Tab A is Warren Christopher’s paper on the timing of Gerry
Smith’s post-INFCE explorations with the Europeans and Japanese on
his proposals for modifications in US non-proliferation policy. The
paper is simply a listing of reasons for and against authorizing Smith to
proceed; Christopher does not offer a recommendation.
In my view, your decision should be based on the following con-
sideration. The decision on Tarapur2 will encounter determined resist-
ance on the Hill. Many there who applauded the policy you announced
in 1977, see the Tarapur decision as a significant move away from that
policy. Moreover, we face a growing coalition of opposition made up of
those who oppose Tarapur on substance, and Reagan supporters who
simply want to embarrass you.
No matter how tightly Smith’s instructions are worded, his explo-
rations will be seen as another deviation from your policy, generating
further opposition on the Hill and among liberal supporters. The ques-
tion is whether or not you want to address both of these issues simulta-
neously. I think not, and there is no need to do so since you can control
the timing of the Smith initiative, waiting until after it has been fully re-
viewed in the normal NSC process.
RECOMMENDATION
That you not authorize Smith to conduct post-INFCE explorations
at this time.3
2 On April 28, Carter approved the issuance of two pending licenses so that India
could import enriched uranium from the United States for its nuclear power plant at Ta-
rapur. For more on this decision, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
3 Carter checked the “Disapprove” option and wrote “J” underneath.

Non-Proliferation
Tab A
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter4
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Explorations
At the Friday foreign policy breakfast,5 I promised to send you an
analysis of advantages and risks to Gerry Smith’s proceeding with
post-INFCE explorations now, as opposed to after Tarapur is resolved
by the Congress.
Reasons for Not Going Ahead Now
—Movement on this approach now could create public percep-
tions that “the Carter Administration is proposing to weaken its non-
proliferation policy” or “the Carter Administration is changing signals
on breeder reactor programs.”
—The Tarapur decision complicates our moving forward now
with post-INFCE in two ways. First, both decisions will be character-
ized by some as U.S. non-proliferation retreats—Tarapur as a fall off of
our commitment to full-scope safeguards, and post-INFCE as a retreat
from our opposition to premature reprocessing and plutonium use.
Second, it could be argued that our Tarapur decision is inconsistent
with our post-INFCE explorations. That is, the Tarapur decision is
based on the rationale of preserving controls over U.S.-origin material
to prevent its reprocessing in India, whereas our post-INFCE explora-
tions are designed to relax such controls where we have them in Eu-
rope and Japan outside of EURATOM.
—The approach could be characterized as helping European and
Japanese nuclear programs (in particular breeder, advanced reactor
and reprocessing programs) that might otherwise fail. And, our ap-
proach may not in fact achieve greater allied cooperation in improving
the non-proliferation regime.
—The precedent of this approach could undercut our effort to pre-
vent the spread of sensitive technology and material to countries out-
side Europe and Japan, or result in charges of discrimination by coun-
tries which we assert do not meet the necessary criteria.
4 Secret.
5 June 13.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Reasons for Going Ahead Now
—Other countries expect us to take INFCE results into account,
and key Allies have already approached us on harmonizing policies. If
we do not move soon, the Australians (who are actively negotiating
with EURATOM and Japan) could make agreements which would un-
dercut our ability to limit reprocessing and plutonium use. We also
need greater fuel supply assurances to meet anticipated criticism at the
NPT Review Conference.
—Our supply leverage is diminishing and our reliability is in ques-
tion. Failure to commence explorations now would risk our Allies’
going their own way in their nuclear programs and making the issue an
even greater irritant in our relations. We could also lose their coopera-
tion in improving the non-proliferation regime, in particular deterring
commercial thermal recycle.
—Going ahead with Tarapur and the post-INFCE explorations is
entirely consistent. Both actions are designed to support the non-
proliferation regime—in the case of Tarapur, to preserve safeguards
and controls over U.S.-origin material in India; in the case of post-
INFCE, to obtain limits and controls on U.S.-origin material in EU-
RATOM (which we currently do not have) and greater non-
proliferation cooperation generally including full-scope safeguards as
a condition of future supply. Both decisions also serve broader foreign
policy objectives.
—Post-INFCE explorations will be less sensitive politically than
Tarapur, especially since they will be low-key, non-committal and con-
fidential and would be only with Allies who are either NPT parties
with full-scope safeguards or, in the case of France, a nuclear weapons
state. USG consideration of post-INFCE options has already had some
press play (particularly in the trade press). We have had extensive con-
sultations with those most concerned in Congress, and no one has ob-
jected to further explorations.
Options
Let Gerry Smith go ahead with explorations now.6
Postpone Gerry Smith’s explorations until after Congress acts
on Tarapur.
(A copy of proposed instructions for Gerry Smith is attached for
your convenience.)
6 Carter checked the “Let Gerry Smith go ahead with explorations now” and wrote
“J” underneath.

Non-Proliferation
Attachment
Draft Telegram7
Washington, undated
USIAEA for Ambassador Smith from Secretary. Subject: Post-
INFCE Explorations.
1. SECRET (ENTIRE TEXT)
2. The President authorizes you on an absolutely non-committal
basis (and in a low key and confidential manner) to explore with the
major European governments and Japan arrangements by which they
would agree to cooperate in strengthening the non-proliferation re-
gime and limit the reprocessing of spent fuel and use of plutonium.
Your purpose is to clarify what we might expect from our allies in re-
turn for greater predictability in the exercise of consent rights over the
use of US-origin spent fuel. Based on these explorations, we would be
better able to develop positions for the statutorily mandated renegotia-
tion of our agreements with EURATOM, Japan, and certain other
countries.
3. In your explorations, you should be guided by the following
elements:
A. What we would seek:
—Deferral by the involved countries of commitments to commer-
cial thermal recycle for a specified period.
—Limiting new reprocessing capacity to that required for breeder
and advanced reactors and restraint in the separation of plutonium to
avoid unnecessary stockpiling and pressures for thermal recycle.
—Support for development of an effective IPS and avoidance of
excess national stockpiles of plutonium.
—Agreement by EURATOM and Japan to US consent rights called
for in the NNPA.
—Continuing limits over US-origin material after use in breeder
and advanced reactor RD&D programs.
—Increased commitments to spent fuel storage as our alternative
to reprocessing.
7 Secret; Nodis. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Let’s let Gerry do this
exploration of the idea on his own and report back to me. I may not wish to go forward
with it. I’ll discuss some in Venice [the Summit of Industrialized Nations, the G–7, to be
held on June 22 and 23]—J.C.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Improved cooperation in dealing with countries of proliferation
concern, including concrete steps to strengthen restraints on exports of
sensitive technology and material to such countries.
—Commitments to condition significant new nuclear supply
commitments on NPT-type safeguards on future, as well as existing,
facilities.
—Cooperation to make reprocessing associated with breeder re-
actors more proliferation resistant.
—Cooperation on improving the “once-through” cycle.
—Dedication of future enrichment capacity to produce low-
enriched uranium only.
—Greater commitments of financial and technical resources and
political support for development and implementation of improved
IAEA safeguards.
B. What we would consider offering:
—The United States would adopt predictable ground rules for the
exercise of US consent rights and control over reprocessing and use of
plutonium in certain RD&D programs for breeder and advanced
thermal reactors. Specifically, you may explore advance agreement to
reprocessing of US-origin material in mutually agreed facilities for use
of the resulting separated plutonium in certain agreed breeder and ad-
vanced reactor RD&D programs in advanced NPT or equivalent coun-
tries that meet certain criteria.
—You may indicate willingness to consider generic agreement to
reprocessing in the United Kingdom and France for other countries
that have good non-proliferation credentials, or no spent fuel storage
alternatives, or where it is in our non-proliferation interest to remove
spent fuel.
—You should also indicate the US is reviewing in the context of
preparations for the NPT Review Conference, licensing of export of
low-enriched fuel for a longer term than now, as well as backup assur-
ances and increased technical assistance, to NPT parties with good
non-proliferation credentials.
4. You should make clear that in return for flexibility on repro-
cessing and plutonium use we would expect agreement to improve-
ments in the present non-proliferation regime, particularly a more
helpful active role in dealing with problem countries. You should stress
that no final policy decisions have as yet been made.

Non-Proliferation
384.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Explorations
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
Ambassador Gerard Smith
Frank Hodsoll
FRG
Ambassador Peter Hermes
Mr. Stephan Von Welck
SUMMARY
Ambassador Smith opened the Post-INFCE discussion making
clear he was continuing his personal and confidential explorations and
that no US policy decisions had been made. Smith said that he had been
authorized to explore (without commitment) ideas such as program-
matic approvals of reprocessing and plutonium use, as a basis for the
US/EURATOM renegotiation. Smith reviewed needed improvements
in the non-proliferation regime (with particular emphasis on full-scope
safeguards (FSS), better cooperation regarding problem countries, im-
proved safeguards and avoiding premature or excessive plutonium
separation). He stressed that progress on these elements would be
needed if we were to move toward greater predictability in supply and
retransfer relationships.
Ambassador Hermes stated he had conveyed our views on re-
scheduling the visit to Bonn to Lautenschlager and Haunschild. While
he had not received final word he believed a Smith visit in September
rather than August would probably be alright. We suggested Sep-
tember 12 as a possible date.
Hermes listened to our points which he said he would convey to
Bonn. His questions focused on:
—How could we resolve the inconsistency of seeking NNPA con-
ditions which were more onerous than those already set out in our in-
ternational agreements?
—Who would have to agree to FSS and on what basis?
—How would the US distinguish the Indian case?
Nodis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—What would be the “designated areas” where advance consents
to reprocessing of US-origin material and use of the resulting pluto-
nium would be permitted?
—What problems did we see with our approach?
END SUMMARY
1. The meeting opened with a brief discussion of the current situa-
tion in Pakistan. Smith said he did not understand how Germany could
doubt the proliferation risk in that country; Hermes responded that
some of the information they had had not been accurate; they were
aware only of relatively small scale basement operations. Smith re-
sponded that the Paks were proceeding with both reprocessing and en-
richment; he suggested a lot had happened since our last technical
briefing of the Germans and that perhaps a further technical discussion
should take place. Hermes said he would take this up with Bonn.
2. Hermes then said he had conveyed to Bonn Smith’s preferences
on timing of his post-INFCE Bonn trip. Our suggestion of September
was probably OK; but, since Lautenschlager and Haunschild were on
leave, Hermes would have to confirm later. Smith said that, if for any
reason the FRG wanted him in Bonn in August, he would be prepared
to go.
3. Smith then made the following points on his post-INFCE
explorations:
—The President had authorized him to explore certain ideas.
—If key countries were willing to join together to modernize the
non-proliferation regime, the U.S. might be able to make its rules on re-
processing of US-origin spent fuel, and plutonium use more flexible.
We should be able to move to a programmatic, instead of case-by-case,
approach. Would EURATOM give prior consent rights if we gave ad-
vance approvals for reprocessing and plutonium use in breeder and
advanced reactor RD&D programs?
—If the President decides to move in this direction on reprocessing
and plutonium use, it would only be in the context of broader move-
ment toward non-proliferation improvements including:
—FSS.
—Better cooperation with problem countries (e.g., Pakistan).
—Substantially larger commitments to improving safeguards.
—New reprocessing capacity would be established only where
needed for breeders.
—New enrichment capacity would be designed only for produc-
tion of LEU.
—An effective IPS would be established.
4. Hodsoll then noted that we were in addition seeking expanded
commitments to restrain the export of sensitive technologies, more pro-
liferation resistant reprocessing, cooperation on “once through” fuel
cycle and deferral of commercial thermal recycle.

Non-Proliferation
5. Hermes asked what was the situation with regard to prior con-
sent before the NNPA. Smith said we do not have consent rights now,
and that in order to get such rights we might provide an “automatic
OK” for specified programs. Hermes asked whether the FRG would
“designate areas and the US would say yes or no”. Smith said the FRG
would initially designate the areas for programmatic consent.
6. Hermes noted that the US and FRG were now in a transitional
period through March 1981.2 Smith said that, if US–EURATOM negoti-
ations were underway, the US could extend the deadline. Smith noted
that we would have to cease exports to EURATOM unless the deadline
were extended.
7. Hermes then asked if the new procedure being suggested by
Smith would be tougher than the procedure that currently existed in
EURATOM: i.e., US-origin material could be used for peaceful, safe-
guarded uses. Smith said the new procedure was required to comply
with the NNPA. Hermes noted that the NNPA contravened the ex-
isting agreement with EURATOM countries. He asked what the impact
of our law was on international agreements which he thought were
“the supreme law of the land”. Smith noted that he believed that under
U.S. law legislation subsequent in time to a treaty superseded the treaty
for US domestic purposes.
8. Hermes said the FRG wanted development of an effective
IPS. He said the suggestions outlined by Smith constituted in effect
“a grand design”. Smith said we had to aim high to achieve
improvements.
The French told us it would be difficult to predict future needs, but did
not rule out in principle prior consent plus advance agreement on how
it would be exercised. The UK similarly did not rule this out in prin-
ciple, but were uncertain regarding their breeder program. Smith noted
discussions with the French on non-proliferation. Smith told the French Delegation “that
a recommendation for a one-year extension of the EURATOM deadline” set to expire in
March 1981 “to agree to US prior consent on reprocessing and plutonium use had been
forwarded to the White House.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
bilateral meeting on post-INFCE explorations, the UK government said “principle of
US-origin material and use of the derived plutonium not necessarily a problem, but pre-
dictability in exercise of such consent rights would be needed to prevent it becoming so.”
4 No record of the U.S.-France bilateral talks has been found. Telegram 134778 to
Bonn, May 22, reported that during the May 13 U.S.–FRG bilateral meeting on
post-INFCE explorations, the FRG Delegation said “the FRG and France are united in
their opposition to U.S. prior consent rights.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800252–0605)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
he would be meeting with the Japanese next week and with the British
and French again in September.
10. Smith stressed there would not be quick action in the US given
our pending elections. He said he was trying to lay the groundwork for
EURATOM negotiations thereafter.
11. Smith then noted a number of other matters in which he
thought the Germans would be interested:
—We were considering longer-term licensing of LEU. Hermes
thought this would be an important improvement.
—Our voluntary offer had been ratified by Senate.5 Hermes said
the FRG was pleased.
—The US was working on improved procedures for licensing ex-
ports of HEU.
—Carnesale would be a good NRC chairman.
12. Hermes then posed four sets of questions:
a. FSS. Would we get all suppliers to agree on an FSS approach that
included enriched uranium and natural uranium, as well as equipment
and technology? Specifically, would the USSR agree? Smith said the So-
viets had indicated that if all other suppliers agreed they could agree to
an FSS approach. There was no problem in Europe as all non-nuclear
weapon states in Western Europe were NPT parties, and the UK and
France had indicated willingness to place their civil facilities under
safeguards. Hermes queried whether Italy, Switzerland and South Af-
rica would agree to FSS. He noted that we needed today more countries
to make FSS effective than when the Supplier Guidelines were agreed.
He asked whether agreement would have to be multilateral and
whether we planned to reconvene the NSG. Smith responded that we
did not envisage reconvening the NSG, but assumed a series of bilat-
eral agreements reflecting the FSS approach.
Hermes thought asking consumers to accept FSS as a condition of
trade was a big undertaking. He wondered what the legal basis for it
might be. Smith noted that the majority of countries had accepted FSS
through NPT. Hermes said the problem was “the threshold countries”.
These were not NPT parties. He asked: would our approach cause diffi-
culty in the Argentine and Brazilian cases? Hodsoll stressed we were
only talking about new commitments.
Hermes said the FRG “quite agreed on the principle of FSS for all
countries.” The difficulty was not the principle, but the imposition of
FSS on other countries. He reiterated the German view that it was
better to “control, than deny, the have-nots”.
b. Distinguishing Tarapur. How does the US distinguish our FSS ap-
proach from our recent decision to support shipments of fuel to Ta-
rapur? Smith responded that the NNPA permitted such shipments
where license applications and shipments would have been made in
time prior to March 1980 but for USG blockage. He also noted that the
5 The U.S. voluntarily offered to accept IAEA safeguards for the transfer or export
of nuclear materials.

Non-Proliferation
Indian shipments were pursuant to prior contracts which provided for
shipments to the 1990s; our FSS approach would only apply to “new
commitments”. In response to Hermes’ question, Smith stated that we
expected the Tarapur review period provided in the NNPA to expire in
early October. He gave Hermes our current reading on Congressional
prospects: the House would vote against the President; while it was
close, we hoped the Senate would sustain the President.
c. Programmatic Consent. What “designated area” would be eligible
for programmatic approvals? Smith said that we envisaged providing
such approvals for breeder and advanced reactor RD&D (including re-
processing for breeder needs, but not for commercial thermal recycle).
Smith said the question of thermal recycle RD&D was not clear in our
minds. Smith noted thermal recycle was particularly troublesome be-
cause it could justify plutonium flows wherever there are reactors. He
said this had been a particular concern in India; if we did not agree to
the pending Tarapur licenses, there was a substantial risk that India
would reprocess and recycle US-origin spent fuel and thus establish a
precedent for recycle linked to small scale reprocessing plants.
Hermes said the Germans still planned some thermal recycle pro-
grams and implied that the US approach could cause Germany a
problem. Hodsoll noted that our approach to thermal recycle was only
for a limited (10–15 year) period during which we doubted there were
likely to be moves in any country towards commercial thermal recycle.
He noted that our approach would not preclude case-by-case consider-
ation of specific needs for thermal recycle R&D.
d. Problems with US Approach. What did we envisage the problems
would be with our approach? Smith responded that he understood that
our approach to thermal recycle might pose a problem for the FRG, Bel-
gium and Japan; and that the FSS export condition might be difficult for
the FRG, but he assumed (if the French went along with FSS) the FRG
would not want to be isolated. Program designations might also offer
difficulties.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
385.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, August 1980
The NPT Review Conference: A Preview (U)
Key Judgments
The second nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) review confer-
ence will open on 11 August in Geneva. The prospects for formal reaf-
firmation of the value of the treaty are clouded by a number of recent
international developments:
• The interruption in progress toward major arms control agree-
ments because of the sharp increase in East-West tensions.
• The aggravation of the controversy over assured access to nu-
clear material and technology for peaceful purposes, which has re-
sulted from the efforts of the United States and other major nuclear
suppliers to establish more rigorous export criteria.
• The success of some nonnuclear weapons states (such as Pak-
istan and South Africa) in acquiring or developing militarily sensitive
nuclear technology free of international controls. (U)
These and other related developments, such as renewed concern
about India’s nuclear intentions, will be cited by many NPT signatories
at Geneva as evidence that the delicate balance that the treaty seeks to
establish between the rights and obligations of nuclear and nonnuclear
weapons states is deteriorating. Most criticism of the nuclear weapons
states will focus on their failure to live up to their obligations under Ar-
ticle VI2 to halt and reverse the nuclear arms race, and under Article IV3
to facilitate, together with other major nuclear suppliers, the fullest
possible exchange of nuclear materials and technology for peaceful
purposes. (U)
All the nuclear weapons states party to the treaty—the United
States, the USSR, and Great Britain—are vulnerable to criticism on the
first count. The Soviets, however, have sought to maneuver themselves
into a position of comparative advantage with respect to each of the
major security issues that are likely to be raised: SALT II, the Compre-
hensive Test Ban Treaty, and the question of negative security assur-
3 See Document 318.

Non-Proliferation
ances (guarantees that the nuclear powers will not use or threaten to
use their nuclear arsenals against nonnuclear weapons states). (C NF)
In part because of the controversial Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
of 1978, the United States is uniquely vulnerable to criticism on issues
relating to the Third World’s demand for ready access to nuclear fuel
and technology under the provisions of Article IV. Of all other sup-
pliers, only Canada has been nearly as active in attempting to slow the
spread of advanced nuclear technology. The Soviets, as members of the
London Suppliers Group, have been quietly supportive of these efforts.
But because their role as a nuclear supplier outside the Warsaw Pact
area has so far been limited, they are in a far less exposed position than
the United States. (C NF)
Moscow will be tempted to exploit these differences to its political
advantage. Because it still has a strong stake in the survival and effec-
tiveness of the global NPT regime, however, its actual efforts to this end
will probably be relatively restrained. The fact that the Soviets can
count on the United States bearing the brunt of Third World criticism in
any event makes such restraint all the more likely. (C NF)
The importance attached to the review conference and the issues
that will be aired there has been demonstrated by the attention that has
been given to preparing for the meeting by both the developing and in-
dustrialized nations in recent months. It has also been reflected in the
failure of most NPT signatories to agree on who should preside over
the meeting. The choice could be critical to the outcome of the confer-
ence, for it was only through the strong personal intervention of the
president of the first NPT review conference, Inga Thorsson of Sweden,
that that meeting managed to produce a final declaration five years
Not surprisingly, most industrialized nations favor reappointment
of Thorsson, but her candidacy has been challenged in recent weeks by
a number of developing countries who support selection of an Iraqi
diplomat for the post. The issue seems unlikely to be resolved before
the conference opens. (U)
Although the portents are even less auspicious than they were in
1975, the serious approach to the meeting evinced by most likely partic-
ipants is reassuring. So too is the fact that none of the countries most
likely to participate has demonstrated a specific intent to disrupt the
meeting. In view of what appears to be a continued broad consensus on
the basic value of the NPT (whatever specific flaws may be perceived),
there is about an even chance that the conference participants will be
able to produce some sort of final declaration. But there also is a good
chance that the developing nations will insist that the text of the docu-
ment contain language more explicitly critical of the performance of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nuclear weapons states—particularly with respect to Article VI—than
was the case in 1975. (C NF)
If agreement cannot be reached on a final declaration, most nations
involved will consider the conference a failure. The possibility of actual
or threatened defections—perhaps tied, in the latter case, to deadlines
for the conclusion of major arms control agreements—would increase,
and the prospects of attracting new adherents to the NPT would de-
cline. Even under such circumstances, the major nuclear suppliers
could probably preserve the basic features of the existing global non-
proliferation regime for some time to come if they acted in concert.
Nonetheless, the moral force behind this regime would have been
largely dissipated. (C NF)
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
386.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Earle) to Special Coordination
Committee Principals1
Washington, September 3, 1980
SUBJECT
NPT Review Conference
As its end-of-the-week adjournment nears, the Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) Review Conference in Geneva is in serious disarray.
There is a real possibility of a divisive outcome that would be por-
trayed by many as demonstrating that the NPT has not served the
interests of its non-nuclear weapon state (NNWS) parties. The non-
aligned participants led by a few militants and supported to some de-
gree by neutrals such as Sweden are pressing very hard for acceptance
of contentious wording on several important issues for inclusion in a
final conference declaration. Because of repercussions that a highly-
publicized “failure” of this major conference could have, I believe it
warrants our urgent attention.
The goal of the conference has been a consensus document that
would review all aspects of the NPT’s implementation. Negotiation of
this text, especially the portion concerning nuclear arms control negoti-
NPT: Revcon. Confidential.

Non-Proliferation
ations (Article VI), has proved extremely difficult. Some of the prin-
cipal points on which agreement is still being sought relate to criticism
of South Africa and Israel for allegedly developing a nuclear capability
and blocking agreement on nuclear free zones in their regions, a call for
the parties to SALT II to act in the interim period prior to its ratification
as though the treaty were in force, a call for a moratorium on nuclear
testing, and establishment early next year by the Committee on Disar-
mament (CD) of a working group to discuss a comprehensive test ban
(CTB). These and other issues are still under negotiation, and it is
hoped that ways will be found to deal satisfactorily with most of them
in a final document.
In the absence of a consensus the probable alternative would be a
communique´ stating simply that the conference had taken place and
noting several other facts about the meeting and indicating that another
review conference would be held in five years. We would anticipate,
however, that the non-aligned would independently issue and seek
maximum publicity for its version of what the final document should
have stated and be highly critical of those, mainly the U.S., that it
would hold responsible for failure to reach agreement. We and others
would, of course, also make our views known.
A third alternative, which we have not, however, explored as a
possibility with the delegation in Geneva and which may be non-
negotiable, could be a short declaration in support of the NPT as a
sound treaty, on the functioning of which, however, there are differing
views. The latter might be attached or issued separately by the con-
cerned delegations. This would have the advantage of putting all
parties on record in support of the NPT regime, but we cannot now
assess whether such an outcome would be negotiable.
While it is still too early to be sure, the leaders of our delegation in
Geneva believe that U.S. acceptance of a CD working group on a CTB
may be pivotal in achieving a consensus on a final document. In light of
this possibility, I believe we should discuss whether it is desirable to
give Ambassadors Van Doren and Flowerree contingent authority to
agree, if it appears this would lead to a consensus, to language calling
for the CD to set up a CTB working group with an appropriate man-
date. The timing and precise tactics with which this authority would be
used would have to be left to the delegation, as it would have to act in
an extremely fast-moving negotiating situation. It would be under-
stood that the authority would not be employed unless the delegation
was satisfied that it was necessary to achieve a consensus and that a
consensus would result.
Attached are a number of arguments for and against U.S. accept-
ance of a CD working group on CTB under the above circumstances.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the United States Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency2
Washington, undated
Factors to Consider in Determining U.S. Position on CD Working Group
on a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB)
—If a consensus cannot be achieved at the NPT Review Confer-
ence because of U.S. unwillingness to accept a CD working group on
CTB, many nations, especially from the third world but also including
some western countries, would blame the U.S. for “wrecking” the
review conference by its inflexibility, and undermining one of the Ad-
ministration’s own major arms control objectives—a strengthened non-
proliferation regime. This criticism would be echoed in future multi-
lateral fora, including the UN General Assembly this fall.
—We would risk a serious blow to the NPT regime, and lose the
positive effects that a final conference document would have, including
encouragement of further adherence to the treaty and increased tech-
nical cooperation, advancement of full-scope safeguards and increased
support for IAEA safeguards, and discouragement of action by non-
nuclear weapon states (NNWS) to assist other NNWS to acquire nu-
clear weapons or explosive devices.
—We would face a generally more hostile attitude in multilateral
arms control efforts across the board, on which we need the coopera-
tion and support of others to achieve our objectives. Resentment could
spill over into other security-related issues.
—Actual establishment of a working group would be subject to
consensus agreement in the CD in February, where its precise terms of
reference would have to be negotiated, a process that would take many
weeks or even months and in which we could exercise considerable
influence. We could expect substantial differences of view on the
working group’s mandate. Given the time required for negotiation of
the mandate, the working group would be unlikely to be able to start
substantive discussions before the end of the CD’s first 1981 session
(May) or sometime during its second (June–August) session.
—In addition to influencing the working group’s mandate, we
would also have some opportunity in the working group itself to re-
strict the scope of its activity. We could seek to have the group at least
2 Confidential.

Non-Proliferation
initially, for example, carry forward the discussions already held by CD
experts on exchange of international seismic data to monitor a test ban.
—A working group would provide an opportunity for the Soviets,
if they were so inclined, to exploit third world pressures on issues such
as verification, where our position is considered by many to be unnec-
essarily demanding. Progress in the trilateral talks might actually be
hindered by a working group if the result were increased Soviet re-
sistance to acceptance of our position on key issues or, alternatively,
might result in a weakened verification regime and would jeopardize
Senate ratification of a CTB Treaty.
—Some of the U.S. positions in the trilateral talks (e.g., on duration
of the treaty), could be exposed in the working group discussions and
be subject to severe criticism. We would come under pressure to
modify them, probably from domestic, as well as foreign critics.
387.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva and the Embassy in the United Kingdom1
234386. Subject: Bartholomew/Bessmertnykh Meeting on NPT
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Moscow. Drafted by Napper
(EUR/SOV) and Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Palmer (PM/DCA), Combs, Jr. (EUR/
SOV), Bohlen (EUR/RPM), McGaffigan (S/MS), and Jones (ACDA/MA); and approved
by Bartholomew (PM).
NPT Review Conference talks. The U.S., UK, and Soviet Delegations “decided the confer-
ence President should be pressured to break the impasse on the language of the final dec-
laration. The Soviets indicated that they would be willing to take public positions on key
Article VI issues which they will attempt to present as concessions and indications of
flexibility. These positions would include acceptance of: “a deadline for conclusion of tri-
lateral negotiations on a CTBT (1982), a CD working group on CTB (but only if all five
NWS participate), and a nuclear testing moratorium (again, only if all NWS participate).
be considered good for consensus outcome” of the NPT Review Conference, “and there is
a real possibility for a divisive conference result that would be portrayed by many as
demonstrating that the NPT has not served the interests of its non-nuclear weapon state
(NNWS) parties and that non-proliferation efforts are losing ground.” The Mission also
warned that “over the last week or so, the more militant Non-Aligned Delegations, pri-
marily Yugoslavia, Sri Lanka, and Mexico, have strengthened their grip on the Group of
77, and have taken assertive and uncompromising positions on key conference issues, es-
pecially in the area of arms control.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800417–0402)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Confidential—Entire text.
2. PM Director Bartholomew called in Soviet Embassy Political
Counselor Bessmertnykh on September 3 to discuss developments at
NPT Review Conference. After referring to past record of US/Soviet
cooperation on NPT issues in general and particularly on key arms con-
trol issues which come within purview of Article VI, Bartholomew con-
veyed substance of following points:
—We have been following very closely the state of play at the NPT
Review Conference and want to share our views with you.
—Nuclear disarmament issues in Article VI,4 and particularly
CTB, are major questions which go to the very heart of our respective
national security interests.
—Considerable progress in trilateral negotiations, has been made
in CTB, and the basis has been created for building upon this to bring
the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
—Unlike other CD issues, such as CW and RW, CTB matters
should in the first instance be resolved by the three interested NWS,
and not negotiated prematurely by states not possessing nuclear
weapons. Such a situation would encourage states whose interests are
not directly concerned to make extreme demands of the trilateral nego-
tiating partners.
—We therefore continue to believe that it would be inadvisable to
have multilateral negotiations on CTB prior to completion of the trilat-
erals. We are concerned that such a development could set back pros-
pects for the very progress which our countries and so many others de-
sire in the talks.
—On other CTB-related issues we do not feel that there should be
either a deadline for completing trilateral negotiations or a testing mor-
atorium pending completion of an agreement—even if such a morato-
rium is conditioned on participation by all NWS.
—We hope you will look carefully at this situation and gauge the
potential damage to our mutual interests in permitting multilateral ne-
gotiation of a CTB. We believe that, working together along with our
respective allies, we can find ways to meet multilateral concerns on this
and other major issues at the NPTRC, ways which protect the essential
interests of all concerned.
3. In reply, Bessmertnykh said that he was unaware of develop-
ments reported Reftels since Soviet Embassy here is not regularly in-
formed of events in Geneva. Bessmertnykh said that he personally
agreed with Bartholomew’s points and agreed to transmit substance of
de´marche to Moscow immediately.

Non-Proliferation
4. For Geneva: NPT Delegation should inform SovDel of Bartho-
lomew/Bessmertnykh meeting without characterizing Bessmertnykh’s
response; and reiterate points contained in para 2 above.
5. For London: You should inform FCO of meeting and convey
substance of de´marche.
Muskie
388.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, September 4, 1980
SUBJECT
September 3 Mini SCC Meeting on the NPT Review Conference
1. The meeting, chaired by David Aaron, was called at the request
of ACDA to review the state of play at the NPT Review Conference in
Geneva which is scheduled to end Friday.2 The Conference at this time
is in serious disarray and there is a good chance that they will not be
able to agree on a final consensus document. The major area of dis-
agreement is on that portion dealing with Article VI of the treaty which
the Non-aligned Nations, wants to put into the final document three
items that the US finds unacceptable:
—a call for establishment of a CTB Working Group in the Com-
mittee on Disarmament (CD)
—a call for a moratorium on nuclear testing
—criticism of South Africa and Israel for allegedly developing a
nuclear capability.
2. ACDA proposed at the meeting that we might want to accept the
creation of a CTB Working Group in the CD in exchange for elimination
of the other objectionable items from the final document and thereby be
able to produce a consensus document. It was acknowledged that we
did not know if such an exchange would be acceptable to the G–77. The
minutes or summary of conclusions for this meeting has been found.
2 September 12.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
US has always opposed a multilateral forum such as the CD for the CTB
because of the risks of manipulation by the Soviets on verification
issues. The discussion at the mini SCC revolved around the degree of
damage that would be done to the NPT regime by failure to achieve a
final consensus document, balanced against the risks to progress in the
CTB negotiations by putting any part of them in a multi-lateral form.
The general feeling at the meeting was leaning toward the ACDA sug-
gestion except for JCS who flatly opposed creation of a CTB Working
Group in the CD. No decision was made at the meeting and it was de-
cided to add the issue as an agenda item to the SCC meeting on theater
nuclear forces on Thursday.4
3. My assessment is that while there would certainly be some short
term negative impact on our non-proliferation efforts from failure to
achieve a final consensus document at the Review, the long term pros-
pects for the NPT regime will depend primarily on the future per-
formance and behavior of the nuclear weapons states (NWS) in the
arms control and nuclear supply arenas. At this stage the NNWS still
believe that a viable NPT is in their interests, primarily as a tool in
keeping pressure on the NWS for arms control progress and nuclear
supply assurances.
4. Attached is a short paper prepared by ACDA on the issues that
were discussed at the meeting.5
[name not declassified]
4 September 11.
5 Not attached.
389.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
11804. For the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and ACDA Director.
Subject: NPT Review Conference (60): Urgent Request for Contingency
Guidance.
Non-Proliferation
1. (Secret—Entire text)
2. With respect to issue on NPT RevCon which we understand will
be subject of discussion by principals this morning, following is input
from US NPT RevCon Del.
3. We believe the NPT RevCon is in serious danger of ending in
well-publicized disarray. The more militant G–77 Delegations, espe-
cially Mexico, Sweden, and Yugoslavia, are continuing to take an un-
compromising line.2
4. It is our shared judgment that only hope for a satisfactory sub-
stantive outcome lies in a compromise final document retaining
a number of constructive formulations on safeguards and peaceful
uses, avoiding unacceptable language on Israel but reflecting various
strongly held views on major arms control issues and going some way
toward meeting main non-aligned objectives. In the latter category we
believe we can within present guidance handle all but the:
(A) Moratorium on nuclear testing;
(B) Working groups in Committee on Disarmament on CTB and
nuclear disarmament; and
(C) Interim compliance with SALT II.
Moratorium is clearly not acceptable and many non-aligned, even
militants like Ambassador Fonseka (Sri Lanka), understand this. Nu-
clear disarmament working group is not of the highest priority ac-
cording to Fonseka and might not be pressed if other desiderata are
achieved. Although we obviously could not accept a formal interim
commitment on SALT II compliance in final Conference document, this
is an issue on which our position is strong because of our stated policy
and because of adamant Soviet opposition to any commitment prior to
ratification of SALT II. This leaves a CTB working group as the only
conceivable area of US flexibility.
5. What we are requesting is contingency authority to accept—
if necessary and sufficient to achieve an acceptable Conference out-
come—language calling on the CD at its next session to establish an ad
hoc working group, with an appropriate mandate, on the question of a
CTB. Such language would make clear that the precise mandate or
terms of reference for such a working group would have to be worked
out by consensus in the CD, and would specify that the CD’s work
should not interfere with the trilateral negotiations. Moreover, any
such formulation would only be accepted if agreed to by the other tri-
sought to broaden the issue” of the NPT to include prohibiting “even seemingly legiti-
mate civil nuclear cooperation with South Africa and Israel” because “it ‘indirectly’ con-
tributes to their nuclear weapons capabilities.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800417–0703)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
lateral negotiating partners. In this connection British floated last night
with US and Soviets a contingency formula which Soviets accepted
with slight modification, reflected below:
“The Conference therefore believes that at its next session, the CD
should draw up terms of reference for a working group on a nuclear
test ban treaty. It considers that efforts in the CD on this subject and the
separate trilateral negotiations by the NWS parties to the treaty are not
mutually exclusive.” (FYI: Establishing “Terms of Reference” is tanta-
mount to establishing the working group.)
This language was prepared as a draft of part of a possible com-
promise final document reflecting divergencies of views on many
issues which might be used as a last minute Chairman’s draft. We have
not indicated any ability on our part to accept this formulation. It has
not yet been shown to anyone except a few members of Depositary
Delegations.
6. We would not propose to use the authority we are seeking
unless and until it becomes clearer than it now is that its use is neces-
sary and sufficient to achieve an otherwise acceptable Conference out-
come. We are not yet at the stage where this judgment can be made, but
time is becoming so short that we need guidance on whether this bar-
gaining tool would be available in the crunch of the final hours of the
Conference. We will keep you advised of the situation and of our ad-
vice as to whether such contingency guidance need be drawn upon.
Helman
390.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 4, 1980
SUBJECT
NPT Review Conference
The SCC this morning2 reached consensus that we should autho-
rize our delegation to the NPT Review Conference to agree to the for-
the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 No record of this meeting was found.

Non-Proliferation
mation of a working group on CTB under the auspices of the Confer-
ence on Disarmament. The JCS did not agree because they fear that
such a working group will become a source of independent pressure
on the trilateral CTB forum that will make it more difficult for us to
achieve such goals as good verification provisions. All others agreed
that this was a serious possibility but felt that we should make this at-
tempt if we could avoid a total collapse of the NPT Review Conference
(the inability to reach agreement on a consensus document).
The SCC consensus was subject to the proviso that we will agree to
the formation of the working group if it is clear that our agreement
would produce an acceptable conference outcome, though all under-
stood that the idea would have to be floated during discussions in Ge-
neva tomorrow. We know this is clearly a long shot with all the dis-
order at the conference but we feel we should give our people
something to work with and, as Ed Muskie put it, we would be better
off failing having made the effort, than having failed to make the effort.
The UK and Canada support this approach.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the SCC consensus.3
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
391.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Earle) to President Carter1
Washington, September 12, 1980
Subject
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference
The NPT Review Conference completed Sunday2 was a difficult,
contentious process, and it was not possible to reach agreement on a
substantive declaration satisfactory to all participants.
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 September 7.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
There was no controversy over the NPT itself—which was sup-
ported by all speakers (with no suggestions for amendments or pro-
tocols and no withdrawals from the Treaty). There was, however,
widespread resentment on the part of many of the non-nuclear weapon
parties at the disparity between their self-denial and the dearth of con-
crete achievement by the nuclear weapon states in limiting their nu-
clear armaments.3
Most participants made clear that they considered greater progress
by the nuclear weapon states on nuclear arms control—as contempated
by Article VI4 of the Treaty and consistently advocated by you—to be
basic to the NPT bargain. This led to strong pleas from all quarters for
prompt ratification of SALT II and early initiation of SALT III. But it
also led to bitter denunciations of the failure to have achieved a com-
prehensive test ban—which was the step most clearly desired—not
only by the neutrals and non-aligned but also by a number of our allies.
Your approval of a contingent offer by the U.S. to establish a CTB
working group in the CD—even though it was not successful in
achieving a consensus document—helped to head off an acrimonious
ending of this particular Conference. But the underlying discontent
and resentment still remain. Unless we succeed in achieving significant
limitations on nuclear testing in the next few years it is clear from this
Conference that the NPT, and the non-proliferation regime of which it
is the principal pillar, will be in serious jeopardy.
Ralph Earle II
3 Carter bracketed this paragraph and wrote “I agree” in the left-hand margin.

Non-Proliferation
392.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, September 26, 1980
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting of 25 September 1980: Options for Augmenting Supply of Nuclear
Materials
1. The subject meeting was chaired by Secretary Brown who re-
viewed the results of the July 24 meeting on the same subject.2 At that
meeting it had been agreed to upgrade the three operating reactors at
Savannah River and to restart the L-reactor at Savannah River. There
had been disagreement on whether to convert the N-reactor at Hanford
to weapons grade plutonium production and restart the Purex facility.
It was also agreed at the 24 July meeting that no actual implementation
of these decisions would be made until after the completion of the NPT
Review Conference.
2. Discussion at this meeting centered around the conversion of the
N-reactor at Hanford, the restart of the Purex facility and the negative
impact that these actions might have on US nonproliferation policy and
goals. The previous agreements reached at the 24 July meeting were
reaffirmed. It was decided to send two options forward to the Presi-
dent, one recommending immediate action on conversion of the N-
reactor and restart of the Purex facility, the other recommending post-
poning this decision until December. NSC and JCS supported the first
option while State, ACDA, DoD and OMB supported the second. The
budgetary impact of a three month delay in the decision was minimal.
3. Intelligence input to the meeting was minimal consisting only of
a reaffirmation of our previous estimate of Soviet plutonium produc-
tion and a statement of our confidence in the accuracy of this estimate.
No follow-on action will be required from this meeting.
[name not declassified]
cret. Original paragraph classification and handling restrictions not declassified. No
minutes or summary of conclusions for this meeting has been found.
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions of the July 24 meeting has been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
393.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, October 16, 1980
SUBJECT
After the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
I know you are aware of the inconclusive results of the recent NPT
Review Conference in Geneva, despite our best efforts to achieve a last
minute compromise. I would like to give you my views on its broader
significance and the prospects for non-proliferation.
The Meaning of the Review Conference
Because the Review Conference ended on a discordant note, we
will face tougher sledding on arms control issues and in pressing our
non-proliferation objectives. In addition to continual criticism by the
non-aligned, it will be harder to hold the support of many of our Allies,
to whom progress in arms control is important both in terms of NPT
obligations and for perceptions of their own security. Furthermore, the
Soviets will be highly critical of our own arms control efforts (Gro-
myko’s recent UNGA speech is a good example of this).2
However, I do not believe there is a real danger of withdrawal or
abrogation by Treaty parties in the near term. There was strong support
for the Treaty itself at the Conference. Many non-aligned leaders (such
as Yugoslavia and Mexico) have been instrumental in endorsing the
NPT through the years and have substantial self interest in seeing the
Treaty preserved.
While generally based on a real concern over the lack of forward
movement on arms control, non-aligned demands for accelerated
progress and a significantly greater multilateral role in negotiations
also reflect a desire by some Third World leaders to prove their creden-
tials by engaging in public confrontation with key Western countries.
The Preservation of Non-Proliferation
The NPT is essential for the preservation of non-proliferation and
it is vital to prevent its unravelling. However, the Treaty itself is not
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
randum, Carter wrote “Ed. A reasonable approach. C.”
2 In a September 22 address to the UN General Assembly, Gromkyo “blamed the
United States and its allies” for “escalating international tensions and charged that Wash-
ington is working out plans for a nuclear war in an atmosphere of ‘militarist frenzy’. ”
(Don Oberdorfer, “Gromyko Blames U.S. Policies for Rising Global Tensions,” Wash-

Non-Proliferation
sufficient to deal with the truly dangerous problem posed by the nu-
clear threshold states.
Some present or potential threshold countries (e.g., Iraq) are NPT
parties and would think twice before withdrawing from the Treaty.
Moreover, progress on a CTB or other arms control measures might
strengthen the international consensus on non-proliferation that could
help restrain non-party states as well.
Nonetheless, certain threshold countries are already well on the
way toward fuel cycle autonomy or are obtaining technical options to
develop nuclear explosives. These states will make their decision on
whether to produce a nuclear device on the basis of their perception of
immediate security interests and vulnerabilities, with internal politics
also coming into play. If one or more of these countries decides to ob-
tain a nuclear explosive capability, there would be an increased chance
for regional conflict and serious consequences for the continued Treaty
adherence of neighboring NPT parties.
In any case, it appears likely that we may be faced with cruel di-
lemmas involving our national security, if such threshold states as Pak-
istan or South Africa continue their progress in developing nuclear
devices.
Implications for Arms Control and Peaceful Cooperation
After the NPT Review Conference, we plan to adopt the following
stance on major arms control issues in the near-term:
—The concession on a CTB Working Group which you approved
was worth making under the circumstances, but was only valid in
terms of achieving a consensus final document at the NPTRC. We be-
lieve the non-aligned will seek to “pocket” our contingent concession,
and that Australia, Canada, and other allies may join them in increas-
ing the pressure for a Committee on Disarmament Working Group. We
will resist accepting their position since multilateral involvement in
CTB talks would seriously complicate tripartite negotiations, especially
the important verification issue.
—We should not agree to a CD Working Group on nuclear disar-
mament, since nuclear arms control can be approached effectively only
through step-by-step negotiations by the partners directly concerned.
—We will continue to reject proposals for cut-off of production of
Special Nuclear Materials (SNM),3 which some of our Allies may sup-
forts should be made to discourage arms control proposals that are presently unrealistic
and unworkable—such as cut off.” The Carter administration believed that “consider-
ation of cut-off would be premature and inadvisable in light of the current international
situation and the importance of not detracting from priority issues on the arms control
agenda, such as SALT, and CTB. As appropriate, we would also stress the various diffi-
culties associated with a possible cut-off (definitions, modalities, and verification) and
the need to ensure that our security interests would be properly protected.” (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
port, as premature. We could receive increased criticism because of our
decision to upgrade our SNM production capacity. We still regard
cut-off as a desirable long-term arms control objective.
To demonstrate our support for the IAEA and legitimate nuclear
power programs in developing countries, we will be generally sup-
portive of implementing Review Conference understandings on peace-
ful uses. (Gerry Smith will be sending you a more comprehensive mem-
orandum covering this area.)4
—As a follow-on to INFCE and the NPTRC, we will continue to
pursue through the IAEA forum the concepts of international spent
fuel storage, and an effective international plutonium storage regime.
—We will also pursue, through a newly established IAEA Com-
mittee, mechanisms such as a fuel bank for improved assurances of
non-sensitive nuclear supply.
Finally, we must focus on the need for restraint in nuclear exports to
potential threshold countries. This would include:
—Pressing for acceptance of full-scope safeguards as a condition of
new supply commitments to non-nuclear weapons states not party to
the Treaty.
—Continuing to press nuclear exporters to restrict the transfer
of reprocessing and enrichment technology and sensitive nuclear
materials.
4 See Document 395.

Non-Proliferation
394.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, November 1980
Deadlock at the NPT Review Conference: Causes and Consequences
Key Judgments
The recent conference in Geneva to review the nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) failed to produce a declaration assessing
how effectively the treaty has been implemented over the past five
years. None of the 75 participants questioned the need for or basic pur-
pose of the NPT, but they were unwilling to make the compromises
necessary to reach a final declaration reaffirming the value of the treaty.
Widespread concern now exists that the failure to reach a consensus
will undermine confidence in the global nonproliferation regime.
Causes of Failure
A longstanding conflict over the intent of the treaty between the
nuclear weapons states and nonnuclear weapons states, primarily
those in the developing world, was the root of the problem. Ever since
the negotiation of the NPT in the late 1960s, the two groups have dis-
agreed over the delicate balance of rights and obligations in the treaty.
The developing nations have consistently argued, and did so forcefully
at the conference, that the problem of nonproliferation is a matter of
controlling the nuclear arms race between the nuclear powers as well as
containing the spread of nuclear weapons to other states. The three nu-
clear weapons states that are party to the treaty—the United Kingdom,
the Soviet Union, and the United States—prefer to emphasize the con-
tainment purposes of the NPT, arguing that a global nonproliferation
regime is valuable in its own right and its implementation should not
be made dependent on progress in the arms control area.
The developing nations at the conference, acting as spokesmen for
the Group of 77 (G–77), alleged that there had been no meaningful
progress toward disarmament since the 1975 Review Conference and
insisted that their viewpoint be expressed in a final declaration. They
also sought commitments from the nuclear weapons states to increase
the role of nonnuclear weapons states in arms control negotiations.
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
cation and handling restrictions not declassified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The G–77 entered the conference with a wide range of arms control
demands. These were eventually narrowed to three items that they in-
sisted be included in the final declaration:
• The establishment of a multilateral working group on a compre-
hensive test ban treaty (CTB) in the Committee on Disarmament.
• A pledge by the Soviet Union and the United States to observe
the terms of the SALT II agreement pending ratification.
• Language that would single out Israel and South Africa for criti-
cism and prohibit nuclear cooperation with these two nonsignatories
unless they accepted international safeguards over their entire nuclear
programs.
Significant concessions by the industrial nations giving assurances
about the supply of nuclear fuel and technical assistance to nuclear pro-
grams of Third World signatories of the NPT were not sufficient to lead
to compromise in the arms control area. Indeed, G–77 leaders like Yu-
goslavia and Mexico apparently persuaded the more moderate nations
within the Group to dig in their heels because the nuclear weapons
states showed no signs of agreeing to any of the arms control demands
until well into the last week of the conference. The United States even-
tually indicated a willingness to accept a CTB working group under
certain conditions, but by that time most of the developing nations had
decided that an inconclusive conference outcome would provide a dra-
matic warning to the superpowers.
Consequences of Failure
The failure of the review conference to reaffirm the NPT in a final
declaration is likely to have a number of far-reaching consequences:
• It will weaken the global nonproliferation regime. The inconclu-
sive outcome does not alter the treaty obligations of signatories, but the
failure to agree on whether the treaty has been effectively implemented
raises serious questions about its long-term viability.
• No signatory is likely to withdraw from the treaty in the next few
years because of the conference outcome, but the prospects for per-
suading nonsignatories to adhere to the treaty have been greatly re-
duced. Some nonsignatories may conclude that the costs of nonadher-
ence and the potential penalties for crossing the nuclear threshold have
been reduced.
• The issue of nuclear weapons programs in the Third World is
likely to be further politicized. The G–77 nations at the conference, for
example, were unwilling to discuss the question of how to deal with
potential proliferators within their own ranks.
The developing nations’ insistence on discussing nuclear arms
control between the superpowers probably will complicate future dis-
cussions of nuclear proliferation. This linkage may make any strength-

Non-Proliferation
ening of the global nonproliferation regime conditional upon progress
in arms control, thus providing an additional excuse for some devel-
oping nations to resist specific US proposals for tighter control of inter-
national nuclear commerce.
The ability of the developing nations to mold and pursue a unified
negotiating position at the review conference is likely to reinvigorate
their efforts to negotiate as a bloc on other international issues that can
be cast in North-South terms. G–77 unity has been under considerable
strain recently, particularly on economic issues such as the cost of oil.
Stimulated by their success on nuclear matters, the G–77 members are
likely to redouble attempts to find issues of common concern around
which they can achieve consensus.
The increased cooperation among developing nations does not
necessarily imply, however, that the dialogue with industrial nations
will become more acrimonious. Nations normally considered mod-
erates within the G–77 and the related nonaligned movement assumed
leadership roles at the NPT review conference. This may presage a
trend against Cuba and other radical nations that have attempted to
steer these organizations in a distinctly anti-Western direction.
The results of the review conference may even stimulate a leader-
ship role for Third World moderates, particularly in the nuclear prolif-
eration field. Many developing nations wish to preserve, in upcoming
meetings of the new International Atomic Energy Agency Committee
on the Assurance of Supply and in other forums, important concessions
on nuclear trade issues already won from the industrial nations.
Finally, the outcome of the NPT review conference is likely to af-
fect future arms control negotiations and deliberations. At minimum, it
will reinforce the G–77’s allegations that the nuclear weapons states are
dragging their feet on arms control negotiations, and this attitude may
serve as a basis to oppose as ineffective and discriminatory almost any
multilateral arms control initiative sponsored by the superpowers. In
any event, the nonaligned nations probably will lobby in the UN Gen-
eral Assembly for a broader mandate for the Committee on Disarma-
ment, including the creation of a working group on CTB.
If the CTB issue is not resolved in the UN, nonaligned nations are
certain to insist on such a working group in the 1981 sessions of the
Committee on Disarmament, knowing that Washington has accepted
the idea, at least in principle. Even if the procedural issue is resolved in
the Committee on Disarmament, there is little reason to expect the de-
veloping nations to be in a cooperative mood at the Third NPT review
conference in 1985 unless the nuclear weapons states have by then
concluded a comprehensive test ban treaty and other arms control
agreements.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
395.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Policy—Report of Gerry Smith (U)
Attached are three papers from Gerry Smith which together com-
prise his final report to you on non-proliferation policy:
—A report (Tab A) on his explorations with Europe and Japan of a
possible bargain in which the US would relax its constraints on their
reprocessing and plutonium programs in return for greater coopera-
tion in dealing with problem countries. He concludes that such a
deal cannot be struck “within the strict framework of the April 1977
—A longer paper (Tab B) giving his overall assessment and recom-
mendations on how our policy should be changed. (C)
—A brief memorandum (Tab C) urging that priority attention be
given to the Israeli weapons program and the negotiation of a CTB. (S)
These papers cover a lot of territory, but two issues are central:
(a) how to deal more effectively with problem countries, like Pakistan
and Argentina, where proliferation risks are immediate or around the
corner, and (b) the relevance of global constraints on reprocessing and
plutonium, which affect important Allied programs, to such risks. (C)
Smith believes that we have put too much emphasis on denying
access to sensitive material and technology, and should focus more on
proliferation motives through the resolution of disputes and by en-
hancing security arrangements. The alternative view, elaborated in
PRM–15,3 is that where motives and technological capability coincide,
proliferation will almost certainly result; motives are the most volatile
and least controllable factor, and access to materials and technology the
most amenable to short-term control. (C)
While he acknowledges that economic developments since 1977
have strongly confirmed US arguments that reprocessing and pluto-
nium fuels should be deferred, Smith believes that the European and
information. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum, Carter
wrote “Zbig. How best to present alternatives to next administration? J.”
3 See Document 317.

Non-Proliferation
Japanese programs present no significant proliferation threat, and that
we must relax our controls there in order to gain their cooperation in
withholding sensitive materials and technology from problem coun-
tries. The alternative view is that a more permissive plutonium policy
toward Europe and Japan would inevitably increase both proliferation
risks, and political resentment, in the rest of the world. (C)
These and many other questions addressed in Smith’s analysis
were debated extensively in 1977. It is entirely appropriate that they
should be examined again in the light of our experience over the past
four years. Smith’s present conclusions would be contested by many,
but this is an important and well-argued brief for one point of view. (C)
Tab A
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
President Carter4
Washington, October 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Policy after INFCE
In June, you authorized me to explore with major European allies
and Japan on a personal and non-committal basis arrangements by
which they might agree to greater cooperation in strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and limiting reprocessing of spent fuel and
use of plutonium.5 The purpose was to clarify what we might expect
from our allies in return for greater predictability in exercise of consent
rights over the use of US-origin fuel. On the basis of such clarification,
we would be better able to develop positions for renegotiation of agree-
ments for cooperation with EURATOM, Japan, and other countries, as
required by the NNPA. As you requested, here are the results of the
explorations.
In a series of discussions with senior nuclear and foreign policy of-
ficials of the UK, France, the FRG, and Japan, I put forward for their
4 Confidential.
5 See Document 383.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
consideration a regime for the next 10–15 years in which those coun-
tries would:
—defer commitments to thermal recycle;
—limit new reprocessing capacity to that required for breeders,
and limit separation of plutonium to avoid unnecessary stockpiling
and pressure for thermal recycle;
—support development of an effective International Plutonium
Storage regime, and avoid excess national stockpiles of plutonium;
—agree to US consent rights, as called for in the NNPA, including
their continuation over material after use in breeder RD&D programs;
—increase commitments to spent fuel storage as an alternative to
reprocessing;
—require full-scope safeguards as a condition of new supply com-
mitments and improve cooperation in dealing with problem countries;
—cooperate to make reprocessing more proliferation-resistant, to
improve the “once-through” fuel cycle, to limit future enrichment ca-
pacity to production of low enriched uranium only, and to improve
IAEA safeguards through financial, technical and political support.
I suggested that in such a regime the US might:
—adopt predictable ground rules for exercise of consent rights
over reprocessing and plutonium use in specified breeder and other
advanced reactor RD&D programs;
—grant generic authorizations to reprocessing in the UK and
France for other countries that have good non-proliferation credentials,
no spent fuel storage alternative, or where it is in our non-proliferation
interest to remove spent fuel.
The regime defined above, which you approved as a basis for ex-
ploration but without decision as to its ultimate acceptability, was
drawn up after extended review within the Executive Branch. Our ef-
fort had been to identify a position for reprocessing and plutonium use
in Europe and Japan that would meet the near-term requirements of
those countries, avoid damaging precedents for other countries, and
evoke greater support from Allies in dealing with countries of near-
term proliferation concern.
The Allies recognize the need to increase efforts with problem
countries. They believe the more promising approach is political
(dealing with motivations of problem countries) rather than technical
(trying to stop or slow access to sensitive technologies and materials).
They may be willing to adopt NPT-type full-scope safeguards as a re-
quirement for new supply commitments, in return for our easing inter-
ference in their programs.
The Allies agree that national stockpiles of excess plutonium
should be avoided. They support establishment of an international plu-

Non-Proliferation
tonium storage regime, with some skepticism that a truly effective IPS
would be acceptable to the countries we worry about most. This skepti-
cism may be well-placed, but I believe we should work actively to try to
develop the best possible IPS.
The EURATOM countries (where we now have no consent rights)
are very loath to give us such controls. They resist proposals that they
set a “good example” to the rest of the world by limiting their domestic
programs for reprocessing and plutonium use. They see a right of con-
sent as an infringement of their national sovereignties, as giving us a
“supervisory” role over their programs, and as introducing an arbi-
trary and unpredictable element in their nuclear power planning. They
foresee our generic approach as requiring impossible precision in fore-
casting the plutonium needs of their breeder programs.
In the end we may be able to get the Europeans to grant formal
consent rights provided it is clear that they would be exercised in a very
general way. The UK, France, and the FRG, unlike the US, are com-
mitted to reprocessing and to developing options for breeders and
thermal recycle. They believe these programs are indispensable for
their energy security, and that their decisions on and pursuit of these
programs are national issues not subject to compromise with the US.
They believe we overemphasize the dangers of the civil nuclear fuel
cycle and that decisions they take with respect to their own programs
are not relevant to dealing with the problem countries.
Japan will not much longer tolerate asymmetry between US–
EURATOM and US-Japan nuclear relations. Our case-by-case exercise
of consent rights in Japan is a constant source of friction. We are un-
likely to get control over use of US supplies in Europe comparable to
that which we have in Japan. If unable to get consent rights in Europe,
or able to get them only under an agreement providing for liberal ap-
plication, we will have to agree to the same with Japan. We probably
will have to accept Japan’s having a commercial scale reprocessing
plant, and agree to some generic approvals for reprocessing of Japanese
fuel in Europe and use in Japan of some of the separated plutonium.
I believe we cannot accomplish the foregoing within the strict
framework of the April 1977 policy. For this and other reasons, the di-
rection of our non-proliferation effort should be reviewed. I think the
NNPA should be amended to restore a positive attitude toward inter-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
national cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. I expand
on these ideas in the attached paper.
Gerard Smith6
Tab B
Paper Prepared by Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith7
Washington, October 30, 1980
U.S. NON-PROLIFERATION POLICY AND PROGRAMS:
AN ASSESSMENT
Executive Summary
In light of concerns that growth of civil nuclear power and the ad-
vent of wide-spread trade in weapons-usable materials would lead to
an increased proliferation of nuclear explosives, initiatives were taken
by the Administration and Congress to foreclose the electric power
route to nuclear explosives. They included i) the President’s April 1977
Policy Statement,8 deferring indefinitely commercial reprocessing and
commercial-scale breeders in the United States and continuing a mora-
torium on exports of enrichment and reprocessing technology, and
ii) enactment of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (NNPA),
which established detailed criteria and procedures to govern United
States nuclear export and international cooperative activities. Studies
were started (the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) and the
Non-Proliferation Alternatives System Assessment Program) to seek
ways of minimizing the proliferation risks inherent in nuclear electric
power generation.
There resulted an increased awareness of proliferation risks and a
willingness of major nuclear suppliers to defer new reprocessing ex-
port commitments and, generally, to cooperate in restricting exports
where proliferation risks could be demonstrated (e.g., Pakistan). How-
ever, serious concern persists about Pakistan. Acquisition of sensitive
facilities by Iraq, Argentina and Brazil also creates proliferation risks.
6 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry.”.
7 Confidential.

Non-Proliferation
We have been unable to persuade these countries and India, South Af-
rica and Israel to accept fullscope safeguards.
Nations with the most advanced nuclear power programs (in Eu-
rope and Japan), which are not of proliferation concern, resent our ef-
forts to impose stringent requirements on them which have resulted in
uncertain nuclear supply. They now see us as insensitive to their crit-
ical energy needs. They have not agreed to condition exports, or even
new export commitments, on the recipient’s accepting full-scope safe-
guards or foreswearing national enrichment or reprocessing facilities.
While the reduction in the growth of nuclear electric power supports
U.S. arguments that reprocessing, thermal recycle and breeder com-
mercialization can be prudently deferred, it has put governments com-
mitted to nuclear power and their nuclear industries on the defensive
and as a result spirited defenses of these options have been mounted.
Our approach to non-proliferation has been too single-minded. In-
adequate consideration has been given to linkages between prolifera-
tion and other foreign policy and security interests. In particular, where
other interests have appeared to conflict with non-proliferation con-
straints—in the Tarapur and Pakistan cases, for example—the former
have appeared to prevail (although our actions in these cases were sup-
portive of or consistent with our non-proliferation interests).
U.S. non-proliferation consideration led to legislative and policy
constraints of general application, including a highly restrictive export
policy, disregarding the fact that proliferation risks vary greatly from
one country to another, and that the energy security requirements of
other major industrial nations differ from America’s. We should adopt
a more balanced approach which recognizes the motivations which
lead nations to acquire nuclear explosives. No system of export con-
straints can substitute for elimination of these motivations, by resolu-
tion of international disputes, security guarantees and reduction of the
prestige value of nuclear weapons.
There are only five states of near-term proliferation concern—
India, Iraq, [less than 1 line not declassified], Pakistan and South Africa—
with perhaps a half dozen others of concern in the longer term. While
as a matter of general policy accepted international practice calls for
equal treatment for all states, distinctions where risks are gravest are
the only way to achieve the support of major Allies and other nuclear
suppliers in coping with proliferation risks effectively.
We need more flexibility in dealing with close Allies on export, re-
processing and retransfer requests, and in nuclear cooperation negotia-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tions. We need policies which are more sensitive to Allies’ energy
needs, are consistently and predictably implemented, and are neither
unilaterally derived nor based on threats of denial.
There is virtually no support for a “throw away” fuel cycle, aban-
doning the energy value of the plutonium and uranium in spent fuel.
We should recognize that regrettably R&D and pilot scale reprocessing
plants are a prudent near-term step to nations with medium or long-
term interest in reprocessing for energy purposes, and that technical
fixes we once thought to have promise do not now appear viable.
It is illusory to believe we have much leverage to force our views
on foreign nations when other supply sources are available and it is we,
not the recipients, who are seeking to alter existing terms of nuclear
trade.
What leverage we do have has been undercut by i) the ambiguity
of American government policy on nuclear power as an energy option,
ii) the divisions in the country on this issue, and iii) our speaking on
non-proliferation with different voices—those of the Administration,
the NRC and the Congress. In particular, with the export licensing
function residing in the NRC, other nations lack confidence that under-
takings of the Executive Branch will be fulfilled in a timely and predict-
able manner. Our unilaterally established policy and legislative re-
quirements have generated concerns about security of supply and have
driven foreign nations to increased fuel cycle independence, further re-
ducing any residual leverage for our supply position. A policy of ex-
port restraint can succeed only if suppliers act in concert. It is not likely
that all supplies will accept our policies. Measures to enhance security
of supply are likely to be more effective in inducing nations to forego
reprocessing and enrichment technology and breeders than threats of
denial or highly restrictive conditions.
I recommend that we:
1. Consider proliferation problems primarily as international secu-
rity issues;
2. Center non-proliferation efforts on problem countries—those
where early explosive acquisition seems probable;
3. Increase flexibility in dealing with major Allies (EURATOM and
Japan);
4. Recognize that reprocessing will occur and
—support an international plutonium storage system,
—rely on economic factors rather than U.S. pressures to dissuade
nations from adopting thermal recycle,
—urge other suppliers to condition new nuclear supply commit-
ments on full-scope safeguards, and

Non-Proliferation
—give increased support to IAEA safeguards;
5. Enhance U.S. nuclear supply reliability by
—transferring the export licensing function from NRC to the Exec-
utive Branch,
—eliminating duplicative reviews of export activities to allow
some predictability concerning U.S. actions in authorizing requests,
and
—eliminating certain sanctions provisions in the NNPA and the
Foreign Assistance Act.
Gerard Smith9
Tab C
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative
for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to President Carter10
Washington, October 31, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
I am sending along separately my final report. But I would like to
stress two matters which I believe to be central to success for your
non-proliferation policy—[less than 1 line not declassified] and a Compre-
hensive Test Ban.
While we have urged our allies to set a good example by limiting
their power programs’ [less than 1 line not declassified] we have set a bad
example by acquiescing in [less than 1 line not declassified] While we,
by law, cut off aid to Pakistan11 [1 line not declassified] a large percentage
of American [less than 1 line not declassified] The international commu-
nity is well aware of this inconsistency and discrimination. I trust [less
than 1 line not declassified] can be introduced into the Middle East
negotiations.
CTB—For ten years we have had an obligation under NPT to get
on with arms control and disarmament. That was the quid pro quo for
the non-weapons states to forego weapons. As clearly demonstrated
during last August’s NPT Review Conference, a large number of states
believe we have failed to keep our end of the bargain. That belief bodes
badly for the credibility of your program and the life expectancy of the
NPT regime. That argues strongly for ending the subordination of our
proliferation interest to possibly marginal weapons refinement.
9 Smith signed the paper “Gerry.”
10 Secret. Brzezinski initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
As I leave government, I urge you to give priority to these two
often overlooked aspects of your great non-proliferation effort.
Again, may I say how much I appreciate having had the privilege,
opportunity and experience of serving under your fine leadership.
Respectfully,
Gerard Smith12
12 Smith signed the letter “Gerry.”
396.
Memorandum From Jerry Oplinger of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation
Attached is the history of non-proliferation policy which you
asked for.2 I have tried to hold it to the 15 pages you requested, and the
result is a highly compressed and selective account. It is very difficult
to write on this subject without some personal bias showing through,
but I have tried to keep it reasonably straightforward and non-
polemical.
Some more personal and subjective comment seems appropriate
however, so I will make it here:
On balance, and judged by its stated objectives, the Carter non-
proliferation policy has to be considered a failure.3 A half-dozen coun-
tries have moved perceptibly closer to a nuclear explosive capability,
and in at least one case (Pakistan) that movement now appears irre-
versible. Almost all of this slippage involved assistance from Europe,
and could have been prevented. Reprocessing plant capacity has more
information.
2 Attached but not printed.
3 An unknown hand underlined the words “be considered a failure.”

Non-Proliferation
than tripled; world plutonium stockpiles (most of it of US origin) have
grown substantially and appear likely to increase at least tenfold in the
next decade. Our own nuclear R&D budget, which we said in 1977 was
to be restructured to defer the breeder and develop safer alternatives,
continues to fund the breeder at excessive levels and to ignore alterna-
tive technologies. While our 1977 objective was to prevent the develop-
ment of plutonium fuel cycles, we have continued to cooperate with
other countries, permitting Japan, the UK, and France to reprocess
large quantities of US-supplied spent fuel to support such fuel cycles.
The fault was not with the Carter policies. They rested on three
basic principles which seem at least as self-evident today as in 1977:
that certain nuclear materials (HEU and plutonium) are explosives and
if available in nuclear power programs will make possible rapid con-
version to weapons; that misuse of these materials cannot be prevented
or adequately controlled by international inspection (safeguards) or
any political institution yet devised, and that the technologies which in-
troduce these materials into common use could be deferred for at least
many decades without economic penalty. While the dangers of pluto-
nium are obvious, what is not generally understood is that a single fuel
charge for a breeder reactor would contain enough high-grade pluto-
nium for hundreds of nuclear weapons; that is comparable to the total
stockpile of the US or the USSR in the early 1950’s and is a major stra-
tegic threat. Safeguards, whose purpose is only to detect diversion of
materials to unauthorized use, are meaningless when dealing with ma-
terials which can be made into bombs within a week. Plutonium-fueled
reactors are economic only at uranium prices exceeding $100 per
pound based on 1977 breeder capital costs; the current cost of uranium
is $30 and falling, breeder costs are soaring and these trends now seem
likely to push the economic utility of breeders well past 2050.
The failure of US policy in the face of all this has been a failure of
will and of implementation at the working level of US government. The
policy was entrusted to a bureaucracy which cared less for these facts
and their clear implications than for diplomatic harmony. Intimidated
by the reactions of foreign nuclear bureaucracies, our diplomats recom-
mended, in a series of critical decisions, actions which quickly eroded
both the substance and credibility of our policy. The British and French,
poised on the brink of heavy investments in reprocessing plants eco-
nomically dependent upon US MB–10 approvals, watched us agree to
Japanese reprocessing of our fuel, insisted upon commitments to sim-
ilar approvals as the price of their participation in a misguided interna-
tional debate (INFCE) which we did not have the votes to win, watched
our performance, and decided to ignore us. In response, we approved
every single reprocessing request ever presented to us, and adopted a
set of guidelines which guaranteed that these projects would succeed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
and eventually produce an amount of separated plutonium sufficient
not only for their breeder programs, but to create vast economic pres-
sures for recycle in today’s reactors.
Meanwhile, in Pakistan, Argentina, Brazil and Iraq, the European
suppliers continued to transfer materials and equipment which was ei-
ther dangerous in itself or subject to controls so weak they permitted
these countries to continue other dangerous nuclear activities with im-
punity. Our allies had learned that we were more concerned with rhet-
oric than results, that our bottom line was infinitely elastic, that State
could be depended upon to argue their interests, and that the practical
test of US policy on any important issue would be—not its capability
actually to curb proliferation—but its ability to please.
Whether the policies would have led to greater success had they
been implemented with the conviction, toughness and tenacity that
they obviously required must now be left to the historians. Without
those qualities in the people who were responsible for the daily con-
duct of the policy, the President, and you, never had a fair chance. It is
still possible that the logic of events, including the spread of plutonium,
and one or more nuclear tests in the Middle East, will make nuclear
proliferation a central concern, and what this Administration originally
tried to say and do will have an ultimate impact. But the effectiveness
of a serious non-proliferation policy is likely to be lower, and the costs
considerably higher, next time around.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
397.
Editorial Note
During the 1976 presidential campaign, candidate Jimmy Carter
called for “new international action to make the spread of peaceful nu-
clear power less dangerous.” In an address at the United Nations on
May 13, Carter warned that despite the fact that “several administra-
tions” had refused “to authorize the sale of either enrichment or repro-
cessing plants, even with safeguards,” to nations that did not possess
nuclear technology, “other principal suppliers of nuclear equipment”
had recently “begun to make such sales.” Carter ultimately called for a
worldwide “voluntary moratorium on the national purchase or sale
of enrichment or reprocessing plants.” News reports contended that
Carter was referring to the Federal Republic of Germany’s 1975 sale of a
nuclear reactor and plutonium technology to Brazil. (“Excerpts From
Carter Speech on Nuclear Policy,” and Kathleen Teltsch, “Carter Pro-
respectively) The Gerald Ford administration had also opposed the sale
between the Federal Republic of Germany and Brazil but failed to con-
vince either nation to abrogate the purchase. For more on this subject,
303.
Only hours before Carter’s inauguration on January 20, 1977, the
Ambassador to Brazil, John Crimmins, reported that the FRG Ambas-
sador to Brazil had said that his government would “brook no third-
country interference in the Brazilian-German agreement, although this
attitude does not prevent ‘clarifications’.” The FRG Ambassador had
assured a group of European journalists that Brazil, although not a sig-
natory to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, “had made clear several times
‘in various international forums’ Brazil’s intention not to fabricate nu-
clear devices” and “reportedly cited as one example Brazil’s signature
of the Tlatelolco Treaty,” the 1967 pact that outlawed nuclear weapons
in Latin America and the Caribbean. (Telegram 539 from Brasilia,
January 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
In his first National Security Council meeting on January 22, Carter
instructed Vice President Walter Mondale, during Mondale’s up-
coming European visit, to “confirm to Chancellor [Helmut] Schmidt
that provision of nuclear fuel reprocessing technology to Brazil will
create a major crisis in US-German relations.” The NSC then agreed “to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
review the U.S. commercial aspect of the reprocessing issue so as to
meet expected charges that the U.S. opposition to Germany’s supply
technology to Brazil is self-serving.” (Summary of Conclusions of Na-
tional Security Council Meeting, January 22, 1977; Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Meetings File, Box 1, NSC
On January 26, Crimmins reported that Brazil’s Foreign Minister,
Antoˆnio Francisco Azeredo da Silveira, had said, “in an obvious allu-
sion to the nuclear question,” that Brazil would “not permit its destiny
to be ‘defrauded or disparaged by misunderstandings or foreign influ-
ences’ and that “the quality of life depends on a nation’s self-respect,
self-fulfillment, and autonomy.” One Brazilian newspaper called Sil-
veira’s comments “extremely aggressive” and a Foreign Ministry press
backgrounder made it clear that his “remarks were aimed at Presi-
dent-elect Carter and other leaders of the great powers.” Crimmins
concluded that while Brazil remained determined to maintain its “en-
ergy autonomy” and would refuse to abrogate the purchase of the nu-
clear reactor from the Federal Republic of Germany, this “beginning
position of apparent intransigence” could be modified through bilat-
eral negotiations with the United States. (Telegram 693 from Brasilia,
January 26; National Archives, RG 59, Department of State, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770028–0387) In a later telegram, however,
Crimmins warned that the dispute over non-proliferation in Latin
America could produce “serious and irreversible damage to the
U.S.-Brazilian relationship.” (Telegram 741 from Brasilia, January 26;
398.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Brazil1
Tovip 22. 18228. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject:
Message From the Secretary to Foreign Minister Silveira. Rome for
Aaron with Vice President’s Party.
mation Immediate to Bonn and Rome. Drafted by Charles W. Bray III (ARA), Regina Eltz
(ARA/ECA), and John Kalicki (ARA/ECA); cleared by W.H. Luers (ARA); and ap-
proved by Vance. The telegram number “Tovip 22” is handwritten.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1. Unless you perceive objection, please deliver the following mes-
sage, and make the following points, to Foreign Minister Silveira:
Begin quote: Dear Mr. Minister:
I have asked Ambassador Crimmins to make himself available to
you and want to convey to you, by means of this letter and his pres-
ence, the importance we attach to our relationship with Brazil.
We wish to affirm our desire to continue the consultative processes
which have served both countries so well over the years. My colleagues
in this administration would welcome your views on the various
issues—bilateral, regional and global—with which our two gov-
ernments will be confronted in coming months. For my own part, I am
looking forward to the early opportunity of meeting you.
Please accept my best wishes.
Sincerely,
Cyrus Vance. End quote.
2. You can make any or all of the following points orally to Silveira:
—I am deeply concerned that events and newspaper stories of the
past week2 not affect US-Brazilian relations;
—We would like to move ahead promptly to consult on the full
range of issues outstanding between us, including the nuclear. I recog-
nize that the differences on some issues are deep, but I am committed to
attempting to reduce them, where that may be possible, by frank
consultation;
—I believe we owe the GOB an early and authoritative presenta-
tion of the perspectives President Carter’s administration brings to the
nuclear issue. We would be prepared to send a representative to Bra-
silia for that purpose at Silveira’s convenience.
—While we have not worked out detailed nuclear policies—and
do not intend to consult on important issues through the press—I
would like the Foreign Minister to know that in his discussions with
Chancellor Schmidt, Vice President Mondale conveyed President
Carter’s interest in moving toward official discussions with both the
FRG and Brazil on nuclear exports and non-proliferation issues.3 (FYI:
during his meeting in Bonn with West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, requested
the FRG curb its sale of nuclear technology to Brazil. The Los Angeles Times also reported
the same week that Carter objected to a German agreement to construct a plant in Brazil
for reprocessing spent nuclear reactor fuel “because it would give Brazil plutonium,
which can be used only for making nuclear weapons.” (David Broder and Michale Getler,
“U.S.-Bonn Agree to Early Talks on Nuclear Curb,” Washington Post, January 26, 1977, p.
A1; “Mondale Wins German Promise on Nuclear Sales,” Los Angeles Times, January 25,
3 Mondale met with Schmidt on January 25 in Bonn. He reported on his meeting in
telegram Bonn 590 from Mondale to Brzezinski, September 25. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic,
position to the deal,” Schmidt “stood firm” and gave only his “assurance” that the FRG
“would observe existing international safeguards” against the proliferation of weapons-
making materials. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 131)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
We do not yet have an account of the Vice President’s discussions with
Schmidt.)
We wish to discuss with you a range of possibilities for meeting
Brazil’s legitimate energy needs, without incurring proliferation risks.
One possibility we would be prepared to consider is a guarantee,
within the context of FRG supply of nuclear reactors, of the nuclear fuel
needed for Brazil’s full economic development, if this would help defer
indefinitely the enrichment and reprocessing elements of the contract.
—This approach would not require abrogation of your contract
with the FRG, but would be based on joint agreement between the
parties concerned.
—This is not a concern focused on Brazil; it is a global issue. We
recognize that we both share a strong non-proliferation interest and we
support Brazil in its desire to expand and diversify its energy sources.
Our concern is rather with the global implications of any precedent-
setting transfer of sensitive nuclear technology. As you will recognize,
the approach we suggest would meet both your economic and our mu-
tual non-proliferation interests.
—As you know, this administration is approaching the prolifera-
tion question in all its aspects including the need for greater efforts on
the part of nuclear weapons states. This balanced view is the context in
which we are seeking indefinite deferral of the enrichment and repro-
cessing projects.
(If asked: We will pursue our concerns about the Pakistani repro-
cessing project with both France and Pakistan.4 The Administration
views all such transfers in the same light, and attaches the highest im-
portance to finding acceptable alternatives.)
—On the broader question of our relationships, we would wel-
come the GOB’s views on how and when we might move ahead on con-
sultations covering the full range of issues of mutual interest. I am in-
clined to believe that it might be useful to begin promptly with at least
some of the existing sub-groups, but I do hope to meet with you when
our respective calendars can be clarified.
—I would have no objection if the GOB wished to convey the
flavor of my written message above to the press. I would prefer that
any public references to the nuclear issue be confined to our will-
ingness to consult at an authoritative level in an effort to acquaint the
GOB with our perspectives and to seek better understanding of the Bra-
zilian position.
4 In April 1974, France agreed to supply a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in
Pakistan.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
3. If, in your judgment, there are better ways to proceed in the
present circumstances, please let me have your views immediately.
4. Unless I hear from you promptly, I will also convey the fore-
going to Ambassador Pinheiro as soon as an appointment can be
arranged.5
Vance
5 That afternoon, Crimmins met with Silveira and conveyed Vance’s talking points.
Policy File, P840086–0900)
399.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Brazil Nuclear Agreement
The Brazilian Foreign Minister made an extremely strong state-
ment2 about foreign interference with Brazil’s sovereign right to make
international agreements, like the one with the Federal Republic of Ger-
many on nuclear reprocessing facilities. The U.S. Embassy thinks Brazil
is very sensitive to your remarks on nuclear energy exports, but that the
“extreme aggressiveness” of the Foreign Minister’s statement is a tac-
tical effort to ensure that after U.S.-German discussions, the German-
Brazilian agreement will be as close to the original as possible. Since
President Geisel has made remarks stressing the “safeguard” provi-
sions of the agreement, there is reason to believe that the Brazilian Gov-
ernment is not wholly united on the issue, and that they may just be
trying to adapt to your position. In fact, recent and very private probes
by people in the State Department indicate some willingness by the
Brazilians to negotiate directly with us.3
the upper right-hand of the memorandum.
2 See Document 397.
3 Ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
400.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
U.S.-Brazilian Consultations
PARTICIPANTS
Brazil
Joao Baptista Pinheiro, Brazilian Ambassador
United States
The Secretary
Warren M. Christopher, Deputy Secretary
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary, ARA
Robert W. Zimmermann, ARA/ECA (Notetaker)
Following initial amenities, the Secretary said that yesterday Am-
bassador Crimmins delivered a message2 from him to the Brazilian For-
eign Minister and he wanted to take this early opportunity to cover the
ground with Ambassador Pinheiro.
It was his strong conviction, the Secretary said, that great emphasis
must be placed on strengthening bilateral relations between the United
States and Brazil. Deputy Secretary Christopher will do so as well and,
with Assistant Secretary Todman, we will be very well assisted in
dealing with issues that arise. The Secretary stated his firm belief that
the two nations must consult across the whole range of common
problems. He then told Pinheiro that he had suggested to Silveira that
we might start the consultative process with some of the subgroups al-
ready in being. He noted that Silveira had been told that the U.S. is pre-
pared to send a representative to Brazil to exchange perspectives on the
nuclear issue and that the Deputy Secretary would be following this
matter himself.
In his conversations with Schmidt in Bonn, the Secretary con-
tinued, Vice President Mondale had conveyed President Carter’s deep
concern with the problem of proliferation.3 In this connection the U.S.
will be prepared to discuss with Brazil the whole range of possibilities
for meeting Brazilian energy needs including a guarantee of fuel for
Drafted by Robert Zimmerman (ARA/ECA); cleared by Bray and Terence A. Todman,
(ARA); and approved by William Twaddell on February 4. The meeting took place in the
Secretary’s Office.
2 See Document 398.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Brazil’s nuclear plants so that there would be no need for reprocessing
and enrichment facilities. Finally, the Secretary emphasized that the
concern with nuclear proliferation was global and in no way directed
at Brazil. The control of proliferation is very important to future
peace and order and a matter of general concern to the United States
Government.
Ambassador Pinheiro said he wished to express his government’s
appreciation for this early initiative to resume the bilateral dialogue
and said that he was aware of the content of the Crimmins-Silveira con-
versation. He welcomed the Secretary’s statement of the importance
that the United States attaches to relations between the two countries.
Brazil, he said, totally reciprocates the importance accorded to relations
between the two countries; Brazil takes pride in being a faithful friend
and ally of the United States. There are differences on some issues but
this is not true in the case of proliferation. Brazil has demonstrated its
similar preoccupation with this problem by signing the guarantees
which cover its agreement with Germany—guarantees which go be-
yond the NPT in renouncing peaceful nuclear explosions. In addition,
Brazil has signed the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Brazil, he emphasized, is
equally concerned about proliferation but the problem must be ad-
dressed in relation to all aspects of the matter and must include those
countries which already have the pertinent technology. When Brazil
did not sign the NPT it was in protest against vertical proliferation.4 It is
to be hoped that those who have the technology will be equally circum-
scribed because the danger is the same.
Ambassador Pinheiro said he did not intend by these preliminary
remarks to get into the kinds of details that would arise in the fruitful
discussions he hoped would take place. Nevertheless, Brazil has certain
limitations on the actions it can take. Brazil cannot subordinate its
sources of essential energy to the control of even friendly countries
such as the United States because attitudes depend upon the political
winds. For example, he said, in spite of the belief that certain institu-
tions should consider projects on their merits, the United States condi-
tions loans on other issues such as human rights performance. Brazil
cannot be dependent on one source outside Brazil’s control. This be-
came evident with relation to the oil exporting countries. Brazil will be
only too happy however to explore all areas of mutual interest and con-
sultations will strengthen the mutual purpose of the two countries. He
pointed out that in view of its growing specific weight, Brazil is inter-
ested in a broad range of issues including North-South relations and
4 Vertical proliferation is an increase in the capabilities of the existing nuclear
powers while non-nuclear weapons states were prohibited from developing nuclear
capabilities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
disarmament. It is only by close consultation that peace and order can
be achieved.
The Secretary said he would look forward to mutual cooperation
to this end. Pinheiro said he would transmit to his government the
views expressed by the Secretary and he would only respectfully re-
quest the United States to try to look at the nuclear problem from
Brazil’s point of view as well. Brazil needs the energy but is equally in-
terested in the nonproliferation question.
Pinheiro then remarked that the press was already aware that he
was seeing the Secretary today. The Secretary said that he had in-
structed the Department’s press people to respond to questions by
saying he had asked the Ambassador to come in to talk about the broad
range of common interests between the two countries and how we
might approach these mutual interests in a constructive way. If the
press inquired whether nuclear matters were discussed the answer
would be affirmative—that it was one of the subjects raised.5
5 In a second meeting with Vance on February 2, Pinheiro said that Silveira wished
to emphasize that his government wanted to hold meetings with the United States to
discuss the nuclear issue and that Brazil and the Federal Republic of Germany remained
committed to nuclear non-proliferation. However, he stressed that the “Brazilian Gov-
ernment believes that an effort to prevent the transfer of technology would be unjust and
even impossible to achieve” and he called the agreement between the Federal Republic of
Germany and Brazil “a valid, legally binding instrument entered into by two states and
supplemented by an agreement on safeguards.” Vance thanked Pinheiro for passing on
Silveira’s message and said that a Delegation led by Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher would visit Brazil on February 10 to discuss the issue. While he “understood
that Brazil considers the agreement as legally binding,” Vance asked that it delay “imple-
mentation of the agreement until after” Christopher’s visit. Pinheiro replied that he
would “convey this point immediately.” (Memorandum of Conversation, February 2;
Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—
State instructed Walter Stoessel, the Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, to
inform Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher about Christopher’s trip and that the
United States considered the issue “of the highest importance to USG and we intend to
approach these discussions from standpoint of reaching overall solution, involving ac-
ceptable alternatives to transfer of enrichment and processing plants to Brazil.” (Tele-
gram 24890 to Bonn, February 3; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
401.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The German-Brazilian Deal: The New Approach in More Detail
While all the details have not yet been worked out (these would be
submitted to you at a later date), the following general strategy has been
approved by State, ACDA, and Gerry Smith for a new approach to the
German-Brazilian deal:
—Acceptance of full scope safeguards by both Brazil and Argen-
tina through implementation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
—Mutual deferral of reprocessing by both countries in the interest
of each nation’s security vis-a-vis the other.
—Assistance to both nations at the front end of the fuel cycle (since
enrichment is less of a proliferation risk than reprocessing), specifically:
• transfer of German enrichment technology to Brazil,
• heavy-water assistance (jointly by the US and Canada) to
Argentina.
Our hope for the success of this approach rests on the belief that:
(a) both Brazil and Argentina have a very strong interest in avoiding a
bilateral race toward acquiring a weapons capability; and, (b) neither
nation has fully thought through the implications of the path each is
now embarked on, in these terms. If both can be brought (with the help
of other affected regional powers such as Venezuela, Colombia and
Mexico) to see the advantage each gains in mutual deferral of the weapons
option, the plan may stand a reasonable chance of success.
One tactical consideration poses a major problem. During the last
round of negotiations, the Brazilians made abundantly clear that they
hand corner of the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
deeply resented the fact that we had first approached the Germans.2
They feel that if any deal is to be made it must be struck with them and not im-
posed upon them by the Northern powers. They feel that by going to the
Germans first, we relegate them to second class status.3 On the other hand,
we owe the Germans the consideration due a close ally—particularly
where major economic interests may be at stake.
I therefore recommend (with the concurrence of Smith and State),
that you simply make clear to Schmidt that we are still working on de-
vising some mutually acceptable solution to this problem, that we have
some new ideas, and that Smith will be coming to Bonn to discuss
them.
If you approve this strategy, your points to Schmidt would simply
be:
—We are deeply concerned about recent events in Argentina,
which point strongly to a regional race towards acquiring nuclear
weapons capability.4
—We (Germany and the US) share a heavy responsibility to do ev-
erything possible to avoid such a development.
—This is too important an issue for the US to ignore, but at the
same time, we are determined that it not sour our relations with the
FRG.
—We are developing some new ideas—which protect Germany’s
economic interests. When they are fully developed, Gerry Smith will be
coming to Bonn to discuss them with you.
2 The Carter administration scheduled a meeting between Christopher and a FRG
Delegation headed by Ambassador Peter Hermes to discuss the nuclear issue on Feb-
ruary 10 and 11. Christopher arranged to “personally brief” Ambassador Pinheiro about
the meeting. (Memorandum from Tuchman to Brzezinski and Aaron, February 10; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box
ministration believed that “it is urgent that we halt the transfer of sensitive technologies
leading to acquisition of weapons usable material.” Hermes replied that “proliferation is
best met by development of adequate safeguards, not by refusal to supply sensitive tech-
nologies, control of which in any event is uncertain given relatively wide knowledge of
basic elements of sensitive technologies in question (particularly reprocessing).” The
Federal Republic of Germany, Hermes stressed, was “obligated by its agreement with
Brazil” to supply such materials. (Telegram 32301 to Bonn and Paris, February 12; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German
on February 11. (Memorandum from Vance to Carter, February 11; ibid.)
3 The CIA reported that “Brazil sees US efforts to halt the spread of nuclear
weapons technology as a deliberate attempt to impede the country’s economic and tech-
nological development” while its military leaders “firmly believe that a sine qua non of
great power status is the ability to explode a nuclear device.” Predicting a coming decline
in U.S. influence in Brazil, the CIA suggested that Brazil was now “willing to take eco-
nomic risks in its relations with the US on the nuclear issue.” (Intelligence Memorandum
4 Carter drew a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Decision:
General strategy:5
Tactics with Schmidt:6
5 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
402.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Mexico1
32669. Subject: US Position on Protocol I2 of Treaty of Tlatelolco.
1. Department is aware that General Conference of Organization
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL),
at its April 1975 session, adopted resolution calling on US, France and
USSR to adhere to protocols to Treaty of Tlatelolco (Protocol I in case of
US and France, II in case of USSR) and declaring that if such adherence
is not achieved by February 14, 1977, OPANAL would “submit the situ-
ation created” to the UN Security Council. Presumably, one of the
reasons for upcoming extraordinary session of General Conference,
scheduled on February 14 deadline (which is tenth anniversary of
opening for signature of Treaty of Tlatelolco), is to draw attention to
Confidential; Immediate. Sent Immediate for information to USUN and the Mission in
Geneva. Sent for information to all American Republic diplomatic posts. Drafted by
Robert Einhorn (ACDA/NTB); cleared by Oplinger, Tuchman, Michael Congdon
(ACDA/IR), John King (ARA/RPP), George Falk (ARA/MEX), Giles Harlow (DOD),
David Macuk (IO/UNP) and Edward McGaffigan (T); and approved by Charles Van
Doren (ACDA/NTB).
2 Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco bound overseas nations with territories in
Latin America—the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands—to
the terms of the treaty, which prohibited the manufacture, testing, storage, and use of nu-
clear weapons in Latin America.
ment of State that Mexican President Jose Lopez Portillo might raise the subject of
non-proliferation during his forthcoming meeting with President Carter. (National Ar-
4 February 12.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
non-compliance of nuclear powers with above resolution and to con-
sider further action on issue, perhaps decision to bring matter to Secu-
rity Council.
2. As Embassy knows, we have taken the position toward Protocol
I that neither the Virgin Islands nor Puerto Rico could be included in
the nuclear-free zone because the Virgin Islands were part of US Terri-
tory and Puerto Rico has a special relationship with the US. However,
we have held that Guantanamo could be included if Cuba joined the
Treaty and that the Treaty would apply to the Canal Zone when juris-
diction over the Zone returned to Panama under the Treaty currently
being negotiated.
3. The new administration is presently conducting a thorough, in-
teragency examination of US non-proliferation policy, and we would
expect, in this connection, to review US attitude toward Protocol I,
which has not been reviewed since the mid-1960s. Therefore, while no
decision has been taken to alter our Protocol I position as described
above, we would hope that it would be possible, in connection with the
upcoming General Conference, to avoid taking a posture that could
convey to OPANAL members the impression that we were overly rigid
and unresponsive to their appeals that we reconsider the matter. Such
an impression could encourage the members to proceed with any plans
they may have to bring the protocols adherence issue to the UN Secu-
rity Council. We strongly want to avoid such an action, not only be-
cause it might appear to raise questions about our commitment to non-
proliferation, but because it could bring the sensitive issues of the
Canal Zone negotiations and US-Cuban relations to a highly visible
and politicized forum.
4. Embassy is therefore requested to convey the following points to
OPANAL officials in manner deemed most appropriate (we would not
object to circulation by OPANAL of any written communication to
OPANAL members):
A. The US Government wishes to express its continuing support
for the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as evidenced by its adherence to additional
Protocol II of the Treaty,5 and its hope for the widest possible adher-
ence to the Treaty and its additional protocols, by Latin American
states and states located outside the region.
B. With respect to the appeal contained in Resolution 74 (IV),
adopted April 17, 1975 by the General Conference of OPANAL, the US
Government wishes to state that it is presently conducting a thorough
5 Protocol II calls upon nuclear-weapon states to agree to respect the obligations set
forth in the Treaty and to promise not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
Contracting Parties to the Treaty. See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XI, Arms Control

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
examination of its nuclear non-proliferation policy, which will include
a review of the question of US adherence to additional Protocol I of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco.
C. The US Government intends to maintain close contact with
OPANAL on this question.
5. Embassy should not speculate on the outcome or timing of US
review. It is likely that question of possible US adherence to Protocol I
will be handled in more extended time frame than general non-
proliferation review.
6. Embassy is requested to report as soon as possible on any devel-
opments regarding possible move to bring Protocol I question to Secu-
rity Council.6
Vance
6 Ambassador Thompson reported that his presentation to OPANAL, including the
administration’s decision to review the question of Protocol I, “was well-received and the
most noteworthy event of the session.” (Telegram 1826 from Mexico City, February 15;
403.
Editorial Note
On February 16, 1977, President Jimmy Carter told Department of
Agriculture employees that he was “moving aggressively” to “elimi-
nate the possibility of additional nations being able to build atomic
weapons,” and specifically cited his attempts “to induce the Germans
not to sell nuclear processing capability to the Brazilians.” (“President
Carter Discusses Foreign Affairs Priorities,” Department of State Bul-
Carter’s remarks to the Embassy in Brazil on February 18 in telegram
37480. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770057–0845) The Brazilian government, however, continued to resist
Carter’s entreaties. Nogueira Batista, the President of NUCLEBRAS,
Brazil’s state-supported nuclear energy company, said that Carter had
caused “serious problems” between the United States and Brazil by
trying to “pressure” Brazil and West Germany to either suspend or ab-
rogate their nuclear deal. Batista also said that the “Americans acted
like amateurs in foreign policy.” (Telegram 1352 from Brasilia, Feb-
ruary 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770058–0849) Foreign Minister Silveira said that Brazil “had nothing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to fear from President Carter’s statement,” reiterated Brazil’s and the
Federal Republic of Germany’s determination to go forward with the
deal, and gave Batista “a vote of confidence.” Pressure from Wash-
ington, he said, “will get nowhere.” (Telegram 1414 from Brasilia, Feb-
ruary 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
404.
Telegram From the Embassy in Brazil to the Department of
State1
1616. Subject: Discussions on Nuclear Cooperation.
1. In full day of discussions with Foreign Minister Silveira and
GOB officials, Deputy Secretary Christopher:
—Impressed upon Brazilians, in context of President Carter’s let-
ter to Geisel,2 strength of US opposition to spread of nuclear explo-
sive capabilities and directly-related enrichment and reprocessing
technologies.
—Presented for joint discussion and consideration alternatives to
national enrichment and reprocessing designed to meet energy needs
while reducing proliferation dangers.
—Stressed that US seeks neither commercial advantage nor
abrogation of FRG-Brazil deal by either party, but made clear that
sensitive transfers should be deferred pending full examination of
alternatives.
2. In response, Silveira emphatically and repeatedly refused to sus-
pend in any way, either privately or publicly, any element of agree-
ment with FRG. Most he would accept—after being pressed hard by
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. In a March 6 memorandum to Mondale, Christopher said
that Silveira “took a hard stand” during their meeting and “reacted with disinterest” to
Christopher’s attempts to explore “bilateral and multilateral alternatives to Brazil’s plan
to acquire national enrichment and reprocessing facilities.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Papers of Warren Christopher, Withdrawn Items, Box 5, Chronological Files, Memo-
randa to the Secretary, 1977) In his memoirs, Brzezinski recalled that Silveira received
Christopher “very coldly,” and “his public reception was even worse. Popular
anti-American sentiment was running high, and the trip only served to strengthen Presi-
dent Ernest Geisel’s position on this issue.” The Christopher Mission, Brzezinski wrote,
“did not succeed, and it weakened American credibility.” (Brzezinski, Power and Prin-
ciple, p. 131)
2 Not found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Deputy Secretary—was to continue conversations on this matter and to
consider alternatives proposed by US. He said that his mandate, from
Geisel did not give him any further latitude.
3. Silveira reiterated GOB support of nuclear power to meet energy
needs, opposition to nuclear weapons (but not specifying explosives)
proliferation reliance on international safeguards as fundamental
policy tenet, unwillingness to accept discrimination in technology
access, and determination to reduce dependency on outside energy
sources. Beyond this, new elements of GOB position were:
—An intimation of willingness to forego PNE’s, even beyond
scope of trilateral agreement with FRG and IAEA;
—Acknowledgment that GOB considers itself bound to take no ac-
tion inconsistent with the provisions of Treaty of Tlatelolco as long as
other signatories do not violate them; and
—Readiness to consider further unspecified international non-
proliferation undertakings, particularly as regards safeguards, as long
as there is no abrogation of existing agreements.
4. US side welcomed GOB statements supporting limited non-
proliferation objective, but emphasized concern with spread of nuclear
weapons, usable material and sensitive technology, and view that safe-
guards were necessary but not sufficient to prevent nuclear spread.
5. In elaboration of possible alternatives to national enrichment
and reprocessing, US side discussed bilateral, multilateral and interna-
tional arrangements for assuring supplies of reactor fuel and described
possibilities for international evaluation of fuel cycle, including reactor
technologies, spent fuel storage, and reprocessing and its alternatives.
To provide for GOB participation in latter, US side outlined interna-
tional mechanism based on bilateral consultations among interested
countries with current and planned major nuclear energy programs—
with multilateral meetings as appropriate. In his only “observation”,
Silveira welcomed our clarification that bilaterals would not be exclu-
sively with the US.) US side also reported willingness of France to back
up fuel supply to Brazil and French agreement not to place FRG or
Brazil at commercial disadvantage. US outlined possibilities for non-
nuclear energy cooperation, which Silveira expressed strong interest in
pursuing.
6. At conclusion of talks, Deputy Secretary made clear—and Sil-
veira appeared to register—that GOB now faces key choice for energy
security: it can consider multilateral alternatives to meet its energy
needs, or it can accept risks to its nuclear program by proceeding on its
present course. Deputy Secretary summed up message he wanted Sil-
veira to take away with him as follows: (A) President Carter is deeply
committed to halting nuclear spread; (B) We have suggested alterna-
tives to Brazil, which we will summarize in writing after return; (C) We

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
expect GOB to seriously consider these proposals, which we believe
will benefit Brazil and the international community, and will forestall
proliferation; (D) We ask Brazil to take no irretrievable steps preju-
dicing availability of alternatives; and (E) US will continue consulta-
tions regarding proposals with other interested States, understands
that GOB will be back in touch as it considers these proposals, and is
prepared to meet again with GOB any time and any place.
7. Brazilians proved highly suspicious of and resistant to US sug-
gestion that joint press statement be issued, arguing that any statement
would imply GOB readiness to suspend FRG agreement. When faced
with prospect of independent US statement, however, GOB side finally
agreed to issue following jointly agreed text: Quote the two parties ex-
changed views on nuclear matters and energy needs. Each side will
consider the positions expressed by the other. There will be further
talks on these matters. End quote.
8. Comment: For the most part, Silveira projected some of this reac-
tion we judge to be posturing, which at times bordered on the offen-
sive. He pointedly indicated that he was prepared to do no more than
to listen to what US had to say, just as Brazil would listen to “any other”
friendly country. As we engaged Brazilians on issues raised by FRG
agreement, others on the GOB side clearly insisted that Silveira voice
even more forceful opposition to reopening the agreement in any way.
At several points, Silveira sought to leave impression that GOB was
prepared to accept attenuation of bilateral relationship if that were
price of going ahead with nuclear accord. In the end, however, Silveira
very grudgingly agreed to consider US suggested alternatives—a word
he refused to accept, preferring “proposals”—and to hold further talks.
Crimmins
405.
Editorial Note
On March 7, 1977, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher
urged President Jimmy Carter to take advantage of West German
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt’s recent “flexibility,” displayed in a Feb-
ruary 23 letter to Carter, in order to “forestall sensitive transfers to
Brazil” without damaging the U.S.-West German relationship. (Memo-
randum From Christopher to Carter, March 7; National Archives, RG
59, Papers of Warren Christopher, Withdrawn Items, Box 5, Chronolog-
ical Files, Memoranda to the Secretary, 1977)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
On March 8, Carter wrote Schmidt that he remained “profoundly
concerned with the spread of sensitive enrichment and reprocessing fa-
cilities which are capable of producing materials which can be rapidly
used in nuclear weapons.” In particular, Carter worried that despite
safeguards, such materials could either be diverted to weapons pro-
duction or agreements could be abrogated by “governments tempted
by ready access” to nuclear materials. Transfers of nuclear material, the
President argued, would “establish a very adverse global precedent at
the very time when we should be moving to lessen the risk of nuclear
explosions.” Carter instead urged Schmidt to defer “the enrichment
and reprocessing elements of your nuclear agreement with Brazil
pending joint examination of the alternatives,” and noted that Christo-
pher would travel to West Germany at the end of the week to discuss
non-proliferation. Carter, however, stressed that he sought neither “the
abrogation of your agreement nor commercial disadvantage for Ger-
many or Brazil.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Brazilian President Ernesto Geisel, meanwhile, announced what
Ambassador John Crimmins called Brazil’s “steadfast views on nuclear
policy.” In particular, Geisel reiterated his government’s determination
to develop a peaceful yet independent nuclear program. Crimmins
warned that Geisel’s statement indicated that the “FRG–GOB agree-
ment is all or nothing, and a lack of equitable international nuclear
cooperation could frustrate arms nonproliferation objectives by stimu-
lating the development of unsafeguarded nuclear technology.” (Tele-
Foreign Policy File, D770083–0431)
Carter raised the proliferation issue in a meeting with West Ger-
man Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher on March 14, in which
he repeated his call for “multilateral solutions” to the problem of nu-
clear non-proliferation and pledged that the United States was “pre-
pared to do more than we have in the past.” Genscher replied that the
Federal Republic of Germany had historically been committed to non-
proliferation, and said that it would fulfill its agreement with Brazil. He
also argued that “the more certain Brazil is” that Bonn would fulfill its
nuclear agreement, “the greater will be Brazil’s willingness to abide by
multilateral restraints.” The Federal Republic of Germany, he stressed,
could be “more flexible if it is not perceived to be under United States
pressure.” Carter promised that he would make “special efforts to indi-
cate that we trust Brazil and regard non-proliferation as a world-wide
problem. We do not distrust any nation, but we do not want to add an-
other country to the list of those that can explode bombs.” (Memo-
randum of Conversation, March 14; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
406.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, and the Director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke)1
Washington, April 7, 1977
SUBJECT
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
Attached is a decision memorandum on whether the United States
should adhere to Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco on creating a Nu-
clear Free Zone in Latin America.
Please state your Department’s preferences on the options pre-
sented by COB Monday, Apr 11, 1977, so that the President will have
time to consider whether or not he would like to include an announce-
ment on adherence in his Pan American Day speech on April 14.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Attachment
Decision Memorandum2
Washington, April 6, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Adherence to Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
The Issue
Whether we should adhere to Protocol I to the Treaty for the Prohi-
bition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
which would obligate us to prohibit and prevent the testing, use, man-
ufacture, storage, installation, deployment, or possession of nuclear
weapons in territories located in Latin America for which we are inter-
nationally responsible—principally Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,
Guantanamo Naval Base, and the Canal Zone.
2 Secret.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Background
The U.S. supported the negotiation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
which was concluded in 1967, and in 1971 adhered to its Protocol II,
under which nuclear weapon states undertake to respect the nuclear-
free zone and to refrain from using nuclear weapons against its parties.
(The UK, France, and China have also joined Protocol II, while the
USSR has not.) However, citing primarily the integral relationship to
the U.S. of Puerto Rico as well as its importance to hemispheric defense,
we have stated that we were not prepared to adhere to Protocol I. (Of
the three other states eligible to adhere, the UK and the Netherlands
have joined, while France has not.)
U.S. adherence to Protocol I would eliminate one of the few re-
maining requirements specified in the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the full
entry into force of the nuclear-free zone regime, which would involve
commitments by all Latin American states to forswear acquisition of
nuclear weapons and to accept IAEA safeguards on all their nuclear fa-
cilities. (The remaining requirements would be Soviet adherence to
Protocol II, French adherence to Protocol I, and Cuban and Argentine
ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Brazil has already ratified, but
unlike most other Latin American states that have done so, has exer-
cised its right under the Treaty not to be bound until all the specified
conditions are met.)
When the question of U.S. adherence to Protocol I was last re-
viewed internally, a Strategic Air Command squadron equipped with
nuclear weapons was deployed at Ramsey Air Force Base in Puerto
Rico and nuclear anti-submarine warfare devices were stored at Roose-
velt Roads Naval Station in Puerto Rico. At present, however, we do
not deploy or store nuclear weapons in any Protocol I territory. More-
over, while we continue to have operational requirements for nuclear-
armed naval vessels to call at ports in the zone and to pass through the
Panama Canal as well as to patrol and conduct training exercises in the
Caribbean area, U.S. adherence would not abridge transit rights or
freedom of navigation on the high seas, and therefore those require-
ments would not be affected.
U.S. adherence would, however, rule out existing contingency
plans, which could be activated at a time of advanced readiness, for
transferring nuclear depth charges to Roosevelt Roads for use by the
squadron of P–3 ASW aircraft stationed there. Alternatives would be
available for performing the ASW mission envisaged in those plans
[2 lines not declassified] although these alternatives could involve some
loss of [3 lines not declassified]
A potentially controversial legal matter involves a provision of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco specifying that, upon fulfillment of all require-
ments for full entry into force, the Treaty’s zone of application would

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
expand to a large area extending at some points up to 1500 miles from
the Latin American coast. While the authors of the Treaty presumably
intended this provision to have some constraining effect, our legal
analysis indicates that the activation of this “extended zone of applica-
tion” would not have any practical effect on U.S. obligations under Pro-
tocol I and II, and would therefore not in any way restrict U.S. freedom
of navigation on the high seas surrounding Latin America. However, to
insure against future controversy, we would want to place our inter-
pretation of this provision on record at the time we signed the Protocol
and deposited our instrument of ratification (presumably after con-
sulting with key treaty parties and determining that they would not ob-
ject to our interpretation).
Advantages of U.S. Adherence
—Would have a favorable effect on U.S. relations with Latin
America, particularly with Mexico, the principal sponsor of the Treaty,
and Panama.
—Would generate pressures for Soviet adherence to Protocol II,
which would obligate the Soviets not to store or deploy nuclear
weapons in any Latin American territory.
—Would enhance prospects for adherence to the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco by Brazil, Argentina and Cuba although the latter two would still
have the legal power to block the Treaty’s full entry into force if they
considered it in their interest to do so. (In the absence of such adher-
ence, there is a serious risk that Argentina and Brazil will follow the In-
dian route to a nuclear explosive capability.)
—Would not affect any current U.S. operational requirements or
deployments.
Disadvantages of U.S. Adherence
—Would rule out existing contingency plans for storing nuclear
ASW devices in Puerto Rico, although alternative (perhaps less op-
timal) means for implementing those plans would be available.
—Would limit U.S. flexibility to deal with possible future threats in
the Caribbean and South America by deploying or storing nuclear
weapons in our Protocol I territories.
—If we adhered without requiring adherence by other holdouts
(e.g., Cuba, USSR), could be perceived as giving up military options in
the Caribbean area without requiring reciprocal restraints and as re-
ducing the leverage we might otherwise have for inducing those
holdouts to take corresponding actions.
Options
(1) Continue existing policy.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
(2) Adhere to Protocol I without conditions. If this option were chosen,
it could be announced in the April 14 Pan American Day speech, al-
though it would be important to contact the Puerto Rican government
before any announcement in order to confirm that they would not have
objections.
(3) Adhere to Protocol I when Cuba joins the Treaty and the USSR joins
Protocol II. If this option were chosen, it is assumed that, in view of the
sensitivity of current discussions with Cuba, we would proceed
through diplomatic channels rather than through an announcement in
the April 14 speech, which might be resented by the Cubans as placing
public pressure on them. While this option would reduce possible criti-
cism on the grounds that we had not required reciprocal restraints by
others, it could entangle Protocol I in other U.S.-Cuban and U.S.-Soviet
matters, and thereby delay U.S. adherence and any benefits resulting
therefrom.
(4) Adhere to Protocol I when all other requirements for full entry into
force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco are fulfilled. Since the focus on Cuba would
be diluted, this could be announced on April 14 or pressed through
diplomatic channels. Although this option would ensure full reci-
procity, it could delay U.S. adherence indefinitely and might be criti-
cized by Latin Americans as imposing unreasonable conditions on U.S.
adherence.
407.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 11, 1977
Subject
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
ACDA believes that the military costs of US adherence to Protocol
I—primarily the constraint on contingency plans for storing nuclear
anti-submarine warfare devices in Puerto Rico—are modest compared
to the benefits of improving our relations with Latin America and
Vance and Brown.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
strengthening international support for our global non-proliferation
efforts. In addition, such adherence could increase the likelihood of a
Soviet pledge not to deploy or store nuclear weapons anywhere in
Latin America and a commitment by Argentina, Brazil and Cuba not to
acquire nuclear weapons or permit them to be deployed on their
territories.
We favor option two of the options listed in the decision memo-
randum.2 Announcement of our decision to adhere in a major Presiden-
tial address on April 14 would maximize the favorable impact of that
decision on US relations with Latin America. Equally important, in our
view, such an announcement would be a valuable means of strength-
ening international support for the Administration’s non-proliferation
policies. Nonaligned recipients of nuclear technology, whether or not
located in Latin America, would welcome US adherence to Protocol I as
demonstrating our willingness to bear our fair share of responsibility
for curbing proliferation and as balancing an approach to non-
proliferation that has been criticized by some as requiring recipients to
make the greatest sacrifices, especially in terms of foregoing access to
nuclear technologies.
We also regard option two as a more promising means of
achieving corresponding restraints by the USSR, Cuba and Argentina
than if we made US adherence conditional on acceptance of restraints
by those states. Making our adherence conditional on actions by others
would, in effect, place us in a bilateral negotiation with each of them,
with the risk that the Tlatelolco issue would get entangled with unre-
lated matters of bilateral concern and the strong likelihood that, forced
to view the situation essentially as a bargain with the US, the other
states would be reluctant to accept a bargain that clearly requires
greater concessions by them than by the US. The result might well be
continued impasse.
On the other hand, US adherence without conditions can be ex-
pected to stimulate Latin American proponents of the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco, who would be encouraged by enhanced prospects for early com-
pletion of the Treaty regime, to apply pressure on the remaining
holdouts to accept their respective obligations. While there is of course
no guarantee that such pressure will succeed, we feel that it will be
more effective than the modest, and perhaps counterproductive, lev-
erage we could bring to bear on the holdouts directly.
If the President decides to announce a new Protocol I position on
April 14, we believe it would be important to brief key Congressmen in
advance and to consult with the Governor of Puerto Rico. In addition,
2 See attachment to Document 406.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
in implementing such a decision, it would be necessary to develop a
statement of understandings to accompany our signature and ratifica-
tion of Protocol I that would place on record our interpretation that the
Tlatelolco regime does not affect transit rights or freedom of navigation
on the high seas.
Paul C. Warnke
408.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
The Department of State prefers option 2 of the four options set
forth in the decision memorandum attached to your memorandum of
April 7 on the above subject.2 State believes that careful attention
should be given to the political effects on our relations with Puerto Rico
of an immediate signing of the Protocol. The people of Puerto Rico have
a strong interest in the nuclear status of their territory. We, therefore,
concur in the importance of ascertaining in advance of any announce-
ment that Puerto Rico would not object to our adherence.
The Department of State also believes that our adherence (both sig-
nature and ratification) should be made subject to understandings
which restate the U.S. position that:
(1) rights of transit and transport, and of innocent passage,
through parties’ territories are not affected; and
(2) all explosive nuclear applications are prohibited by the Treaty
and Protocol.
In announcing our intent to sign Protocol I, we should underscore
our interest in adherence by all states of the region, and in ratification of
the Protocols by all eligible countries. We could also add that expedi-
tious ratification by the U.S. would be aided by progress toward full
Secret.
2 See attachment to Document 406.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
entry into force of the Treaty. Such a statement should stop short of
making U.S. ratification explicitly conditional on other ratifications.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
409.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco (U)
(S) The Department of Defense has reviewed the draft decision
memorandum2 on U.S. Adherence to Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco and prefers Option One with further study to determine the legal
and operational implications, particularly for U.S. transit rights in the
geographic area of the Treaty.
(S) The DOD does not support the premise that U.S. adherence to
Protocol I would not affect the right of U.S. warships and aircraft to
conduct transits, port visits, training exercises, and patrols within the
Caribbean area. Freedom of navigation which is fundamental to our
national security could be jeopardized by adherence to this protocol.
The precedent of accepting limitations on U.S. sovereignty over U.S.
territory, plus constraints on operational use, deployments, and contin-
gency options in the Caribbean is inadvisable at this time.
(S) To encourage Soviet adherence to Protocol II, the Secretary
General of the Latin America Nuclear Weapons Free Zone organization
(OPANAL) recently made a new proposal. The new OPANAL formu-
Latin America MWFZ, April 1977. Secret.
2 See the attachment to Document 406.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
lation3 would interpret the treaty as “prohibiting” transit of nuclear
weapons through the treaty territory. This interpretation, if accepted,
would prohibit transit of U.S. nuclear weapons in the treaty area under
Protocol II (Tab D).4
(U) When other requirements for full entry into force of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco are fulfilled, the U.S. should re-examine its policy re-
garding U.S. adherence. Presently there appears to be no compelling
reason to accept constraints on U.S. freedom in the Caribbean.
(U) The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurs in this matter.
Harold Brown
OPANAL efforts to encourage Soviet adherence to Protocol II, we are concerned by for-
mula reportedly proposed to Soviets by OPANAL Secretary General Gros Espiell as pos-
sible basis for such adherence (i.e., interpretative statement that Article I of Treaty of Tla-
telolco prohibits transit of nuclear weapons through the territory encompassed by the
Treaty). Proposed interpretation,” the Department of State contended, “would be incon-
sistent with position on transit issue taken by states which participated in negotiation of
Treaty of Tlatelolco as well as by us.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770124–1121)
4 Tab D is not attached.
410.
Editorial Note
On April 7, 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced that after “an
extremely thorough review of all the issues that bear on the use of nu-
clear power,” including his concern that nuclear materials ostensibly
designated for peaceful purposes could be diverted into weapons, he
had concluded that the United States must work with other nations to
explore “a wide range of international approaches and frameworks
that will permit all nations to achieve their energy objectives while re-
ducing the spread of nuclear explosive capability.” (Public Papers:
A week later, Carter addressed the Permanent Council of the Or-
ganization of American States and promised to sign Protocol I of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco. However, he said that “banning the spread of nu-
clear explosives does not require giving up the benefits of peaceful
technology.” The United States, he assured his audience, would “work
closely with all of you on new technologies to use the atom for peaceful
State forwarded Carter’s remarks to all American Republic diplomatic

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Foreign Policy File, D770132–0029)
Alfonso Garcı´a Robles, the Mexican diplomat who was “one of the
principal architects” of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, “expressed great plea-
sure at” the announcement. (Telegram 2849 from the Mission in Ge-
neva, April 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770135–0628) OPANAL Secretary General Hector Gros Espiell
echoed those sentiments on April 20. (Telegram 3979 from Caracas,
April 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The Department of State also instructed the Ambassador to Brazil,
John Crimmins, to tell the Brazilian government that Carter’s decision
to sign Protocol I would hopefully lead to “full participation in the
treaty by other states, including (although not singling out) Brazil.”
Nevertheless, the Carter administration wanted to reassure Brazil that
it did not “wish to reinforce any GOB suspicions that we are adhering
to Protocol I specifically as a lever on Brazil.” The United States was
“not only ‘preaching’ to others about nuclear risks,” but would “place
some restraints on our own actions in furtherance of nonproliferation
Central Foreign Policy File, P840086–0918)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
411.
Telegram From the Embassy in Venezuela to the Department
of State1
3975. Subject: Latin American Non-Proliferation Consultations.
1. Amembassy utilized occasion of OPANAL meeting in Caracas
to discuss OPANAL matters and other non-proliferation related ques-
tions with several delegations and with OPANAL and Venezuelan offi-
cials. In an initial conversation between OPANAL Secretary General
Gros Espiell, Ambassador took the occasion to reiterate to Gros USG
concern over the position he had taken with the Soviets on transit (see
Mexico 5368).2 Ambassador emphasized the fact that the position Gros
had taken with the Soviets (that Article I of the treaty prohibited transit
of nuclear weapons and therefore the Soviets could become party to
Protocol II) was wholly inconsistent with the understanding that had
permitted the U.S. to become part of the Protocol II and now to take the
step of becoming party to Protocol I. Gros stated he did not wish to take
any action which would undercut the position of the U.S. or complicate
prospects for ratification of Protocol I. Accordingly, Gros said he in-
tended to drop the entire matter.
2. We also took the occasion to ask Gros his assessment of the pros-
pects for the other steps being taken to bring the treaty into effect. Gros
stated that the action by the U.S. greatly improves chances for the addi-
tional steps to be taken, though he cautioned that each of them could
take some time. We asked in particular about Argentina. Gros said he
had received some tentative indications that the Argentines might
prefer the Treaty of Tlatelolco to either the NPT or the British full scope
Confidential. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Moscow, Paris,
and the Mission to the International Atomic Energy Agency. The U.S. Representative to
OPANAL, Viron Vaky, reiterated Carter’s decision to sign Protocol I to OPANAL on
April 20. His statement is in telegram 93329 to all American Republic diplomatic posts,
Vaky’s statement, the Brazilian representative “pledged to do nothing which would frus-
trate the objectives of the treaty and reiterated Brazil’s support for the cause of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin America.” OPANAL subsequently
adopted a resolution “urging” Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Cuba to “become parties to
the treaty and to waive the preconditions to bring the treaty into effect.” (Telegram 93330
to all American Republic diplomatic posts, April 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770144–1027)
lighted and encouraged” by Carter’s announcement that he would sign Protocol I. (Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
safeguards model as a means of becoming a full field cycle safeguard
state, but they had not pursued the question with him recently.3
3. During a cocktail reception after the opening session given by
the Foreign Minister, Ambassador had the opportunity to have a short
private discussion with the Foreign Minister. During these discussions
U.S. Representatives emphasized their appreciation for the Foreign
Minister’s kind remarks concerning President Carter’s decision to sign
Protocol I and stressed the importance the U.S. attached to having
countries, such as Venezuela, continuing to speak out in favor of non-
proliferation. Otherwise, there was a risk that non-proliferation would
be viewed as a matter of sole interest to the super powers. The Foreign
Minister assured U.S. Reps that was not the case and that Venezuela
would continue to support U.S. non-proliferation initiatives. We also
pointed out that it would now be easier for the U.S. to take other quiet
steps to assist the actions of Mexico, Venezuela and others to bring the
treaty into force. U.S. Reps pointed out that it would have been difficult
for the U.S. to raise this matter with other countries, such as the Soviets,
so long as we ourselves had not decided to ratify both protocols. U.S.
Reps suggested in turn that Argentina and others in Latin America
were not good candidates for American persuasion and that it would
be more useful if the Latin American countries themselves kept up the
momentum. The Foreign Minister agreed and said he would raise the
question with the Argentines when they are in Caracas for a state visit
on May 11–16. He stated “we do have some influence on the Argen-
tines”. Finally, U.S. Reps pointed out that more ambitious efforts
would be needed in the future to deal with the potential problems of re-
conciling peaceful uses of the atom with the dangers of proliferation
and that the U.S. would be spending substantial sums to investigate al-
ternative, inherently safer nuclear technologies. Moreover, it may be
necessary to create new international institutions or enhance the role of
existing international institutions to reduce the dangers inherent in nu-
clear power. The Foreign Minister agreed and stated that it might be
possible for OPANAL to play such a role, either in carrying out such
tasks or in planning and coordinating work which might be carried out
by the nations themselves, or by new regional institutions. He thought
these matters required further consideration and study, and stated that
President Perez will probably wish to discuss these questions directly
with President Carter when he makes his state visit.4
3 The Embassy in Argentina reported that the Argentine Government considered
the ratification of the Treaty “a difficult matter which was presently being studied.”
Policy File, D770138–0202)
4 Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Pe´rez was scheduled to make a state visit to
Washington in late June.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
4. In a conversation on April 20, the head of the Mexican Delega-
tion, Gonzalez Galves of the Mexican Foreign Ministry reiterated
strongly the point made in Mexico City 55055 that the government of
Mexico was particularly pleased with the step taken by Pres. Carter.
Gonzalez Galves stressed that the American action will make it much
easier to put real pressure on the Soviet in particular, and also on the
Argentines to ratify Protocol II and the basic treaty respectively. He
thought Cuba might be a somewhat more difficult case in the near term
though he was optimistic about the eventual outcome. As for the
French, he thought they would be last, but that it was just a matter of
time before they too became party to Protocol I.
5. Comment: OPANAL officials and others with whom U.S. Reps
spoke had ample reasons of their own to wish to stress publicly their
pleasure at the step taken by the U.S. since our action tends to increase
the pressure on the Soviets to become party to Protocol II. However,
these officials were, if anything, more effusive in their praise of the
President’s position in private conversation. The Mexican pleasure de-
rives primarily from the leading role they have always played in this
treaty. The Venezuelans, however, are genuinely worried about prolif-
eration, particularly in Brazil, and enthusiastically support U.S. non-
proliferation policies. At the same time, Venezuelans should be ex-
pected to occasionally engage in third world rhetoric about “discrimi-
natory supplier policies.” Nevertheless, in the final analysis, if at some
juncture multi-national solutions become important to a resolution of
non-proliferation problems in Brazil or Argentina, we can count on
Venezuela taking an active, positive and leading role to assist us.
6. Finally, at the request of the Foreign Ministry, U.S. Rep Wil-
liamson met with an official of the Foreign Ministry’s international
policy division and went over same points made earlier (see para 3) to
Foreign Minister. Venezuelans said they were interested in studying
these matters in relation to President Perez’ upcoming State visit to
Washington.
Vaky
5 Telegram 5505 does not refer to Carter’s decision. Reference is likely to telegram
5431 from Mexico City, April 16, which contained the text of Mexican President Jose´
Lo´pez Portillo’s congratulations to Carter for his decision to sign Protocol I. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
412.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the Federal Republic of Germany and Brazil1
92297. For Ambs from the Deputy Secretary; London for Nye. Sub-
ject: FRG/GOB Nuclear Agreement—Next Steps.
1. We are considering how best to take advantage of the meeting
between President Carter and Chancellor Schmidt at the London
summit2 to meet our concerns over aspects of the FRG-Brazil nuclear
agreement.
2. The purpose of this cable is to give you our tentative thinking on
the elements of a comprehensive settlement and to seek your views on
the package as well as possible tactics by which to secure its acceptance.
3. It may be possible to proceed as follows.
—Just prior to the President’s meeting with Schmidt, Ambassador
Crimmins would deliver a letter from the President for Geisel. The
letter would contain appropriate preambular language referring to our
mutual energy problems and prospects, the departure from previous
US policy represented by our SALT proposals, comprehensive test ban
policy, adherence to Protocol I of Tlatelolco, and deferral of domestic
reprocessing. The letter would then propose the elements contained in
paragraph four below, suitably phrased.
—The letter would be an attempt to wrench this subject out of dip-
lomatic channels and raise it to the level of high statecraft. It might, or
might not, make a specific proposal with respect to further discussions.
The letter could be delivered through Silveria, possibly with backup
duplicate through SRF/SNI channels.
—In his meetings with Schmidt the President would express dis-
appointment that the Germans had issued initial licenses. He would in-
form Schmidt orally (and via a “Non Paper”) of the proposals he had
just made to Geisel. The President would ask Schmidt whether he con-
sidered the proposals to be reasonable. If, as we hope, Schmidt re-
sponds in the affirmative, then the President would ask Schmidt to
convey that view personally and explicitly to Geisel.
4. Elements of possible compromise settlement:
cret; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to London. Drafted by Denis Lamb (D);
cleared by Steven Steiner (S/S); and approved by Christopher.
2 The London Economic Summit, a meeting of the Western industrialized nations,
Documents 27 and 28.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
A. Treaty of Tlatelolco
—Request Brazil to confirm publicly, consistent with the position
taken by Foreign Minister Silveira, that it will act as if bound by the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, and thus all of its nuclear facilities will be under
IAEA safeguards.
—Over the longer term, offer to work with Brazil to bring the
Treaty of Tlatelolco into full effect, with the result that all peaceful nu-
clear explosives would be precluded. (Brazil is committed not to use its
present nuclear supply from the US and Germany for explosives.)
B. Expanded Nuclear Cooperation
—Offer to cooperate with Brazil in developing technology asso-
ciated with high temperature reactors and the thorium fuel cycle, as
part of the US-proposed fuel cycle evaluation program. Point out
that we believe that these technologies could greatly aid Brazil in
achieving energy independence; without reliance on the plutonium
economy.
C. Enrichment
—Tell Brazil that we accept the contemplated initial steps toward
the establishment of a multi-national enrichment facility in Brazil. (Li-
censes for a laboratory-scale facility utilizing the unproven Becker
nozzle process are to be issued in 1979; subsequently a demonstration
plant will be licensed.)
D. Reprocessing
—Ask Brazil to acquiesce in deferral of any further transfers of re-
processing technology pending evaluation of present and alternative
nuclear fuel cycles in the fuel cycle evaluation program.3
Vance
come to make the move” proposed by the Department of State. “The critical factor,” he
cautioned, remained “our readiness and ability to exert persuasive influence and pres-
sure on the FRG.” He also urged the administration to make sure that the Brazilians “un-
derstand what we are driving at; ambiguity on this point can only lay up serious trouble

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
413.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 25, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Adherence to Additional Protocol I to the Treaty of Tlatelolco
In response to Mr. Hornblow’s memorandum of May 132 the De-
partments of State and Defense3 have agreed that when the President
submits Protocol I to the Senate for advice and consent, he should rec-
ommend that United States ratification be made subject to the fol-
lowing statements:
“That the understandings and declarations attached to its ratifica-
tion of Additional Protocol II apply also to its ratification of Additional
Protocol I;
“That the provisions of the Treaty made applicable by this Addi-
tional Protocol do not affect the exclusive power and legal competence
under international law of a state adhering to this Protocol to grant or
deny transit and transport privileges to its own or any other vessels or
aircraft;
“That the provisions of the Treaty made applicable by this Addi-
tional Protocol do not affect rights under international law of a state
adhering to this Protocol regarding the exercise of the freedoms of the
seas, or regarding passage through or over waters subject to the sover-
eignty of a state.”
The first of these statements has the effect of repeating our earlier
declarations and understandings, notably those stating that Treaty
parties retain unimpaired power to grant transit and transport rights to
other countries; that the United States recognizes national claims of
sovereignty over territorial waters only insofar as such claims are con-
sistent with international law; and that the United States considers that
the Treaty covers nuclear explosive devices which are ostensibly for
peaceful purposes as well as devices acknowledged to be nuclear
weapons. The second statement is designed to express our under-
standing that we retain our rights to transit our territories’ waters and
General Files, Tlatelolco, Treaty of. Limited Official Use.
2 Not found.
3 A more detailed description of the Defense Department’s position is contained in
a letter from Secretary Brown to Secretary Vance attached to this memorandum. [Foot-
note is in the original. Brown’s letter is attached but not printed.]

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
airspace with vessels containing nuclear weapons, and to call at ports
there; such transitory presence of nuclear weapons would not infringe
our undertaking to keep the territories free of nuclear weapons. The
purpose of the third statement is to make known our understanding
that our obligations under the Protocol do not affect our operations on
the high seas, or our rights of innocent passage through territorial
waters (or of passage of straits, or of archipelagic passage, if either of
these is adopted as international law).
I will forward to you shortly a set of formal submittal and trans-
mittal documents incorporating these interpretive statements.
The Department of State has also consulted with the Puerto Rican
Secretary of State on the question of attaching a statement to our ratifi-
cation that would allow reconsideration of our adherence as to Puerto
Rico if Puerto Rico became a state. The effect of ratifying without such a
reservation would be that Puerto Rico could not legally be removed
from coverage of the Protocol if it became a state; and Puerto Rico
would be the only state in which by international obligation we could
not place nuclear weapons. The Puerto Rican authorities understood
this consequence when they stated during our consultations with them
that they had no objection to our ratifying without such a reservation.
The Departments of State and Defense have agreed to recommend
that such a provision should not be included in the statements recom-
mended for attachment to our ratification. To do so would dilute the ef-
fect of our ratification. Moreover, we believe that application of the Pro-
tocol to Puerto Rico as a state would not create an objectionable
distinction among states of the Union. In this connection, we note that a
number of other treaties have had a similarly limited geographic effect
within the United States (e.g., Rush-Bagot Agreement limiting naval
forces on the Great Lakes). However, we have noted the matter because
the absence of such a reservation could have domestic political conse-
quences in the event of Congressional consideration of statehood for
Puerto Rico.
Finally, we believe no mention of the recommended interpretive
statements need be made when the President signs the Protocol, since
all the proposed statements are technical in character and none reserves
obligations of the United States under the Protocol. However, we in-
tend to give a copy of the statements privately to Mexican officials in
connection with the signing, indicating to them that we anticipate that
these statements will be submitted to the Senate for its consideration.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
414.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
CIEC, LOS negotiations, Middle East, Treaty of Tlatelolco
PARTICIPANTS
Mexico
Santiago Roel, Secretary of Foreign Relations
Fernando Solana, Secretary of Commerce
Carlos Tello, Secretary for Programming and Budget
United States
The Secretary
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary (ARA)
Herbert B. Thompson, Charge de’Affaires, (notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
Treaty of Tlatelolco
Now that the United States has signed the Protocol I of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, Mr. Todman asked what can be done to get others to sign
the treaty. Secretary Roel said that Mexico must try to persuade others
but cannot pressure them. He said Mexico has spoken to the Cubans
and the Argentines. He thought the United States example would be
very helpful in encouraging others to sign.2
Secretary Vance suggested that the U.S. signing would put some
pressure on the Soviets, who have shown considerable sensitivity at
our seizing the initiative in disarmament efforts. He suggested that if
the Soviets were to sign Cuba might very well follow. Secretary Roel
agreed.
Secretary Roel said that he had found this a very useful day and
thought it a very important one, given the significant events which it
had included. He noted that the events of the day revealed a marked
improvement in U.S.—Mexican relations. He asked rhetorically why
this should be so. Referring to his accompanying colleagues, he as-
serted that it is largely because Mexico now has a younger generation
which is mature enough to speak plainly with its United States counter-
Confidential. Drafted by H.B. Thompson (ARA/MEX); cleared by H.B. Lane (ARA/
MEX); and approved by William Twaddell (S) on June 23. The meeting was held in the
James Madison Room at the Department of State.
2 Carter signed Protocol I earlier that day. For the text of his statement see Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, p. 1027.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
parts and to operate on the basis of a psychological sense of equality. In
any case, he said, he wanted to express his sincere appreciation for the
day. He said he had telephoned President Lopez Portillo, who had ex-
pressed himself as very pleased with the visit and had sent his best
regards.
Secretary Vance agreed that this had been a very important day.
He said that the United States signing of the Treaty of Tlatelolco is of
great significance. He said we are particularly grateful to the Foreign
Secretary for his extraordinary kindness in going to the lengths of
bringing the Treaty to Washington for us to sign. He reminded Sec-
retary Roel that President Carter had already told him of his grati-
tude.3 The luncheon concluded with mutual expressions of esteem and
friendship.
415.
Editorial Note
On June 8, 1977, First Lady Rosalyn Carter met with Brazilian For-
eign Secretary Antoˆnio Francisco Azeredo da Silveira in Brasilia to
discuss President Jimmy Carter’s desire to maintain “close cooperation
and consultation with Brazil” on a number of subjects, including the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. She also asked him to waive the
conditions Brazil had articulated regarding ratification of the Treaty of
Tlatelolco. Silveira replied that while Brazil believed in safeguarding
nuclear materials, “it will never accept restrictions on the transfer of
technology.” He also said that while Brazil had not ratified the Treaty,
it “considers itself committed” to upholding its principles, and had
adopted such conditions “as a means of pressuring the Soviets to ad-
here” to the Treaty. (Telegram 4682 from Brasilia, June 8; National Ar-
The Ambassador to Brazil, John Crimmins, later informed Wash-
ington about the status of a variety of nuclear issues with Brazil, in-
cluding the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and advised the Department to follow
up on Mrs. Carter’s presentation to Silveira, perhaps via a personal
letter from Carter to Brazilian President Ernesto Geisel. A private com-
ment by Geisel to the First Lady that “he would consider this matter,”
Crimmins suggested, might indicate his openness to such a personal
entreaty by Carter. The Brazilians, Crimmins stressed, remained “sus-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
picious” not only of the Soviet Union but also Argentina’s and Chile’s
nuclear ambitions, as well as France’s reticence about signing the
Treaty. (Telegram 5033 from Brasilia, June 18; National Archives, RG
The Department of State also tried to enlist other Latin American
nations, particularly Mexico, in its diplomatic effort to convince Brazil,
Argentina, and Cuba to bring the Treaty of Tlatelolco “into full force
within two years.” The Assistant Secretary of State for International Or-
ganization Affairs, C. William Maynes, told the Mexican Ambassador
to the United States, Sergio Gonzalez Galvez, that the United States
“would prefer to work with both Argentina and Brazil so that adher-
ence” to the Treaty was “not achieved under compulsion.” The United
States, he said, would take the same tack with the Soviet Union “and
continue to do so cautiously.” Maynes also urged the Ambassador to
convince Cuba to sign the Treaty. (Memorandum of Conversation, June
1900)
416.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
President Carter’s First Meeting with the President of Venezuela During His
State Visit
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Terence A. Todman
NSC Staff Member Robert A. Pastor (Notetaker)
President Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela
Minister of Foreign Affairs Ramon Escovar Salom
Minister of State for International Economic Affairs Manuel Perez Guerrero
Minister of Mines and Hydrocarbons Valentin Hernandez Acosta
inet Room. The memorandum of conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXIV, South America; Latin America Regional.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Minister of Finance Hector Hurtado Navarro
Minister of Information and Tourism Diego Arria
Permanent Representative to the United Nations Simon Alberto Consalvi Bottaro
Ambassador to the United States Ignacio Iribarren Borges
Ambassador to the OAS Jose Maria Machin
President Carter opened the conversation by saying that since the
United States and Venezuela shared so many goals and values, he was
looking forward to seeking President Perez’s advice on the many bilat-
eral and multilateral issues of concern to the two governments.
President Carlos Andres Perez thanked President Carter for his
generosity and said that “what you attribute to me is precisely what
you are.” He said that because he identified fully with many of Presi-
dent Carter’s policies, he felt that coordination of policies would be
easy. President Perez said that he would not only try to relate the Vene-
zuelan view of issues, but also the views of Latin America and the en-
tire developing world.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
On the issue of nuclear energy, President Perez said that he
thought that a Latin American organization like OLADE (a Latin Amer-
ican Energy Organization set up by a Venezuelan initiative) or
OPANAL (responsible for implementing the Tlatelolco Treaty) would be
one way of approaching the problem of developing nuclear energy, and he
suggested SELA2 as a possible channel or perhaps as an organization
that could manage a reprocessing plant. On reprocessing, he said that
Brazil was basically using the need for a reprocessing plant as an ex-
cuse to obtain a nuclear weapons’ capability, which it wanted for rea-
sons of status.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
President Carter reiterated his strong opposition to the creation of nu-
clear explosives capabilities in the Hemisphere, and said that Mrs. Carter
had made this point with many leaders, but particularly with Brazilian
President Geisel.3 In addition, we continue to put maximum pressure
on Germany and Brazil to try to get their agreement modified. Our gen-
eral policy will remain that we will continue to provide nuclear fuel for
these countries which do not have reprocessing capabilities.
The President said that Geisel had claimed his intentions were
peaceful, but Mrs. Carter had warned that his successors may not be so
peaceful. Speculating on Brazil’s motives, the President thought that
2 The Sistema Econo´mico Latinoamericano y del Caribe or Economic System of
Latin America and the Caribbean, a regional organization dedicated to promoting eco-
nomic cooperation and social development.
3 See Document 415.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the capability to produce nuclear weapons probably held a certain
status for Brazil and represented greater equality in power.
Nonetheless, Mrs. Carter encouraged Geisel to bring the Treaty of
Tlatelolco into effect. The US has also asked the Soviets, and if Argentina
could ratify it, that would remove Brazil’s excuse. The President said that Ar-
gentina’s apparent desire to build a reprocessing plant caused him some con-
cern. He had signed Protocol I as an indication of his commitment. He
asked whether Venezuela would use its influence to encourage Argentina’s
ratification of the Tlatelolco Treaty.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
President Perez then told of his recent and very frank conversation
with a representative from French President Giscard. President Perez
told him that France was setting a bad example in Latin America in its
reluctance to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty and its non-proliferation pol-
icies,4 and that Venezuela supported President Carter’s initiatives in this
area. President Perez said that President Videla of Argentina made a commit-
ment to try to have Argentina subscribe to the Tlatelolco Treaty, but Videla
couldn’t give Perez complete assurances until he examined the issue with the
rest of his government.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
4 Giscard had told Carter on May 9 that “France sees that it is impossible and unjust
to prevent many countries from getting the benefits of atomic energy.” In particular, he
noted that Brazil wanted the “full system, particularly for dignity and independence.”
Nevertheless, he agreed that “[w]e must avoid transfer of technology that is not needed
for peaceful purposes.” (Memorandum of Conversation, May 9; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Meetings File, Box 75: Subject: Box 1 (II))

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
417.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Walter Stoessel
Ambassador Gerard Smith
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs George Vest
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff Member, Notetaker
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher
Ambassador Berndt von Staden
State Secretary Manfred Schueler
State Secretary Klaus Boelling
Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs Juergen Ruhfus
Assistant Secretary Dieter Hiss
Interpreter for Minister Genscher, Mrs. Gisela Niederste-Ostholt
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
Non-Proliferation
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation
in Latin America.]
The President said that if we can identify the problems, we can ad-
dress them. Brazilian President Geisel had told Mrs. Carter that Argen-
tina was building a reprocessing plant and he implied that Brazil
would not if Argentina did not. Neither country has signed the Tlate-
lolco Treaty. The President felt that if we can assure autonomous fuel
place in the Cabinet Room. The conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe. In an undated memorandum to Carter,
Vance advised him to try to convince Schmidt to at least defer the transfer of nuclear ma-
terials to Brazil while simultaneously convincing Brazil and Argentina to implement the
Treaty of Tlatelolco. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Carter, Brzezinski called Schmidt’s visit “unusually important” not only because
Schmidt’s political future was considered “extremely clouded” both domestically and
within the Atlantic alliance, but because of U.S. pressure to abrogate the Brazilian nuclear
deal. Brzezinski said that Schmidt considered fulfilling “his contractual obligations” a
“matter of ‘honor,’ especially so with all the Third World watching. Nor can Germany af-
ford to repudiate an agreement that encounters American disapproval. What is frustrating
for the Germans is that they basically share your non-proliferation goals, but for the foregoing
reasons, feel that the Brazilian deal allows for little compromise.” (emphasis in the original)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
supply arrangements, then progress can be made. The U.S. was unsuc-
cessful in getting Argentina to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty. Brazil is not a
party to the NPT. Brazil has signed the Tlatelolco Treaty, but it is not
yet in force. The U.S. signed; it will not introduce nuclear weapons in
Puerto Rico or the Canal Zone. We are pressing the Soviets and the
French to sign.
The Chancellor said that the FRG’s view was that cooperation must
be based upon equal status. He felt an amendment to the NPT would be
difficult to achieve. It was better to work within the IAEA (which he la-
belled, jokingly, “a modern American four-letter word”).
The President said that the concern with non-proliferation had pre-
dated his Administration.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear nonproliferation.]
418.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
11862. USIAEA. Subject: Cuban Influence on Soviet Signing of Tla-
telolco Treaty Protocol.
1. Subject of Treaty of Tlatelolco and Protocols arose in conversa-
tion between Emboff and MFA Disarmament Chief, Roland Timer-
bayev, August 10. Emboff asked if there had been any movement on
the Soviet consideration of Protocol One and Timerbayev replied that it
was still under study. Some weeks ago Timerbayev had expressed
doubt to Emboff that U.S. ratification of Protocol Two would be
without reservation and hinted that possible U.S. reservations on Pro-
tocol Two could affect Soviet action on Protocol One. Asked about
reasons for delay in Soviet action, he mentioned Cuba and when
pressed said that “it is logical to assume” that Soviet-Cuban relations
were an important factor in Soviet decision on ratification. He refused
to be drawn out further. He also claimed that the Soviet Union was
trying to get the Cubans to sign the NPT, and that Moscow expected to
assume the major share of the burden among the nuclear powers in get-
ting Cuba to sign. In the same way, the USSR looked to the U.S. and
Confidential. Sent for information to Vienna.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
other Western nuclear powers to play the major role in getting the
South Africans to adhere to the NPT.
2. Comment: To best of our knowledge, this is first comment by So-
viet official on Cuban influence on Soviet signing of Protocol One of
Treaty although Editor-in-Chief of Latin America magazine, Sergo Mi-
koyan, made general linkage to Emboffs during recent conversation
(June 2 Memcon pouched to Dept).2
Toon
419.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation and Nuclear Assistance
State does not believe that there are any important decisions
pending in this area. On nuclear proliferation, we are awaiting a more
propitious time—probably after INFCEP discussions in October—for
our consultations with Brazil and Germany. State and NSC recommend
that you continue to pursue Tlatelolco with Argentina, Chile, and
Brazil (either directly or by the Vice President).
Representative Paul Findley (Rep. Ill.) had an article in the Wash-
ington Post on Thursday, September 1,2 urging Argentina and Brazil
(and indirectly, you) to agree to bilateral, on-site, nuclear verification
agreements as a way to check the advance of both countries toward a
full fuel cycle. The problem with his proposal is that Argentina and
Brazil could conceivably collude to cheat, and thus it is probably better
to stay with the original strategy.
2 See Paul Findley, “Chances for a Latin American Agreement,” Washington Post,
September 1, 1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the Department of State and the National
Security Council3
Washington, undated
NON-PROLIFERATION
ISSUE FOR DECISION
No policy decisions on Latin American non-proliferation ques-
tions appear to be required at the present time.
ESSENTIAL FACTORS
1. Nuclear Cooperation
We have indicated on several occasions—in the President’s April
lolco implementation organization), and at the July meeting of the
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC)6—that we are in
favor of expanding our nuclear cooperation with Latin American
states, not only on a bilateral basis and through the IAEA, but also
through Latin American regional institutions.
Few Latin American states have significant nuclear energy pro-
grams. While we have supplied power reactors to Brazil and Mexico,
our bilateral cooperation to date has largely involved the transfer of re-
search reactors and fuel to a limited number of recipients, including Ar-
gentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela, and no requests for
the transfer of power reactors are pending. We would be prepared in
the future to conclude agreements for cooperation with additional
Latin American states, provided they can accept the non-proliferation
constraints that will be required by pending legislation. Future cooper-
ation with Argentina and Brazil will be influenced by the outcome of
current disagreements with both countries over their desire to acquire
sensitive fuel cycle technologies and their failure to adhere either to the
NPT or the Treaty of Tlatelolco.7 (Our strategy for dealing with Argen-
3 Confidential.
4 See Document 410.
5 See Document 411.
6 Not found.
7 Brzezinski discussed the issue of trying to get Argentina and Brazil to sign the
Treaty of Tlatelolco or the NPT in an August 3 memorandum to Vance. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron,

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
tine and Brazilian problems, which the President has approved, is out-
lined in Ambassador Smith’s July 22 memorandum to Secretary Vance,
a copy of which was sent to you.)8
We have not expressed any preference regarding which institution
or institutions should be used for promoting regional nuclear coopera-
tion, and have indicated that we would be prepared to go along with
any clear preference that may develop among the states of the region.
Some states, particularly Venezuela and Argentina, have favored the
revitalization of IANEC, an OAS subsidiary organ, while others, not-
ably Mexico, support giving OPANAL a role in the peaceful nuclear en-
ergy field. We have been neutral on this question (supporting both a
study of OPANAL’s future role in nuclear cooperation and a two-year,
$400,000 plan of action for IANEC), and for the time being plan to re-
main so in the absence of a clearer Latin American consensus than
exists at present.
2. Treaty of Tlatelolco
Aside from US ratification of Protocol I, remaining requirements
for full entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco are Cuban and Argen-
tine ratification of the Treaty, French adherence to Protocol I, and So-
viet adherence to Protocol II. Although Brazil and Chile have already
ratified, they have so far chosen not to waive the conditions for
bringing the Treaty into force for themselves.9
We have begun to implement a strategy for bringing the Treaty
into full force, and will actively continue our efforts during the next
several weeks. We have not approached Cuba directly, but have en-
couraged key Latin American supporters of the Treaty (e.g., Venezuela,
Colombia, Mexico, Peru) to urge adherence by the holdout states. We
have also asked the USSR to encourage Cuba to join the Treaty. In the
case of Argentina, we have raised the issue directly with the Argentine
leadership, and have also relied on efforts by other Latin American
states. The visit of Latin American leaders to Washington next week
will provide an opportunity to continue these efforts. Moreover, the
proposals we plan to make to Argentina and Brazil in the hope of re-
solving the current disagreements include acceptance by those states of
fullscope IAEA safeguards, which could be accomplished through Tla-
telolco adherence.
With respect to non-hemispheric holdouts, we have already raised
the question of Protocol II with the Soviets at several levels and they
8 Smith’s memorandum is Ibid.
9 An unknown hand underlined “Cuban,” “Argentine ratification,” “French adher-
ence to Protocol I, “Brazil,” “Chile,” and “waive the conditions” in this paragraph and
wrote “specific conditions” in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
have told us they would reconsider their position. In addition, we plan
to raise Protocol I when French Prime Minister Barre visits Washington
on September 15. We do not believe there are realistic prospects for se-
curing Soviet and French adherence by the time of the Panama signing
ceremony.
420.
Draft Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
President Carter/President Videla Bilateral
PARTICIPANTS
ARGENTINA
US
Lt. General Jorge Rafael Videla
President Carter
President of Argentina
Vice President Mondale
Oscar A. Montes, Minister of
Secretary Vance
Foreign Affairs and Worship
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Jorge A. Aja Espil, Ambassador to
Assistant Secretary Todman
the United States
Robert Pastor, NSC
Julio Cesar Carasales,
Charge Maxwell Chaplin
Ambassador to OAS
Enrique Quintana, Chief of
Protocol
Cdr. Eduardo Alberto Traid,
Aide-de-camp
President Carter opened the conversation by expressing his plea-
sure at the attendance of the Argentine President and emphasizing its
significance as a demonstration of hope for the Panama Canal Treaty.
He was also pleased that it provided an opportunity for the hemi-
spheric leaders to have conversations about issues of common concern.
President Videla expressed his satisfaction over the opportunity to
witness an event of such major importance as the Canal Treaty Signing,
as well as the opportunity to have a face-to-face discussion with the
President. He observed that the signature of the treaty not only denotes
the end of one era but opens a new one in which the United States has
Human Rights—-Argentina I. Confidential. The meeting took place at the White House.
A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads “Has not been revised by the
NSC.” No other record of this meeting was found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
demonstrated its sincerity and goodwill toward Latin America. He
added that the Argentine presence was his government’s effort to es-
tablish its goodwill in response. He observed that while US-Argentine
relations have had their ups and downs throughout history, the tempo-
rary circumstances which impeded close relations have always been
overcome by the basic identity of interests of the two nations.
As a parenthetical comment, President Carter observed to Videla
that his Spanish was the clearest and easiest to understand he had ever
heard—the President either chose simple words or had an unusually
clear manner of expressing himself. He found this typical of the Argen-
tina which he and his wife had visited some years previously. President
Carter also added his thanks for the hospitality that President Videla
had shown to Assistant Secretary Todman during the latter’s recent
visit to Argentina.
President Carter said he hoped to have a frank discussion of two
major issues with the objective of optimizing relations between the two
nations.
Non-Proliferation
President Carter considered the threat of nuclear explosives the
greatest problem facing the hemisphere. Because Argentina leads the
Latin American nations in nuclear technology—which is a great credit
to Argentina—he hoped that Argentina could also lead in the establish-
ment of a nuclear free zone in the area and the prevention of introduc-
tion to nuclear explosives. He observed that all hemispheric countries
but Cuba and Argentina had signed and ratified the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco and that Chile and Brazil had conditioned their approval of that
treaty upon Argentina’s ratification and acceptance of it. He expressed
the hope that Argentina would ratify this treaty which would provide
unrestricted use of nuclear energy for power but no introduction of nu-
clear explosives.
President Carter said that the United States, the European commu-
nity, Canada and Australia were now evolving a study of fuel cycle
from ore to reactor wastes and safeguards. On October 19 there will be
a three-day meeting on this subject, and it would be helpful if the GOA
could be represented at this meeting. He envisaged establishing
common policies with regard to the export of nuclear technology,
heavy water and enriched uranium. He said this policy envisages re-
striction of sale of these items to countries which do not cooperate in
the non-proliferation effort. President Carter said he understood that
Argentina was cooperating with Canada with respect to limited safe-
guards but stressed the importance the United States places on the NFZ
and the NPT.
President Videla responded by observing that the two countries’
coincidence of interest was mirrored by the fact that the two Presidents’

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
agendas were the same. He did not perceive these issues as problems
but as opportunities for progress. He reviewed Argentina’s 25 years’
work in developing the peaceful use of nuclear energy, noting that one
power reactor is currently in use, a second under construction and a
third in the planning phase. He understood President Carter’s concern
over the misuse of nuclear energy and said Argentina had offered to es-
tablish safeguards beyond those which were really needed. However,
he understood that even this may not be sufficient reassurance for Latin
America and the world.
President Videla said the GOA had considered ratifying the Treaty
of Tlatelolco but stressed that President Carter must be aware of the
great need for proper political timing of such an action. Argentina was
only 18 months away from its gravest national crisis, so the govern-
ment must be particularly careful not to disturb the progress toward
normalcy. He stated that as soon as political conditions permit—
perhaps before the end of the year—he would give proof of the GOA
goodwill with regard to non-proliferation by ratifying the Treaty of
Tlatelolco. He asked if this reassured President Carter.
President Carter said it did, and stated that if the GOA decided to
send a delegation to the fuel cycle conference, it would be particularly
exciting if it would be possible to announce intended ratification of the
treaty at that time, but he would defer to President Videla on the best
political timing. With Argentine ratification, the treaty would be in ef-
fect for all countries but Cuba, and the United States would be raising
this issue with the Cubans. The President added that Argentine ratifica-
tion would also remove our concerns about technology and heavy
water supply to Argentina from the United States and other suppliers.
The President had discussed this very issue the previous day with
Prime Minister Trudeau in the interest of establishing a common export
policy.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
421.
Telegram From the Interests Section in Cuba to the
Department of State1
170. Subj: Cubans and NPT.
1. USINT Chief and First Secretary (Glassman) made courtesy call
on Soviet Charge´ Narlen Manasov and Political Counselor Aleksander
S. Seletsky, September 20. In course of tour d’horizon, USINT officers
inquired whether Soviets had urged Cuba to sign Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT). Manasov, a veteran of six years here, said that Soviet Em-
bassy here had never rpt never made approach to Cubans on NPT; he
did not comment on approaches elsewhere.
2. Manasov recalled that Cuban UN Perm Rep Alarcon had some
time ago set forth position that Cuba would not sign NPT until Guanta-
namo base removed, Panama Canal problem settled, and U.S. embargo
on Cuba lifted. (FYI on Panama Canal treaties, Manasov remarked that,
in his personal opinion, treaties were best that could be negotiated at
present time. He said that Cubans definitely support treaties.) With re-
gard to Treaty of Tlatelolco and its Protocols, asserted that lack of So-
viet and Cuban adhesion stemmed in part from fact that U.S. main-
tained right for its warships carrying nuclear weapons to transit
Panama Canal, implying that this would be special privilege.
3. British Ambassador told USINT Chief, during recent call, that
during visit early this month of British MP Eldon Griffiths, latter
pressed Cuban Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez for GOC to sign
NPT. Rodriguez reportedly stated that Cubans would not sign NPT as
matter of principle while it had powerful nuclear neighbor with which
it has serious differences. Implication, consistent with Alarcon’s re-
ported position, was that change in this position in long term is pos-
sible when major problems with U.S. have been resolved.
4. Action requested: Department and ACDA requested to forward
available information on bases of Soviet and Cuban objections to Treaty
of Tlatelolco and its Protocols. Also request background on any condi-
tions, other than those cited above, which Cubans have posed for
signing NPT.
Lane
Confidential. Sent for information to Mexico City, Moscow, Panama, and London.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
422.
Telegram From the Embassy in Argentina to the Department
of State1
7732. Subject: Tlatelolco Treaty. Ref: (A) State 2429042 (B) Buenos
Aires 75773 (Both Notal).
1. Summary: Ratification of Tlatelolco has acquired serious polit-
ical dimensions and its fate remains doubtful. President Videla and
ranking officials of the Argentine Commission on Atomic Energy
(CNEA) have indicated privately that they are not opposed to ratifica-
tion but that it cannot be done without heavy political cost to the gov-
ernment. Nationalistic groups both within and without the gov-
ernment are against ratification, which is variously seen as: a further
encroachment on national sovereignty; a weakening of Argentina’s po-
sition as a developing nuclear power vis a vis Brazil; unacceptable
bending to U.S. and foreign pressure; and a bargaining chip which
should be used to extract better treatment from the U.S. CNEA officials
say ratification is being studied and a decision will be made in time to
discuss with Secretary Vance on his visit to Argentina in November.
End summary.
2. Argentina’s intentions concerning Tlatelolco are clouded by se-
rious political implications. President Videla, during his meeting with
President Carter in Washington last month4 said he was not opposed to
ratification but that it would require careful political timing. CNEA of-
ficials have also privately indicated that they have no objection to
cret; Immediate. Sent for information to Brasilia.
Embassy to estimate whether or not Argentina would ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco in the
near future and to assess which groups within Argentina favored or opposed ratification.
miral Carlos Castro Madero, the President of the Comisio´n Nacional de Energı´a Ato´mica
(Argentina’s Atomic Energy Commission), who said that “Argentina adheres totally to
the principle of nuclear non-proliferation for war purposes but cannot accept restrictions
to the development of Argentina’s nuclear plan for the sake of non-proliferation.” (Na-
4 Carter and Videla met on September 7. Videla said that “as soon as political condi-
tions permit—perhaps before the end of the year, Argentina would ratify the Treaty of
Tlatelolco.” Carter replied that the administration would “talk to the Cubans about
signing” the Treaty and also asked if “Argentina would send representatives to the Inter-
national Fuel Cycle Evaluation Conference” (INFCE) scheduled to run from October
Meeting between President Carter and President Videla, September 9; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 45, Latin America,

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
ratification but that it would be at significant political cost to the Videla
Government. The issue is currently being studied by the Argentine
Government and a decision will be made in time to discuss with Secre-
tary Vance during his visit in November, according to CNEA Secretary
General Jorge Coll (protect).
3. Chief opposition to ratification comes mainly from nationalistic
elements—both right and left wing—from both within and outside the
government. While it is likely that the treaty is poorly understood by
many of its opponents, it has nevertheless come to be seen as another
issue in the sensitive area of Argentine national sovereignty.5 CNEA of-
ficials have said that opponents to the treaty are principally nationalist
elements who would take advantage of its ratification to accuse the cur-
rent leadership of selling out the country’s basic interests. CNEA Presi-
dent Admiral Castro Madero heightened such nationalistic sentiments
recently by declaring that Argentina cannot accept restrictions to devel-
opment of its nuclear plan for the sake of non-proliferation. (BA 7577).
The belief that advanced nuclear powers are pressuring and discrimi-
nating against smaller countries to impede their development of nu-
clear power has helped to harden sentiment against ratification.
4. Castro Madero himself has privately told Emboff that he person-
ally cannot see why the USG is so interested in Tlatelolco since the
treaty permits nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, a type of nu-
clear capability which could easily be diverted to non-peaceful pur-
poses. As Argentina has expressed willingness to accept full-scope
safeguards, Castro Madero claims that the treaty will not bind Ar-
gentina any more than it will already be under other safeguard
agreements.
5. Other opponents, seriously concerned with Brazilian intentions
and efforts in the nuclear energy field, claim ratification will further
weaken Argentina’s position as the most advanced nuclear power in
South America. Minister Diaz Bessone, for example, privately claimed
to Datt that Argentina cannot afford to do anything that will restrict its
chances or enhance Brazil in the competition to develop nuclear power
capability.
6.
The
perception
among
the
military
that
nuclear
non-
proliferation, and, more immediately, Argentina’s ratification of Tlate-
lolco are major U.S. foreign policy goals, has led some military to be-
5 On October 18, Castro Madero displayed “surprise that the USG attached
such importance to Tlatelolco” during a meeting with a U.S. Delegation headed by
Ambassador-at-Large Gerard Smith. He also “made clear that ‘political’ motivation” for
Argentina’s need to continue reprocessing nuclear materials was influenced by Brazil’s
determination to establish its own independent reprocessing program. (Telegram 255565
to Buenos Aires, October 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
lieve ratification can and should be used as a “bargaining chip” to ex-
tract better treatment from the U.S., particularly over human rights
questions. They see the U.S. making concessions and soft-pedalling on
Brazilian human rights violations in order to influence that country’s
nuclear power program, and would like to use Tlatelolco in the same
way. Others admire the Brazilian government’s blunt negative reaction
to U.S. human rights pressure and advocate a similar aggressively
non-cooperative attitude for Argentina on matters of U.S. bilateral
concern.
7. Other objections to ratification were registered by the CNEA ad-
visory committee on safe guards which reported that adherence to the
treaty would bring a number of disadvantages. These include: the fi-
nancial cost of staffing and maintaining the large complex administra-
tive mechanism foreseen in the treaty; excessive layering of inspection
requirements beyond those levied in other international and bilateral
nuclear agreements; and the political inacceptibility of having Great
Britain be a party to additional Protocol I by signing for the Falkland
Islands as required by the treaty (Paragraph 1.B of Article 28). Argen-
tina does not recognize British sovereignty over the islands. [less than 1
line not declassified]
8. While the Tlatelolco treaty—as most nuclear questions—is of in-
terest to only a small sector of the public, strong opposition from vocal
military and civilian interest groups and the growing awareness of nu-
clear capability as an important foreign policy tool will make ratifica-
tion a costly business for the Videla Government. Should the Videla
Government opt in favor of ratification quickly and without any ap-
parent concession on the part of the U.S., the navy can be expected to
find fault with the decision and use it to paint itself as the major de-
fender of the country’s sovereignty. It should also be pointed out that
even should Videla agree to ratification, the actual process would re-
quire approval from the legislative advisory commission (CAL) and a
junta decree. CAL has rejected government-introduced proposals be-
fore and other government and military officials, most particularly Ad-
miral Massera, could, despite the most careful preparations on the part
of the Videla Government, use public doubts on the issue for
self-promoting propaganda.
9. This cable is classified secret—not releasable to foreign na-
tionals—[1 line not declassified]
Chaplin

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
423.
Telegram From the Department of State to the United States
Interests Section in Cuba1
251232. Subject: Cuba and the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Ref: Havana
1. Principal reasons given by Cuba for not attending Treaty of Tla-
telolco negotiations and, subsequently, for not adhering were: (A) “ag-
gressive policies” of the US toward Cuba; (B) need to denuclearize US
military bases in Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, and Canal Zone; and
(C) “illegal detention” of Guantanamo. Officials of Mexican Govern-
ment and Organization for Proscription of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (OPANAL), the Treaty of Tlatelolco implementation organiza-
tion, have from time to time consulted Cuba on adherence to treaty.
Ambassador Gros Espiel, Secretary-General of OPANAL, recently told
Amd. Lucey that he considered present Cuban attitude toward treaty
to be very negative,3 and that he planned to postpone further efforts to
persuade Cuba to join until US had completed Protocol I ratification.
Mexican CCD Rep and principal author of Tlatelolco Treaty, Garcia
Robles, has expressed opinion that Cuba is likely to join only in context
of continuing improvement in US-Cuban relations.
2. Cuban adherence to Treaty of Tlatelolco is one of few remaining
requirements for bringing treaty regime fully into force throughout re-
gion, which would involve acceptance of full-scope IAEA safeguards
by all Latin American states and would be a major step forward
in global non-proliferation efforts. Remaining requirements under
Treaty’s entry into force provision are Argentine ratification (they have
already signed), Cuban signature and ratification, Soviet adherence to
Protocol II and French and US adherence to Protocol I (President Carter
signed Protocol I on behalf of US on May 26, 1977, and Protocol will
soon be sent to Senate for ratification). Brazil and Chile have already
ratified but (unlike the 22 other Latin American states that have done
so) have exercised their right under Treaty’s entry into force provision
not to waive conditions for bringing treaty into force for themselves.
for information Priority to Mexico City, Moscow, Panama City, and London. Drafted by
Robert Einhorn (ACDA/NP) and Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP); cleared by Oplinger, Law-
rence Scheinman (T), Philip Farley (S/AS), Mark Garrison (EUR/SOV), Emery Smith
(ARA), and Luigi Einaudi (ARA/PCC); and approved by Charles Van Doren (ACDA).
2 See Document 421.
3 Gros Espiel’s remarks are reported in telegram 15579 from Mexico City, Sep-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
When above requirements fulfilled, these two would become automati-
cally bound.
3. Soviet Union has maintained that it has not adhered to Protocol
II because Treaty of Tlatelolco (A) does not unambiguously ban indig-
enous development of nuclear explosive devices ostensibly for peace-
ful purposes, (B) does not ban transit with nuclear weapons through
the territorial sea, overflight, and port visits, and (C) does envisage ex-
pansion of zone of application to large areas of high seas.
4. In recent months, we have approached Soviets on several occa-
sions at high levels to urge them to adhere to Protocol II (and to urge
them to encourage Cuban adherence to treaty). We have sought to allay
Soviet concerns on legal grounds by (A) explaining our interpretation,
which was formally stated in association with our ratification of Pro-
tocol II and which is shared by all present parties to the treaty, that the
treaty bans indigenous development of any nuclear explosive device;
(B) explaining our interpretation, which will be presented formally
when we ratify Protocol I, that treaty zone of application does not affect
freedom of navigation on high seas; and (C) pointing out that the US
view on transit privileges (i.e., that the treaty does not affect the right of
parties under International Law to grant or deny transit privileges, in-
cluding port visits, to states outside the region) is based on an agreed
interpretation by the Latin American states and does not give the US
special privilege. We have recently heard from Soviet officials that chief
problem is political in nature—their relationship with Cuba.
5. On NPT, Soviet MFA disarmament Chief Timberbaev told US
on August 10 that USSR was trying to get Cuba to sign treaty.4
6. US interest in obtaining Cuban adherence to Treaty of Tlatelolco
has so far mainly been served by urging Latin American proponents of
treaty to encourage remaining Latin American holdout states to join.
There may, however, be value in direct US-Cuban contacts on this
question. Therefore, if USINT Havana considers it advisable you are
authorized, in whatever manner you consider most promising, to raise
question of Tlatelolco adherence with Cubans. In doing so, you may
wish to draw on following points:
—By signing Protocol I this year and earlier by adhering to Pro-
tocol II, the US is formally committing itself not to deploy nuclear
weapons anywhere in the Latin American region. In addition, Protocol
II contains an assurance against the use of nuclear weapons against
parties to the treaty. We hope that these actions will contribute to
bringing the Treaty of Tlatelolco regime fully into force throughout
Latin America. In particular, we hope that our actions will encourage
4 See Document 418.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
others who are in a position to take steps toward achieving that objec-
tive to reconsider their attitudes towards the treaty.
—We believe that completion of this important Latin American en-
deavor will make a major contribution to the security of the entire
Western Hemisphere and would serve as an important example to
other regions of the world.
—At the Protocol I signing ceremony, President Carter expressed
his support for the initiative taken by the people of Latin America to rid
their region forever of the threat of nuclear war. “As I said in my own
inaugural address, our ultimate hope is that we can eliminate com-
pletely from the earth any dependence upon atomic weapons, and I
think it is significant and typical of our Latin American neighbors and
those countries in the Caribbean that tens years before that time they
had already made this worthy commitment which sets an example for
the world.”
Vance
424.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 2, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Fuel for Brazil
At Tab A is a recommendation from Gerry Smith,2 supported by
State and DOE, that you recommend to the NRC that they approve
shipment of the initial loading of low-enriched fuel for Brazil’s Angra I
reactor. ACDA does not oppose the recommendation, but has some
reservations which are also at Tab A.3
wrote “Zbig—ok—but: Draft a frank ltr to Giesel, pointing out obstacles after I make the
recommendation to NRC. J.C.”
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Our agreement with the Brazilians4 envisaged shipment of the fuel
by December 1977 in order to meet the planned start-up date of the re-
actor in July 1978. [less than 1 line not declassified] the date is likely to slip
by as much as one year because of construction problems and bad site
selection. Nevertheless, there is no question that the Brazilians feel that
we are legally and morally bound to approve shipment by December.
As you will recall, this issue arose when you sent the letter to
Geisel last week.5 Our initial strategy was to have made our new pro-
posal to the Brazilians and Germans simultaneously, in order to avoid a
recurrence of last February’s incident when the Brazilians accused us to
trying to go behind their backs in talks with the Germans. We now fear
that there is a high probability that the Germans will tell the Brazilians
of our proposal (possibly in a highly distorted form) and that, out of
pique, the Brazilians will refuse to invite Gerry Smith or to give the pro-
posal serious consideration. State and Smith feel extremely strongly
that the only chance for a fair hearing is for you to remove the Sword of
Damocles—the Angra fuel—by confidentially notifying them that you
have recommended approval to the NRC.
You should be aware of the risks of this decision. In three areas
Brazil does not precisely meet the criteria of the new non-proliferation
bill,6 and it is therefore quite possible that the NRC will refuse the li-
cense, and/or that the license would be the subject of legal proceedings
by anti-nuclear groups. The three areas are: Brazil’s refusal to give us
an explicit no-PNE assurance; Brazil’s refusal to accept full scope safe-
guards; and, the lack of explicit and airtight provisions in the US-Brazil
Agreement for Cooperation giving the US a right of veto over the re-
processing of both US-origin and foreign fuel from Brazilian reactors.
These are all legal questions that can be interpreted one way or the
other. What is clear is that there is a basis here for controversy in Congress, in
the courts, and at the NRC over whether approval of this license is consistent
with your non-proliferation policy.7
United States would provide low-enriched nuclear fuel to Brazil for its Angra I reactor.
5 Carter wrote Giesel on October 25 that he was prepared to send Smith to Brazil “to
discuss with you our new ideas, or to adopt any other mode you prefer,” on the nuclear
question in advance of Carter’s expected visit to Brazil later in November. (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country
Smith’s visit. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
submitted to Congress on April 27.
7 To the left of this paragraph, Carter wrote “I presume they meet present crite-
ria. J.”

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Finally, there is the question of whether the Brazilians are more
likely to be responsive to our proposal if we withhold the fuel or if we
grant it. This is a personal judgment. I can only add that those who
have been directly dealing with the Brazilians are united in believing
that we should approve the shipment immediately, and that your deci-
sion should be conveyed privately and confidentially to the Brazilians
by Ambassador Crimmins.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you recommend to the NRC that they approve shipment of
this initial loading of low-enriched fuel for Brazil’s Angra I reactor.8
8 Carter did not initial either the “Approve” or “Disapprove” option.
425.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Discussion with Argentina and Brazil
During my visit to Latin America on November 21–23, I expect to
discuss nuclear and non-proliferation matters with President Videla of
Argentina and President Geisel of Brazil. I have asked Gerry Smith to
accompany me on the trip to participate in the nuclear talks.
In Argentina, we will seek a public Argentine declaration of its de-
cision to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Argentina may not be prepared
to go that far, and we may have to settle for a declaration of Argentine
intent to ratify, rather than a firm decision. We will emphasize to Ar-
gentine officials the need to apply full safeguards to its nuclear pro-
the Office of the Deputy Secretary, the Bureau of Political Affairs, the Bureau of Eco-
nomic, Business, and Agricultural Affairs, the Bureau of Security Assistance, Science, and
Technology, the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, the Bureau of Politico-Military Af-
fairs, the Bureau of Oceans and Scientific and Environmental Affairs, the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency, and the Executive Secretariat.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gram as a requirement for continued nuclear cooperation with the US.2
It became clear during recent talks with Argentine nuclear officials in
Washington3 that any success in achieving deferral of Argentina’s re-
processing program will depend heavily on what we can accomplish
with the Brazilians.
Nonetheless, the postponement of your visit to Brasilia, and a
number of other recent developments, lead me to believe that we
should take a somewhat more attenuated and indirect approach in
pursuing our non-proliferation strategy with Brazil than originally
planned.
Schmidt’s unwillingness to support our ideas for resolving the
Argentine/Brazil problem will stiffen Brazilian resistance, and Geisel is
likely to reject out of hand any package of proposals we present at this
time. France’s recent decision not to complete the Pakistani repro-
cessing plant and to press the FRG for a similar policy in Brazil, cou-
pled with increasing disenchantment within the Brazilian scientific
community with the FRG/Brazil agreement, suggest that the climate
for a satisfactory solution may improve if these factors are given more
time to work.
I believe that the best approach at this time is to avoid specific dis-
cussion of the FRG/Brazil agreement, to set out our ideas in the context
of seeking Brazil’s views on how to deal with a hemispheric security
problem, and to leave specific solutions for a later stage.4 The main ele-
ments of our thinking could thus be presented and left for Geisel to
consider, without being prematurely offered as an American solution.
I attach a more detailed outline of this approach5 which I would
propose to use as the basis for the Brazil talks if you approve.
2 An unknown hand underlined this sentence.
3 Not found.
4 An unknown hand underlined the sentence “set out our ideas in the context of
seeking Brazil’s views on how to deal with a hemispheric security problem, and to leave
specific solutions for a later stage” in this paragraph.
5 Attached but not printed.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
426.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Latin American Nuclear Strategy: Post-Visit Assessment
The nuclear discussions during my November 21–23 trip pro-
duced mixed results. The Argentine talks produced more progress than
we had anticipated;2 Brazil continues unyielding, as we expected.3 But
the Argentine results should tend to isolate Brazil in Latin America at
the same time that France’s decision not to complete its reprocessing
sale to Pakistan increases the isolation of the FRG in Europe. In sum, I
believe that we made some progress in our strategy, but it is clear that it
will take a sustained effort, as well as some luck, to move Brazil.
Argentina
We achieved three things:
—a public commitment to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco, (albeit
without a waiver of the entry into force requirements), balanced by
public affirmation of US willingness to expand nuclear cooperation in a
manner consistent with our non-proliferation policy and to recognize
Argentina’s potential as a nuclear exporter. But Argentina is not willing
to bring the Treaty into force by waiving the requirement that other
states (the USSR, France, and Cuba) ratify.
—a private understanding that Argentina will move to full-scope
safeguards as a condition for additional US assistance (that would not
include at this stage the transfer of heavy water technology). If such an
exchange is made, we will have achieved the main substantive effect of
the Treaty in Argentina.
—a private expression of Argentine willingness to consider defer-
ring reprocessing if Brazil also defers (a concept of regional equilib-
rium) and if it receives heavy water technology from the US and
the memorandum. Vance also discussed the nuclear issue with Venezuelan President
partment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—
2 A record of Vance’s discussions with Argentine President Jorge´ Rafael Videla is in
telegram Secto 11012 from the Secretary’s Delegation in Buenos Aires, November 22.
3 A memorandum of Vance’s November 22 conversation with Brazilian President
Geisel is in the National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarma-
1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Canada. This is the basic exchange foreseen in the strategy you ap-
proved last July,4 and the Argentines have signalled its acceptability.
Brazil
The Brazilians were aware of our October approach to Schmidt
and the FRG’s rebuff.5 They expected a renewed attack on the FRG
agreement and were prepared to reject it. They were not aware of the
results of our Argentine visit, and there was too little time for them to
absorb its implications. In these circumstances I felt it best to make the
Argentine idea of “regional equilibrium” the centerpiece of a brief
presentation, and to bring in the remaining elements of our package
only indirectly. Their response in the formal sessions was to quietly
reaffirm their standard position, but they listened carefully and the
factors we presented may have greater impact as internal Brazilian crit-
icism of the FRG deal develops. We were careful to avoid any implica-
tion of pressure that would stimulate nationalistic rejection or stop in-
ternal fermentation.
Next Steps
I think it is important that we avoid explicit pressure on Brazil that
would tend to close their minds while we are trying to get them to con-
sider the implications of a shifting situation which may in time require
them to adjust. By the time of your visit in the Spring, you may wish us
to resume a more direct approach. We will pursue technical talks on
thorium and the problems of reprocessing in the context of INFCE, and
bilaterally if they show interest. We will also work closely with France
in the effort to soften the FRG position, and consider ways to further
isolate the FRG and Brazil through Latin American support for the “re-
gional equilibrium” reprocessing moratorium concept. In Caracas we
touched lightly on this concept. President Perez may prove a strong
supporter, and could help us with the Argentines and perhaps the Bra-
zilians. We will also want to protect our present position by moving
ahead with the US/Argentine cooperation mapped out in Buenos Aires
while at the same time assuring that they take no irreversible steps to
develop a reprocessing capability.
4 Not found.
5 On October 25, Smith gave a “presentation, copy of which was an informal talking
point paper, was left with the Chancellor,” which notified Schmidt that “the US has been
concerned that sensitive nuclear projects being carried out in Brazil might cause other
countries,” in particular Argentina, “to move ahead with similar projects in order to pre-
serve their competitive position at both the technological and military levels.” Carter, he
said, wanted to press Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany, and Argentina for “a de-
ferral for a period to be agreed upon of reprocessing” which “would permit the US to
drop objections to the enrichment program.” (Telegram 257624 to Brasilia, October 27;

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
427.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Trip: Nuclear Results and Follow-up
Cy has prepared a short report (Tab A)2 analyzing the results of his
discussions on nuclear matters on his trip to Latin America. It is a short
and good report so I will not summarize it here. Let me just add a
couple of points.
In Brazil, Cy and several members of his party had good discus-
sions with the Minister of Commerce and Industry Calmon de Sa and
the Minister of Mines Ueki on cooperative approaches to develop non-
nuclear sources of energy, including alcohol (from sugar), bioconver-
sion, hydrogen, coal mining technology, and solar energy. The Bra-
zilians seemed quite enthusiastic about the idea, but they have a
problem which has been holding them back, which is quite similar to
our own: different Ministers have responsibilities for different subjects,
and there is no overall way to coordinate such a cooperative effort.
An attempt at developing a cooperative approach to energy re-
search and development might be the best way to demonstrate to the
Brazilians our genuine interest in their energy problem, our interest in
cooperating in scientific endeavors with them, and the sincerity of our
position on nuclear energy. If you approve, I will ask Cy—who had
conversations on this subject in Brazil—to designate a person in State to
work with DOE in negotiating an overall agreement on cooperation be-
tween the US and Brazil in researching and developing non-nuclear en-
ergy sources.3
A second point I wanted to bring to your attention is that our pro-
posal on the German-Brazilian deal, which Gerry Smith conveyed to
the Germans,4 was not conveyed to the Brazilians in its entirety. Gerry
felt that they would reject it immediately if he put it on the table and so
he described the proposal only in very general terms. Since the Bra-
zilians have left the door open for other discussions, we will have the
memorandum.
2 See Document 426.
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
opportunity to put the entire proposal forward at a more propitious
time.
I am also attaching a brief summary of Cy’s conversation with
Geisel5 and Gerry Smith’s remarks at the Brazilian Foreign Ministry
6 See Ambassador Smith’s “Remarks on Nuclear Matters at Working Session at For-
Brazil Bilaterals, November 22, 1977)
428.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
12348. Subject: Approach to Soviets on Protocol II of Treaty of
Tlatelolco.
1. Since Soviet CTB negotiator Morokhov also has major responsi-
bility in Soviet Government for non-proliferation matters, Ambassador
Warnke took opportunity of Morokhov’s presence in Geneva for trilat-
eral CTB negotiations to convey information to Soviets regarding Ar-
gentine intention to ratify Treaty of Tlatelolco and to encourage Soviet
adherence to Protocol II. Warnke’s presentation, made at bilateral
meeting on December 15, drew on points set forth in para 2 below.
After listening attentively to Warnke’s presentation, Morokhov ex-
pressed gratitude for report on Argentine developments. He said that
he was not now in a position to provide Soviet reactions because issue
of Protocol II adherence was currently being reviewed in Moscow. His
government was also presently in process of carrying out consultations
with other countries on this issue. He nonetheless regarded Warnke’s
presentation as “useful and important.”
2. Warnke’s presentation follows:
Confidential. Sent for information to Buenos Aires, Brasilia, Mexico City, Moscow, and
the Interests Section in Havana.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
(A) During Secretary Vance’s recent trip to Argentina,2 the Argen-
tine government announced its intention to ratify the treaty of
Tlatelolco.
(B) We understand that Argentine ratification, unlike its signature
of the treaty several years ago, will not be accompanied by an interpre-
tative statement that the treaty permits its parties to develop nuclear
explosive devices for peaceful purposes. We also understand that Ar-
gentina would negotiate a full-scope safeguards agreement with the
IAEA providing for safeguards against any military or nuclear explo-
sive use.
(C) However, Argentina is not prepared, at this time, to waive the
preconditions specified in the treaty for entry into force. Thus, Argen-
tina will put itself in the same legal position as Brazil and Chile, which
have both ratified but not waived the entry into force conditions.
Twenty-two Latin American states have ratified, waived the condi-
tions, and are therefore already bound by the treaty.
(D) When the remaining conditions are met, Argentina, Brazil, and
Chile would automatically be bound by the treaty, and would be obli-
gated to conclude a full-scope safeguards agreement with the IAEA.
(E) At present, the only remaining conditions are U.S. ratification
of Protocol I (we signed in May 1977),3 French signature and ratification
of Protocol I, Cuban signature and ratification of the treaty, and Soviet
signature and ratification of Protocol II.
(F) Therefore, our two governments are both in a position—
through our own actions and through encouragement of steps by
others—to help bring the Treaty of Tlatelolco fully into force.
(G) Let me underscore the great significance of what could lie
ahead. Argentine and Brazilian adherence to the treaty would be one of
the greatest boosts for non-proliferation in a long time. Those two
countries clearly pose a serious threat in the non-proliferation area.
Given their unyielding attitude toward the NPT, the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco is our best, and perhaps our only, opportunity to get them to ac-
cept formal restraints against the development of nuclear explosives.
(H) For our part, now that the president has signed Protocol I, we
hope to have it ratified within the coming year. We have also urged the
French to reconsider their position toward Protocol I, and we have indi-
cations that they are doing so.
(I) In addition, through our newly opened Interests Section in Ha-
vana, we have directly raised the issue of the treaty of Tlatelolco with
the Cubans at various government levels. We have received inquiries

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
from the Cubans about various aspects of the treaty and its zone of
application.
(J) We hope that the Soviet government will seriously consider
adhering to Protocol II in the near future and will join us in encour-
aging other states (Cuba, France) to take corresponding steps.
(K) We recognize that you have had certain reservations about the
Treaty of Tlatelolco on legal grounds, especially regarding the ques-
tions of PNES and freedom of the high seas. We shared those concerns,
but have studied those issues intensively and have concluded that they
are not a problem. When we ratify Protocol I, we will make an interpre-
tative statement regarding these issues, and would be happy to discuss
them with you further.
Warnke
429.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Argentina1
35248. Subject: U.S.-Argentine Nuclear Relations.
1. Summary. On February 6, Argentine Ambassador Aja Espil met
with Ambassador Gerard Smith and Dr. Joseph Nye to review U.S.-
Argentine nuclear issues. Aja Espil expressed his confidence that Ar-
gentina will ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as promised in the No-
vember 21 communique´ issued after the Secretary’s visit to Buenos
Aires.2 End summary.
2. Ambassador Smith asked Argentine Ambassador Aja Espil to
call on him in order to clarify Argentina’s stance on ratification of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco in light of confusing reports emanating from offi-
cials of the Argentine Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA). Dr. Joseph
Nye was also present.
cret. Drafted by Fernando Rondon (ARA/ECA); cleared by Nye and Smith in draft; and
by Oplinger, Louis Nosenzo (OES), Ronald Bettauer (L), Jeffrey Siegel (INR), Charles Van
Doren (ACDA), Phyllis Oakley (ARA)/RPP), and Malcolm Barneby (ARA/AND) for in-
formation; and approved by Robert Zimmermann (ARA/ECA).

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
3. Ambassador Smith noted that both Argentine President Videla
and Foreign Minister Montes had informed the President and the Sec-
retary of Argentina’s intention to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco.3 The
November 21 bilateral communique´ noted this intention as well as the
United States intention to ratify Protocol I of the treaty. During the Sec-
retary’s visit,4 the U.S. had also agreed to assist Argentina in its re-
search reactor exports to Peru by facilitating fuel transfers, and we had
agreed to supply heavy water. Argentina was to move concurrently on
full-scope safeguards. The U.S. had also explained the difficulties in-
volved in the transfer of heavy water technology, which would entail a
deferral of reprocessing. Argentina too had explained the difficulties it
would face in deferring reprocessing, noting that it would be possible
only in the context of regional equilibrium.
4. Ambassador Smith continued that we were surprised when the
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission’s (CNEA) legal adviser, Mar-
tinez, told Congressman Moorehead, in the presence of Foreign Min-
istry Official Matas, that Argentina will not ratify Tlatelolco until the
U.S. commits itself to the transfer of heavy water technology. Martinez’
statements were contrary to what Argentine officials told our Presi-
dent, the Secretary and Deputy Secretary, and contrary to the heart of
the November 21 communique´.
5. Ambassador Aja Espil explained that there are different opin-
ions within the Argentine Government and that the Nationalists op-
pose all compromise, including Tlatelolco. Aja Espil reiterated the in-
tention of both President Videla and the other members of the Junta to
ratify the treaty. As of December, the Ambassador indicated, the For-
eign Ministry was preparing a document on the steps required for Ar-
gentina to complete ratification. Aja Espil again played down Martinez’
views, and said that he (Aja Espil) knew Videla’s views. The Ambas-
sador suggested that we discuss this subject again with Admiral Castro
Madero, who should be visiting Washington on February 17, on his
way back from Canada and enroute to the IAEA Board of Governor’s
meeting in Vienna. Dr. Nye expressed the hope to see Castro here while
Ambassador Smith looked forward to a meeting in Vienna.
6. Dr. Nye again outlined the three stages of our nuclear coopera-
tion. In stage one, both the U.S. and Argentina will work to ratify Pro-
tocol I and the treaty, respectively. Stage two involves the supply of
heavy water and fuel for a second research reactor to be sold to Peru.
The latter will require an amendment of our bilateral agreement for co-
operation. Full-scope safeguards will be necessary. Under stage 3, the
transfer of heavy water production technology might be envisioned
3 See Document 420.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
under a major change in U.S. policy, and Argentina also would have to
change its policy and defer reprocessing. “Regional equilibrium”
would be necessary for any reprocessing deferral, the Argentine repre-
sentatives had said. Nye stated that at no time did we link stage 3 to
stage 1, as Martinez had.
7. Aja Espil stated that Martinez does not make policy.
8. Ambassador Smith raised the Argentine/Peruvian agreement
and our earlier understanding that the second research reactor to be
provided to Peru (10 megawatts) would use low enriched uranium
(LEU). Smith observed that in December, CNEA officials had stated
that highly enriched uranium was required. The Peruvians, on the
other hand, informed us that the 10 mw reactor would be fueled with
LEU.
9. Aja Espil was not briefed on the question of the 10 mw reactor
for Peru. He promised to investigate. He inquired about the progress of
the quadrilateral agreement (U.S., Argentina, Peru and IAEA) required
for the transfer of the zero power reactor fuel to Argentina. Aja Espil
was assured that we were close to an accord on the quadrilateral
agreement.
Vance
430.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Venezuela1
26891. Subject: Venezuelan Concern Over IAEA Nuclear Material.
Ref: Caracas 209.2
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP/NX) and McFadden
(DOE); cleared by Anne Jillson (IO/SCT), Robert Kelley (S/AS), Louis Cecchini (OES),
Robert Sloane (L/OES), and William Sergeant (ARA); and approved by Charles Van
Doren (ACDA).
cember request by the Venezuelan government for special nuclear materials, was “pre-
pared to provide a gift of uranium” to Venezuela. Still, Ambassador Vaky relayed “US
concern that Venezuela has not yet fulfilled its obligations under the NPT to conclude a
safeguards agreement” to Venezuelan Foreign Minister Simon Alberto Consalvi. The
United States, Vaky stressed, “urged early completion of these negotiations, and noted
that the status of the agreement would be taken into account when the Nuclear Regula-
tory Commission reviews the required export license” for the gift of uranium. (National

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1. In response to Reftel, Embassy is requested to raise the following
points with Taborda3 and appropriate members of the government to
clarify US position.
A. The president is very appreciative of President Perez’ personal
support on non-proliferation.
B. The US does not repeat not want to indicate any falling off of our
support for the gift of uranium to Venezuela.
C. It is especially because Venezuela is seen as a leading nation on
non-proliferation issues that its failure to conclude safeguards agree-
ment pursuant to the NPT and the Treaty of Tlatelolco can be perceived
as a problem. In particular, other countries within the region may be
less inclined to take the final steps necessary to bring Tlatelolco into
effect.
D. While we understand that safeguards are applied under the ex-
isting trilateral (US/IAEA/Venezuela) agreement concrete movement
on the safeguards agreement pursuant to the NPT and Tlatelolco
would further enhance Venezuela’s traditional non-proliferation stand.
2. The US reminder about need for NRC approval, was in no way
intended as threat to withhold material but seemed a necessary caution
to prevent assumption by gov that US executive branch decision to al-
locate gift to Venezuela would per se assure export. Should more spe-
cific questions be raised again by Taborda or any other gov official, or if
Embassy feels response is necessary on Taborda remarks reported
Reftel, Embassy should draw on following information. Draft agree-
ment on transfer of fuel will be cabled in near future.
3. NRC is an independent regulatory agency, not repeat not part of
executive branch. In reviewing export license applications, NRC ob-
tains executive branch recommendations, but is not obliged to follow
them (although normally has done so). Several factors are taken into ac-
count by executive branch agencies in developing executive branch rec-
ommendations and by NRC independently in reaching its decisions on
license issuance. Among these factors is recipient nation’s position on
nuclear non-proliferation; in this connection, Venezuela’s support of
US non-proliferation policies would naturally be a strong positive in-
fluence. Other factors considered include, inter alia, whether an NPT
party has fulfilled its NPT commitment to conclude NPT safeguards
agreement; the fact that Venezuela has not yet done so would inevi-
tably be a negative factor. We cannot predict what weight the NRC
would give various factors in any particular case, but gov conclusion of
NPT safeguards agreement by time export license application is sub-
mitted is certainly highly desirable. However, if this proves impossible,
3 Admiral Jesus Taborda of the Venezuelan National Nuclear Council.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
we believe that likelihood of favorable NRC action will be strengthened
if gov meanwhile makes significant progress in negotiating the re-
quired agreement. We have no reason to believe that NRC would give
factors different relative weights depending on whether or not any pro-
posed export was material to be provided as gift through IAEA.
4. With respect to executive branch recommendation to NRC to li-
cense another shipment of slightly enriched uranium (under 3 percent
U-235) for India’s Tarapur nuclear power plant, as Embassy recognized
this is not a gift. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the 1963 agree-
ment for cooperation under which the Tarapur reactors were supplied
is unique in that it provides for use of only US-supplied fuel for the life
of the reactors, and India contracted in 1966 with the US atomic energy
commission for long-term supply of enrichment services. India has
provided US with written assurance that all nuclear material supplied
for or produced in Tarapur will be used only to meet the needs of the
Tarapur plant (thus precluding any use of such material for any nuclear
explosive device). In view of this, plus various controls contained in
agreement for cooperation on Tarapur, India currently meets imme-
diate export criteria contained in pending non-proliferation legislation.
President Carter has strongly urged India to accept full-scope IAEA
safeguards on all its nuclear activities especially in light of pending leg-
islation. France, of course, is a nuclear-weapon-state, thus not all non-
proliferation controls applicable to US exports to non-nuclear-weapon-
states are relevant to exports to France. However, exports to France are
subject to US–EURATOM agreement which contains guarantee of use
for peaceful purposes only and requirement for multinational EUR-
ATOM safeguards; and France is currently negotiating safeguards
agreement with IAEA which would provide for IAEA safeguards with
respect to certain French civil nuclear activities.
Vance

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
431.
Intelligence Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, March 10, 1978
SIGNIFICANCE OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
IN ARGENTINE NUCLEAR POLICY
Summary
1. The ultimate intentions of the Argentine leadership in the nu-
clear field are not yet clear. Recent events have reconfirmed Argentine
leaders’ determination to develop an independent plutonium and
heavy water production capability. There is no evidence of a decision
by the government to carry the nuclear program through to a weapons
capability, but such an option is clearly left open.
2. While there are no indicators that Argentina has engaged in or
planned for any research dedicated to designing the implosion mecha-
nism for a nuclear explosive device, the management of its repro-
cessing program has been led since 1976 by military officers who seem
strongly motivated to acquire sufficient fissile material for a nuclear
weapons capability. Brazil’s nuclear potential probably has become a
factor in Argentine deliberations over their future nuclear development
programs. (Argentina’s nuclear policymakers have begun to allude
confidentially to Brazil’s reprocessing plans as a justification for their
own reprocessing programs.)
3. The managers of Argentina’s reprocessing program have not re-
garded the presence or prospect of international safeguards as serious
obstacles to the acquisition of plutonium for experimental or military
purposes; moreover, most influential Argentines have regarded inter-
national safeguards as an infringement on their national sovereignty
and encumbrances imposed by great powers. Yet we have no evidence
that Argentina’s nuclear activities have ever been conducted in viola-
tion of international safeguards.
4. Argentina’s top leadership seems to have been preparing to sign
the Treaty of Tlatelolco only on the condition that it not impede the fur-
ther development of its independent nuclear capabilities and does not
to a March 10 note from CIA Executive Secretary B.C. Evans to Dodson, the report “was
prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for Nuclear Proliferation
and the Acting Intelligence Officer for Latin America.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
restrict future Argentine options to develop the ingredients for nuclear
weapons.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
432.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
International Political Issues: Panama Canal Treaties, Non-Proliferation, Middle
East, Africa, Belize, Nicaragua, and Conventional Arms Restraint
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Viron P. Vaky
Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member
Venezuela
Carlos Andres Perez, President
Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs
Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines
Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency
Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund
Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren
Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute
After exchanging cordialities, President Perez asked about Presi-
dent Carter’s preference with regard to an agenda. President Carter
said that he would like to discuss international political issues today
and economic issues tomorrow.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
took place at Miraflores Palace.
2 On March 29, Carter and Perez discussed North-South Issues, Energy, the Carib-
bean, and the Law of the Sea. (Memorandum of Conversation, March 29, 1978; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Subject File, Box 63,
President’s Trip to Brazil and Venezuela (3/78))

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
President Carter said that Argentina had promised to ratify the
Tlatelolco Treaty soon. Although they have said this before, they had
sent a message this month indicating they are getting ready to do so.3
The U.S. Congress had passed a law on nuclear energy, which
clearly spells out the U.S. position in providing nuclear fuel with cer-
tain safeguards.4 President Carter said his visit to Brazil would be used
to explain our position fully; he was afraid that Brazil may not have
completely understood it. We believed it was relatively easy to coop-
erate in ways which will provide nuclear power and at the same time
eliminate the danger of weapon production.
Perez said that during his conversations with Geisel (November
1977) he expressed solidarity with U.S. policy. Geisel was upset, and
took the position that one could not keep Brazil from doing the things
that the U.S. has already done. Perez told him that whatever the U.S.
has already done, the world cannot afford unrestrained proliferation. It
was because of aspirations in this area, Perez said, that he had pro-
posed a multinational Latin American reprocessing center, under the
auspices of OLADE or SELA, as a way of overcoming jealousies and
satisfying needs. Brazil, of course, was also worried about Argentina.
Geisel said that first he wanted to talk to President Carter, then he
would talk to the GOV about the multinational center proposal.
President Carter said that we have tried the reprocessing route and
have found it unsatisfactory. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Study which will be completed soon will probably recommend re-
gional centers under international safeguards, precisely to overcome
national sensitivities. He said he expected that the study would find
that reprocessing is simply not a necessary part of a nuclear energy
system. He expressed the view that both Germany and France realize
the problems and would probably not offer the same kind of arrange-
ments now that they did then.
President Carter said that common expressions of concern would
be useful in drawing the distinction between legitimate desires for
peaceful use of nuclear energy and arms production. He also noted that
Brazil has thorium, and this is a promising source of fuel which would
avoid the plutonium problem. Geisel is discussing the use of thorium,
and this may be an avenue out of the present problem. Perhaps, the
3 Ambassador Aja Espil informed Nye on March 22 that Argentina “has every in-
tention of ratifying the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as President Videla committed his country to
do in conversations with President Carter and Secretary Vance. The Ambassador said
this welcome development would take place soon, noting that the United States should
have no doubt about Argentina’s intentions.” (Telegram 76482 to Buenos Aires, March

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
President said, the U.S. pushed too far too fast with Brazil, but we will
discuss these matters.
Perez asked whether the U.S. would be helpful to Argentina in the
area of thorium technology if they expressed interest, and the President
answered affirmatively.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
433.
Telegram From the Embassy in Brazil to the Department of
State1
2704. Subject: Draft Memorandum of Conversation of Second Bi-
lateral Meeting Between Presidents Carter and Geisel, March 30, 1978,
1. The following is a draft Memorandum of Conversation for the
second bilateral meeting between Presidents Carter and Geisel on
side in addition to President Carter were: Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezin-
ski and Charge´ Richard E. Johnson; the Brazilian side was represented
by President Geisel, Foreign Minister Silveira and Counselor Ronaldo
Mota Sardenberg, the Minister’s Special Adviser for Bilateral Political
and Economic Affairs. After a discussion of approximately forty-five
minutes, the group was expanded with the addition of Assistant Secre-
tary Todman, Director Lake, Mr. Pastor and Embassy Economic Coun-
selor Ruser on the US side and Finance Minister Simonsen, Planning
Minister Velloso, Industry and Commerce Minister Calmon De Sa and
Counsel Nogueira, a Foreign Ministry Advisor for Political Affairs, on
the Brazilian side.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
cret; Immediate; Cherokee; Nodis.
2 No final version of this conversation was found. Carter and Geisel discussed Af-
rica, the Middle East, and the overall U.S.-Brazilian relationship in their first meeting on
fairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Subject File, Box 63, President’s Trip to Brazil

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
17. Changing the subject, President Carter stated that he had en-
joyed his press conference earlier that morning.3 Questions arose on
both nuclear matters and human rights. These were answered truth-
fully and honestly with an acknowledgement that there were certain
difficulties in these areas and that they had been discussed with the
Brazilian government. He pointed out to the press that we are inter-
ested in discussing these matters with the Brazilian government,
adding that the differences are minor in comparison with areas of bilat-
eral agreement.
18. President Geisel said that these two subjects could not have
been avoided. Had he been a journalist, they would have figured in his
line of attack as well. Obviously President Carter has an obligation to
reply truthfully with an explanation of his views. It would be absurd
were he to feel embarrassed in responding. Our differences are natural
and are not as great as is often stated.
19. President Carter said he had two questions to raise concerning
the nuclear question. Brazil, he said, has signed and ratified the Treaty
of Tlatelolco but will not recognize its applicability until all nations sign
the Treaty. This would include nations which will never sign, like
France and the Soviet Union, perhaps also Cuba (under Soviet pres-
sure). Giscard D’Estaing has said he has no particular objections to Tla-
telolco, but he has doubts as to the desirability of France taking part
in these Western Hemisphere arrangements. President Carter aked
whether, if Argentina signs and the list of Central and South American
signatories is thereby completed, Brazil would agree to implement the
accord?
20. President Geisel replied that this question would require fur-
ther study. Argentina does not cause major concern for Brazil, he said.
However, Brazil feels that countries like France and the USSR, which
have nuclear weapons, should make a commitment pertaining to the
non-use of these weapons in the Western Hemisphere. They should un-
dertake to fight their wars elsewhere, not in South America, and to re-
frain from stockpiling their nuclear weapons here. Brazil wishes that
the Russians, French and Chinese would also sign Tlatelolco. President
Geisel said that the Ambassador of the Soviet Union, a country with
which Brazil has fair relations, especially in the trade sphere, came to
him with a note critical of Brazil’s accord with the Federal Republic of
Germany. President Geisel said that he had to be a bit rude in his reply.
He told the Soviet Ambassador that he had no right to bring this matter
up in his dealings with Brazil, in the absence of Soviet acceptance of
Tlatelolco obligations.
3 The text of Carter’s March 30 press conference is printed in Public Papers: Carter,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
21. Foreign Minister Silveira said there were three phases in the
implementation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco—the signing, the ratification
and finally the acceptance of the treaty by the nuclear powers. Brazil
believes that with the signing of Tlatelolco it has committed itself not to
manufacture nuclear weapons. Under the Geneva Convention on
Treaties, if a country has signed an agreement, it is binding even
though it may not have been fully ratified, and that country must
comply with the agreement’s terms pending ratification. Brazil feels
that it must continue to work for a ban on nuclear attacks on this conti-
nent and on the storage of nuclear weapons here; Brazil does not wish
to abandon the pressure on this point. This firm Brazilian policy of
seeking guarantees from the Soviet Union and other countries was
adopted after the Cuban missile crisis, when President Kennedy suc-
cessfully pushed for the evacuation of missiles from Cuba. Brazil came
out firmly in favor of assurances against the establishment in the
Western Hemisphere of bases for the storage of arms. President Ken-
nedy’s successful handling of the Cuban missile crisis marked the be-
ginning of a decrease in the pressure which Cuba exerted over Latin
American nations. Brazil is totally committed at present not to manu-
facture nuclear weapons. The agreement with the Federal Republic of
Germany provides that no nuclear devices will be manufactured even
for peaceful uses. The manufacture of nuclear explosives even for
peaceful uses is for Brazil in the realm of fantasy, and Brazil is not inter-
ested in fantasy.
22. President Carter noted that Brazil has accepted IAEA safe-
guards on installations purchased from the Federal Republic of Ger-
many. He asked whether this applies to other installations.
23. President Geisel said that there are no unsafeguarded facilities
in Brazil. This includes the facilities at universities where research is
underway. Such facilities are under international controls. The scien-
tific community in Brazil had hoped that Brazil’s failure to ratify might
mean that their research would not be under international control, but
was disappointed to learn that this was not to be the case. President
Geisel reiterated that Brazil’s research centers are under Vienna safe-
guards, as well as anything constructed under the agreement with the
FRG. Brazil feels that the IAEA should be strengthened and possibly
reorganized to permit it to conduct its activities in Brazil and
throughout the world. As a UN agency, it should be in a position to use
any necessary resources to fulfill its purposes.
24. President Carter said that when his administration began there
was no systematic formulation for considering requests for the supply
of nuclear fuel abroad. US policy in this respect was variable. There is
now in existence within the USG an entity responsible for such alloca-
tions. President Carter noted that he cannot control these allocations al-

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
though he can exercise a veto power. We have recently passed a law
which clarifies the circumstances under which the US will ship nuclear
fuel in the future. It is important that Ambassador Smith return to
Brazil and meet with the Brazilian authorities in order that there can be
a clear understanding by both sides of the terms of this legislation, and
so that Brazil’s future needs for nuclear fuel can be met, consistent with
US law. This law makes US terms clearer and will help avoid future in-
terruptions in supply.
25. President Geisel said that he had not as yet examined the com-
plete text of the law, but had read about certain of its provisions. He
is aware that it calls for the renegotiation of existing accords with re-
gard to the supply of nuclear fuel. Brazil has a 1972 agreement with
the United States in this sphere. The Angra I nuclear power facility
is under construction, with Westinghouse contributing. The US has
agreed to furnish enriched fuel for the startup as well as for re-loading
for a thirty-year period. President Geisel said that he had heard that the
US has recently reaffirmed its commitment to furnish the startup fuel;
he had expected nothing less of US, but was nevertheless pleased with
this reaffirmation. Brazil is, however, concerned about subsequent
shipments for re-loading over the thirty-year period, and would be
happy to receive Ambassador Smith to discuss this question and ex-
amine the implications of the new legislation. President Geisel ex-
pressed confidence that no problems would emerge.
26. Foreign Minister Silveira said that there were no activities in
Brazil not subject to safeguards. This is a concrete fact; this situation
will continue to prevail unless there is a change in the status quo.
27. President Carter noted that Brazil has recently signed an agree-
ment with the FRG to exchange technical information concerning the
thorium fuel cycle. The United States welcomes this action. Our offer
also remains open. The US has thorium and has had extensive experi-
ence in this area. Our only breeder reactor is based on thorium. If the
German agreement turns out to be inadequate or if Brazil feels the need
for more consultations on the thorium fuel cycle, we will be glad to
cooperate. The US believes that the INFCE studies represent a good
means of learning from one another. There are certain unpredictabil-
ities in the nuclear sphere which need to be resolved. The INFCE
studies do not have as their objective persuading countries to take ac-
tion which is against their own interests, but rather are designed to help
interested nations work together.
28. President Geisel responded that Brazil is very active in INFCE
and is pleased to be involved in this kind of cooperative effort. Thorium
cooperation with the FRG is not a new development, but rather has
been underway for some time (Foreign Minister Silveira interjected at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
this point that it began in 1979).4 President Geisel observed that the
United States is working along the same lines and that Brazil wanted to
cooperate in an endeavor in which all have an interest.
29. President Carter agreed, stating that this is one more approach
to a solution of the energy problem, an excruiatingly difficult matter for
all of us.
30. President Geisel said he is happy about the US initiative on the
bilateral examination of problems in areas involving other kinds of
fuel. Brazil is seeking to develop alcohol as a source of energy, a natural
direction for Brazilian efforts since the country has large land reserves.
Brazil has found new and higher grades of coal deposits in the south,
and the US offer to cooperate in coal research and development is most
welcome. President Geisel said he was extremely happy over the pros-
pect of joint efforts to cooperate in resolving the energy problem and to
improve the outlook, in the face of the inevitable eventual exhaustion
of oil reserves.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
4 An error in transcription; Silveira meant 1978.
434.
Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
State1
6639. USIAEA. Subject: Treaty of Tlatelolco—Ratification Prospects.
1. OPANAL General Secretary Gros Espiel gave visitors from Na-
tional Defense University and Emboffs a good rundown of present
state of play on pending ratifications of Tlatelolco Treaty in meeting at
OPANAL HQ on April 21.
2. Argentina. Gros indicated paramount importance of Argentine
ratification inasmuch as it was most nuclearly advanced country in re-
gion, and he believed some of Argentine military wanted to retain right
to make nuclear weapons. Gros cited Vance-Montes joint communique´
Limited Official Use; Priority. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Caracas, the
Mission in Geneva, Georgetown, the Interests Section in Havana, Moscow, USUN,
Panama City, Paris, Santiago, and Vienna.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
statement that Argentina would soon ratify, as U.S. would Protocol I.
Gros thinks Argentina is waiting for U.S. Protocol I ratification, but
would then ratify (without waiver) in next 2–3 months. He believes Ar-
gentine internal politics now such that it will wish to improve U.S. atti-
tudes toward it and will want to uphold its commitment to Vance, once
U.S. has done its part.
3. Brazil. Gros noted that he had tried in vain for several years to
point out that Brazil, as signer and ratifier, must respect Treaty. In last
year, Brazilians have stated three times that they would, under Vienna
Convention,2 not do anything contrary to Treaty. This was stated (1) in
a letter from Silveira, (B) by a Brazilian Rep at the 1977 OPANAL
meeting in Caracas, (C) in the Geisel-Lopez Portillo Joint Communique´.
Gros has “off the record” info that Brazil would become a full party if
the USSR would sign and ratify Protocol II.
4. Chile. Gros says he has a recent telegram from the Chilean For-
eign Minister that indicates that Chile would waive the entry into force
requirements if the USSR would ratify Protocol II.
5. Cuba. Gros cited Guantanamo as the most fundamental problem
preventing Cuba from signing and ratifying. He thinks that negotia-
tions with Cuba will become much easier once the U.S. ratifies Protocol
I, although this will not solve the problem completely. Cuban adher-
ence, he says, is also connected with the USSR attitude toward Protocol
II. Once this and U.S. Protocol I ratification are accomplished, he be-
lieves fruitful negotiations with Cuba can be accomplished.
6. Guyana. Gros says Guyana wants to sign, but has been pre-
vented from doing so by Venezuelan opposition under Article 25.3 He
says intense negotiations have been underway with Venezuela, and
he thinks a “formula” has been found which will be acceptable to
both countries. He therefore expects Guyana to become a party “in the
coming months.”
7. United States. Gros thinks that the wait in seeking Senate con-
sent to Protocol I was justified as the ratification of the Panama Canal
treaties paves the way for Protocol I.4 He views the Canal zone as now
2 Reference to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
3 Article 25 of the Treaty of Tlatelolco states that “Unless the Parties concerned
agree on another mode of peaceful settlement, any question or dispute concerning the in-
terpretation or application of this Treaty which is not settled shall be referred to the Inter-
4 Reference to the fact that Article IV of the Panama Canal Treaty states that “since
Panama is a signatory to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, the United States shall not install any
type of nuclear armament on the territory of Panama.” The Carter administration there-
fore needed to gain Senate ratification of the Panama Canal treaties before submitting the
Treaty of Tlatelolco to the Senate. The Senate ratified the first Panama Canal Treaty on
March 16 and the second on April 18.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
denuclearized by the new Canal Treaty (except for transit rights) and
notes that, through this treaty, Panama has accepted transit rights.
8. France. Gros says he has “unofficial information” that the
French may announce their intent to sign Protocol I during the SSOD.
9. USSR. Gros believes there are “indications” of a change of posi-
tion on the part of the Soviets toward Protocol II. When Lopez Portillo
visits Moscow in mid-May, he will raise the question with the USSR on
behalf of all of Latin America. The timing will also nearly coincide with
the SSOD in New York. Thus, while there is no assurance, Gros thinks a
favorable Soviet announcement is “very possible.” He added that the
Soviet Ambassador told him April 20 that there were “possible signs”
of a change of Soviet attitude.
Thompson
435.
Memorandum From Robert Pastor of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Your Question About the Treaty of Tlatelolco
I have obtained the relevant portion of Brezhnev’s statement2 on
signing Tlatelolco, and it does not appear that he intends to sign it with
any reservations—at least he did not refer to any reservations in that
statement. The statement follows:
In accordance with its principled line of reducing the threat of nu-
clear war, the Soviet Union has also adopted a decision to become a
party in a relevant form to the International Treaty on Banning Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America. Thus we, like the other states possessing
nuclear weapons, will take upon ourselves the obligation not to help in
the acquisition of nuclear arms by Latin American states, and also not
to use such weapons against the states that are parties to the treaty.
Copies were sent to Hunter and Tuchman.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Where Brezhnev says that the USSR will become a party “in a rele-
vant form” ACDA and I interpret that as meaning he will be signing the
Protocol II. With regard to the President’s note on Vance’s night
reading on Tlatelolco,3 I have spoken to Bob Hunter and to officials in
ACDA to make sure that they touch base with the French before the
SSOD to make clear our desire that the French adhere to Tlatelolco. Fur-
thermore, I have been in touch with ARA requesting that they cable rel-
evant posts about the Soviet announcement and ask those countries
which have not yet signed, ratified, or permitted the Treaties to come
into force, to do that. We have just received a cable from our Interests
Section in Havana4 which speculates on whether the Cubans will
follow the Soviet example, and concludes that they may not.5 The cable
also makes the point that acceptance of Tlatelolco by the Soviets is a
public confirmation of their private 1962 and 1970 assurance to US not
to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba.6
3 Not found.
Policy File, D780181–0611.
5 On May 4, Vance told Mexican President Jose´ Lo´pez Portillo that Mexico could be
“very helpful” in persuading Cuba to sign the Treaty of Tlatelolco. If Cuba refused, how-
ever, he warned that the Treaty could not be implemented. (Memorandum of Conversa-
tion; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor
1970, in response to accusations that the Soviets were constructing a nuclear naval port at
Cienfuegos, Dobrynin informed National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger that the So-
viet Government “would like to reaffirm once more that the Soviet side strictly adheres to
its part of the [1962] understanding on the Cuban question and will continue to adhere to
it in the future on the assumption that the American side as President Nixon has reaf-
firmed, will also strictly observe its part of the understanding.” (Memorandum of Con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
436.
Telegram From the Embassy in Chile to the Department of
State1
3612. For NRC. Subject: Chile Will Sign NPT and Accept Total
Safeguards on All Nuclear Installations in Chile in Exchange for U.S.
Assistance in Nuclear Field.
1. Summary: Reports reaching Embassy indicate Chile might be
willing to sign the NPT, accept total safeguards on all Chilean nuclear
facilities, and waive requirements for entry into force of Tlatelolco
Treaty in exchange for an assured nuclear fuel supply and technical
assistance from the USG. Ambassador will shortly be invited by CCEN
for discussion on the subject. Chile’s strategy will be to first attempt to
obtain nuclear fuel and technical assistance from U.S. without making
concessions; second, attempt to obtain nuclear fuel and technical assist-
ance from U.S. by placing La Reina reactor and facilities under total
safeguards but only the fuel supply at Lo Aguirre under safeguards;
and finally, agree to sign NPT, accept total safeguards, and waive re-
quirements for entry into force of Tlatelolco Treaty in exchange for an
assured nuclear fuel supply and technical assistance from the U.S. in
event previous alternatives fail. End summary.
2. Embassy Science Officer was told by a member (protect) of the
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission (CCEN) on 11 May that Chile
would be willing to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT),
accept total safeguards on all Chilean nuclear facilities, and waive re-
quirements for entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in exchange
for a agreement with the United States government to provide Chile
with a dependable supply of nuclear fuel and other undefined nuclear
technology assistance. This decision was reached, along with a prelimi-
nary negotiating strategy, during a 10 May meeting of the CCEN Advi-
sory Board.
3. During the meeting on the CCEN Advisory Board, CCEN Presi-
dent General (R) Jaime Estrada L. told board members that he had re-
ceived inquiries from both the Chilean Foreign Minister Hernan Cu-
billos Sallato and Defense Minister General Raul Benavides as to why
Chile should not sign the NPT. Estrada stated that he had been op-
posed to Chile signing the NPT and accepting total safeguards over all
CCEN installations. He was, however, beginning to realize that Chile
would not be able to continue operating its two experimental nuclear
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Buenos Aires.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
reactors. Moreover, the GOC would be forced to cancel plans for
building a 600 mw nuclear electric power plant slated to go on-line in
1987, all due to inability to obtain nuclear fuel to operate the facilities.
Estrada said that CCEN had dispatched Dr. Max Von Brandt to France
in February of this year to attempt to obtain 90 percent enriched ura-
nium for CCEN’s experimental reactors. However, the French in-
formed Von Brandt that due to heavy pressure from the USG, they
would no longer be able to supply Chile with highly enriched uranium.
Chile was now without a nuclear fuel supply, said Estrada, and would
have to find some means of changing this situation. After consideration
of all available facts, the Advisory Board recommended that Estrada in-
vite the U.S. Ambassador to CCEN headquarters for a discussion of the
problem and offer to sign the NPT, accept total safeguards and waive
requirements for entry into force of the Tlatelolco Treaty in exchange
for nuclear assistance from the U.S. Estrada reluctantly agreed to the
recommendation but insisted on the following graduated negotiating
strategy:
A) CCEN would first attempt to arrange for a U.S. nuclear fuel
supply and technical assistance without making concessions toward
NPT.
B) CCEN would secondly attempt to arrange for a U.S. nuclear fuel
supply and technical assistance in return for placing the La Reina re-
actor and facilities under total safeguards but limiting only the fuel
supply to a safeguards agreement at the Lo Aguirre reactor; and
C) Failing the above alternatives, CCEN would finally agree to
sign the NPT, accept total safeguards on all nuclear facilities, and waive
requirements allowing the Treaty of Tlatelolco to enter into force in ex-
change for a firm U.S. commitment to provide CCEN with an assured
supply of reactor fuel and other undefined nuclear technical assistance.
4. Comment: The above represents a possible breakthrough in our
attempts to encourage Chile to sign the NPT. Department guidance on
a proper response to CCEN, if and when Ambassador is summoned,
would be helpful as well as an indication of U.S. willingness to nego-
tiate a nuclear assistance pact with CCEN in exchange for Chile signing
the NPT and accepting total safeguards.2
Landau
Chile’s impending decision “very positive events for overall US non-proliferation efforts
if we can secure them.” The Department remained concerned, however, that its hope for
“a rapid restoration of democratic institutions in Chile” might conflict with the goal of
The Embassy replied on June 9 that “the conflicts between USG human rights and nu-
clear objectives are more apparent than real.” (Telegram 4371 from Santiago; National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
437.
Editorial Note
On May 18, 1978, after numerous statements to U.S. officials over
the previous months, (see, for example, telegram 9419 from Moscow,
April 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780184–1211) Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev signed Pro-
tocol II of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. For the text of the statement an-
nouncing the decision, see Telegram 11259 from Moscow, May 20,
1978.
(National
Archives,
RG
59,
Central
Foreign
Policy
File,
Four days later, Argentine President Jorge Rafael Videla wrote
President Jimmy Carter that “following necessary studies and consid-
eration, my Government has decided that the Argentine Republic will
accede to the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The appropriate official announce-
ment will be made during the United Nations Conference on Disarma-
ment.” Videla also said that this “singularly important act merely
serves to confirm our constant policy in matters of nuclear energy, the
basic lines of which I explained to you during our meeting. (See Docu-
ment 420) The same act now becomes all the more relevant in that it is
linked to United States’ disarmament policy and affords, without any
doubt, clear evidence of the common concern of our two countries in
behalf of a more just and stable world order.” (Letter from Videla to
Carter; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/
On May 24, President Carter submitted Protocol I of the Treaty to
the U.S. Senate for ratification. Carter said that he was “convinced that
it is in the best interest of the United States to ratify Protocol I. Such a
step will strengthen our relations with our Latin American neighbors,
further our global non-proliferation and arms control objectives and
contribute to the full realization of Latin American Nuclear Free Zone.”
He also hoped that his decision would influence other nations to ad-
here to the Treaty so it could “enter into full force and effect for the en-
On June 12, Carter wrote Videla and said he “was very pleased to
receive your letter informing me that Argentina would ratify the Treaty
of Tlatelolco. The coming into force of the Treaty will represent a very
significant step toward the establishment of a more secure world order.
I very much hope that Argentina will be able to formally to ratify the
Treaty and bring it into effect soon. This will give important impetus to
our common efforts to reduce the dangers of further proliferation of
nuclear weapons and to secure a nuclear free zone in Latin America.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
438.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
17098. Subject: French Action on the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Ref: State
1. Summary: French will discuss with OPANAL possible condi-
tions under which GOF might adhere to Protocol I of the Treaty of Tla-
telolco. These discussions will probably be held after the June 28 con-
clusion of the SSOD. End summary.
2. As instructed Reftel Emboff raised Protocol I issue with Jacques
Boullet, Acting Chief of PACTSND Disarmament at Foreign Ministry,
in absence of more knowledgeable officials who are in New York for
SSOD.
3. Boullet noted that in his SSOD speech May 25 President Giscard
said that “France hopes . . . to be able to sign Protocol I. With that inten-
tion it will open contacts with authorities established by the treaty with
a view of examining the conditions under which the signature could
come about.” Thus the GOF statement is conditional.
4. Boullet said that as far as he knows no contact has yet been made
with OPANAL. He expected that the contacts will not occur until after
the conclusion of the SSOD. However GOF officials now in New York
may have a better idea on timing.
5. We will continue to discuss this issue. For that purpose we
would appreciate receiving a copy of the analysis of the treaty and Pro-
tocol I which has been given to French Embassy in Washington.3
Hartman
Confidential. Sent for information to Mexico City and USUN.
bassy to notify the French Government that the Soviet Union and Argentina intended to
ratify Protocol II during the UN’s Special Session on Disarmament. (National Archives,
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
439.
Telegram From the Embassy in Argentina to the Department
of State1
4680. USIAEA. Subject US/Argentine Nuclear Cooperation. Ref: A
1. Summary: The GOA having announced ratification of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco6 is taking steps toward discussion with IAEA for interna-
tional safeguards. They expect the US to recognize this with some posi-
tive moves toward expanded cooperation such as discussions on
transfers of heavy water productions technology. They still contend
this was the agreement reached in the Joint Communique´ of last No-
vember7 and claim that reprocessing discussions were out of the con-
text of the Joint Communique´, and in any event, according to GOA they
are not reprocessing. The GOA does not feel Tlatelolco is important
from a non proliferation standpoint but will follow this requirement to
satisfy US requests. They again specify that the NPT is discriminatory
Confidential. Sent for information to Brasilia, Mexico City, and Vienna.
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, Argentina feels it has lived up to the US recommendation made
during the visit of Secretary Vance last November concerning the first stage for nuclear
cooperation; the GOA is expecting an active US response.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780234–1016)
Foreign Minister Montes confirmed publicly that Argentina will ratify the Treaty of Tla-
telolco. There was no indication, however, as to when this long awaited step might take
place or whether Argentina will waive the condition necessary for the treaty to enter into
force.” The Department also requested “the Embassy’s thoughts on when actual ratifica-
tion might be expected and what, if any, additional steps we might take to encourage
prompt Argentine action.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
derstanding of the Joint Communique´ on nuclear cooperation issued during Vance’s No-
vember 1977 visit to Argentina. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Madero had asked Smith to “provide him a written statement of the conditions under
which we would supply heavy water to Argentina.” Accordingly, the Department in-
structed the Embassy to deliver a note to the Argentine Government which explained
that the United States would supply heavy water to Argentina contingent upon Argen-
tina’s adoption of full-scope safeguards with the IAEA and ratification of the Treaty of
6 At the May 27 UN Special Session on Disarmament meeting, the Argentine Min-
ister of Foreign Affairs, Vice Admiral Oscar Montes, announced that his country would
Central Foreign Policy File, D780229–0156)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
and they will not sign. The GOA is highly interested in expanded nu-
clear cooperation with the US and is looking forward to talks in this di-
rection. End summary.
2. The following is an unofficial and free translation of a Diplo-
matic Note received by the Embassy in answer to our Diplomatic Note
Joint Communique´ issued during the visit of Secretary Vance to Argen-
tina in November, 1977, and delineating the three stages of cooperation
discussed.
3. “—The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Argen-
tine Republic presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United
States of America and has the honor to refer to the Embassy Verbal
—The Government of the US expresses in Note 75 its position with
respect to some of the questions discussed during the conversations
held by officers of both countries on bilateral nuclear cooperation, on
occasion of the visit to Buenos Aires of Mr Cyrus Vance, Nov 18–22,
1977. It also establishes its interpretation of the text of the Joint Com-
munique´ in connection with those questions.
—In referring to the activities to be undertaken by both gov-
ernments, the Note states in the three stages indicated that: ‘these ac-
tions would occur separately; they would not be linked, nor would sub-
sequent stages of expanded cooperation be specifically linked to these
actions.’ These are high principles but to our understanding, do not in-
clude the idea of mutual relations, ie “do ut des” (give and take). It
seems natural to interpret that, in general, a cooperation plan contem-
plates in some way an approximate equivalence in the actions that both
countries undertake.
—Hence, it is our interpretation that the conversations held at that
time led to the expressed intention on the side of the US to transfer
heavy water technology to our country, and to our country’s intention
to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco and enter into a regime of full-scope
safeguards like those of the IAEA.
—We understand that this technology transfer—even though it
may not really contribute to nuclear proliferation—may be of a sensi-
tive nature and dissemination would be considered as an exception to
the US policy. Argentina in turn expected the US to understand that the
ratification of Tlatelolco contained difficulties, since it implicated over-
coming internal opposition from different sectors. Also, it is to be noted
that such ratification corresponds in a larger measure—if not exclu-
sively to the interpretation of the US, and not that of Argentina, with re-
spect to the effects of non-proliferation of Tlatelolco and that it would
satisfy a point of US policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Argentina takes note, then, of what the Government of the US
expresses in the Note which is now being answered, but would like at
least to point out that its own understanding of the questions men-
tioned in the Note pertaining to the meaning of the Joint Communique´,
differs in some aspects with those of the Government of the US.
—It may be remembered also that some opinions stated during the
conversation (in November), which my government feels are of great
importance, were expressed by the GOA in opposition to the unilateral
and anticipated postponement of possible chemical reprocessing activ-
ities, which in any event, are not being carried out in Argentina.
—Notwithstanding the above mentioned, the Argentine Govern-
ment is convinced that both countries are greatly interested in pursuing
the high objective of nuclear non proliferation, and also that the US
Government has a sincere interest in promoting and extending nuclear
cooperation for peaceful ends with Argentina. Under such circum-
stances, the Argentine Government is certain that the different
opinions on the interpretation of the Joint Communique´ and other
questions mentioned in Note 75 can be reconciled by means of the con-
tacts which may be established, and which the Argentine Government
looks forward to with its best disposition.
—The Ministry of Foreign Relations and Worship renews to the
Embassy of the United States of America the expressions of its highest
consideration.” Signed: Alberto Aden, Minister, International Organi-
zations Dept.
4. Comments: On June 13, SciCouns met with Minister Aden,
MFA, who prepared the Note, (Aden handles UN and international or-
ganizations and has responsibility for nuclear affairs in that division) to
discuss the contents of the Note and other issues related to the Treaty of
Tlatelolco and full scope safeguards. Minister Aden indicated that Ar-
gentina has announced the ratification of Tlatelolco and will enter into
discussion in the near future with IAEA to develop and agreement for
full scope safeguards. He said the treaty is now with the CAL and the
Presidency for final approvals.
5. However, Aden stated emphatically that the GOA had over-
come tremendous internal pressure against the ratification of Tlatelolco
and feels now the ball is in the US court, so to speak, to live up to their
part of the “bargain” as agreed in the Joint Communique´. Aden men-
tioned also that Argentina would not sign the NPT because of its dis-
criminatory aspects as outlined by Foreign Minister Montes at the
SSOD. He feels the US should understand how deeply the signing of
the Tlatelolco Treaty had separated internal GOA politics, and how
much pressure was on the President not to ratify the Treaty. The Presi-
dent, however, in order to live up to his US commitment, made the
decision to ratify. Aden stated that Argentina never attached much

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
importance to the Tlatelolco Treaty as a device to prevent non-
proliferation since they (Argentina) never had the intentions to prolif-
erate. However, primarily because the US felt this was an important
move followed by international safeguards as discussed during the
Vance visit last November, the GOA decided to ratify the Treaty ac-
companied by international safeguards and was under the impression
the US would follow up with discussions on the transfer of heavy water
technology. This exchange, according to Aden, was the crux of the
whole matter and apparently where both countries are now of different
opinions relative to the outcome of the November discussions. The Sci-
Couns reviewed again the US understanding of the discussions as
stated in our note, and indicated that it is our clear understanding that
paragraph 7 of the Communique´ referred to expanded US/Argentine
nuclear cooperation under the first two stages and that the phrase “rel-
evant technology” did not include transfer of heavy water production
technology except under conditions described in the third stage. The
third stage included the requirement for a deferral of reprocessing ac-
tivities and the negotiation of a full scope safeguard agreement if this
was not accomplished under stages one or two. These would be the
conditions for further discussions on the transfer of heavy water tech-
nology. As stated in the Note, this US position had been expressed on
several occasions to Castro Madero and other GOA officials by Amb
Smith, Prof Nye, and Embassy officers.
6. Aden indicated deferral of reprocessing was not a part of the
Joint Communique´ but of separate discussions during the visit. He
claimed this was not connected to receiving heavy water technology
from the US; and in any event, Argentina was not involved in chemical
reprocessing and does not have the need nor the technology. However,
Aden said this would remain a technical question that could be dis-
cussed further with the US.
7. Finally, Aden stated Argentina was highly interested in moving
ahead with important discussions with the US on future nuclear coop-
eration and objectives of non-proliferation. He feels if both gov-
ernments work together on a sincere basis for peaceful purposes of
atomic energy, these differences related to the Joint Communique´ and
stages of cooperation can be resolved.
8. The reporting officer indicated he was actively working with
CNEA officials and lawyers on the review of the US Non-Proliferation
Act and that they had requested discussions with the US side on the
renegotiation of a nuclear cooperation agreement (Reftel A) which
would be necessary before some of the expanded cooperation referred
to in the Note could take place.
9. In a final question on the PNE Section of Tlatelolco, Aden men-
tioned this would be decided by Cal and the presidency but he felt this
was not of great importance to Argentina.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
10. As stated in previous messages and inclusive in the above Note
and conversation, the GOA has indicated their decisions to include full
scope safeguards with the ratification of Tlatelolco. However, they
(GOA) fully expect that the US should understand how difficult this
decision was because of internal pressure against it and feel they have
lived up to their commitment in the Joint Communique´ of last No-
vember. The GOA now expects the US to enter into expanded talks on
nuclear cooperation, including the provision of heavy water produc-
tion technology. Regarding the provision requesting the deferral of re-
processing, they claim it was not a part of the Joint Communique´ and,
in any event, would not be an issue since (CNEA) is not reprocessing.
11. It seems we have now come to the point where further joint
talks are necessary. If Argentina takes the action to fulfill stage two by
moving toward a safeguards agreements with IAEA, we should move
ahead with discussions on the renegotiation of our nuclear cooperation
in the fields indicated. The issue of reprocessing and heavy water tech-
nology can be covered in these discussions. The Embassy could begin
by discussing the model nuclear cooperation agreement with the GOA
which we have not yet received authority to do.8
Castro
8 On June 30, the Ambassador to Argentina, Raul Castro, reported that the Argen-
tine Government believed that “the Brazilians are dictating nuclear policy to the US,” be-
cause not only had its nuclear deal with the Federal Republic of Germany gone forward,
but it had not been forced to adhere to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, establish full-scope safe-
guards, or sign the NPT. Meanwhile, Argentina believed that it was “being diplomat-
ically isolated and discriminated against from the standpoint of transfer of nuclear tech-
nology for not signing the NPT.” (Telegram 5034 from Buenos Aires, June 30; National

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
440.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, August 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Senate Ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
I understand that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is cur-
rently planning to hold hearings on Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco in mid-August. I know that you are aware of the importance
which the President attaches to ratification of Protocol I, and that you
will ensure that the representatives from your Department and from
the Joint Chiefs of Staff who will testify before the Committee will indi-
cate their complete and unequivocal support for the Treaty.
You may recall that the President said that he would sign Protocol
I in his Pan-American Day speech, April 1, 1977,2 and signed it on May
26.3 At least partly because of the President’s decision, the Argentines
and the Soviets have both taken steps to ratify the Treaty. It would be
ironic and perhaps a little embarrassing if we were one of the last
holdouts, preventing the Treaty from coming into force sooner. There is
little chance that the Senate would be able to ratify the Treaty this year
if DOD or the JCS expressed any reservations to ratification. Indeed,
unless DOD and JCS are aggressively supportive of ratification, the
Senate may decide to put off consideration until next year. I don’t have
to tell you that it would be a significant accomplishment of the Presi-
dent’s non-proliferation and Latin American policy if Protocol I could
be ratified this year. Could you please have your staff inform mine
who will be the representatives from DOD and JCS testifying at the
hearings?
Zbigniew Brzezinski
General Files, Tlatelolco, Treaty of. Confidential. The memorandum was leaked to col-
umnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, who quoted from it in a Washington Post
column. (Evans and Novak, “Retreat from an ‘Open Administration’,” Washington Post,
August 28, 1978) The column elicited an official letter from the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, General David Jones, to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, John Sparkman (D-Alabama), which explained that the Joint Chiefs had en-
dorsed the signing of Protocol I in December 1977. (Congressional Record, September 27,
1978)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
441.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Colombian Representations with Cuba re Tlatelolco
During the meeting in Panama June 16–17, Colombian President
Alfonso Lopez Michelsen promised President Carter to press Fidel
Castro to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty.2 President Lopez has now
provided us with the following summary of the results of his
representations.
Lopez instructed his Foreign Minister who attended the Cuban na-
tional ceremonies July 26 to speak personally to Castro on this subject.
Castro told the Colombia Foreign Minister that he would not sign the
Treaty; that the USSR had been pressing him hard to do the same thing
and he has said no to the Soviets; that this was in fact one of the main
current points of differences he had with the Russians. Castro ex-
plained that he was not about to give up his freedom of manuever or
limit his future freedom (even though he had no intention of storing or
acquiring nuclear arms) just because the big powers ask him to do so,
i.e. “free of charge.” Lopez concluded that Castro is firm against
signing.
President Lopez said he wanted President Carter to know that he
had complied with his promise and asked that the above information
be passed to him.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
2 Not found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
442.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
25032. Subject: French Position on the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Ref:
State 198484.2
1. According to Francis Beauchataud (Acting Chief of MFA Pacts
and Disarmament Office), the French have had preliminary discussions
with Treaty organization in order to clarify some uncertain aspects of
Protocol I and will continue these talks in September. One major jurid-
ical sticking point is French insistence that overseas departments in
South America and Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe and French
Guiana) be explicitly recognized as “de jure” a part of France and not
allowed to float along under the vague Protocol rubric of “de facto or
de jure” territories. In more general terms, Beauchataud characterized
Protocol I as an “assortment of compromises” for which France, as a
non-participant in the negotiating process, would need fuller explana-
tion before signing.
2. Comment: Beauchataud made no reference to a Giscard visit to
Mexico. (The French President is scheduled to visit Brazil.) He placed
no urgency on French adherence to Protocol I, referring instead to a
rather open-ended negotiating process beginning in the fall. These talks
would serve to clarify the numerous ambiguities in the Protocol which
the French now perceive.
Hartman
Confidential. Sent for information to Mexico.
for an update on the French position on the Treaty and information on a possible August
trip by Giscard to Mexico. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
443.
Editorial Note
Vice President Walter Mondale, scheduled for an early September
1978 visit to Rome to meet with the Italian Government and Pope John
Paul I, agreed to meet with Argentine President Jorge´ Rafael Videla on
September 4 “to discuss the deterioration in U.S.-Argentine relations.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
In addition to human rights, the Department of State briefed Mondale
about Argentina and nuclear non-proliferation. The Department ad-
mitted that “the ultimate intentions of the Argentine leadership in the
nuclear field are not clear,” but noted that Argentina’s “decision to
ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco represents a limited but welcome step to
accept greater restrictions on its freedom of action.” Still, Argentina
had refused to forego the construction of its own reprocessing plant
“unless parallel action is taken by Brazil.” Such a plant could “give Ar-
gentina an ample source of safeguard-free plutonium to support a
weapons program as early as 1981.” (Briefing Memorandum attached
to Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American
Affairs Viron Vaky to Secretary Vance, September 1; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 4, Ar-
nuclear issue during the meeting. The details of their discussion are re-
ported in telegram 226556 to Buenos Aires, September 7. (National Ar-
Over the next three months, the United States continued to press
representatives of the Argentine Government to set a date for its official
ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. An Argentine diplomat said that
the “tie-up” over ratification lay in the Ministry of Economy, which had
“requested more background information on the Treaty.” (Telegram
tral Foreign Policy File, D780374–0734) In early October, another Ar-
gentine diplomat blamed the delay on “questions” that had been raised
“about the safeguard agreement that would be negotiated with IAEA,
which the Foreign Ministry was unable to answer because such agree-
ment has not rpt not yet been negotiated.” (Telegram 8903 from Vienna,
October 3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The Central Intelligence Agency also reported that both Argentina
and Brazil resented U.S. intrusion into their nuclear programs. Argen-
tina “steadfastly refuses to sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty,
contending that it discriminates against countries without nuclear
weapons,” and believed that the Jimmy Carter administration “will
have to relent in its current policy. Meanwhile Argentina wants to have
the technology so it can independently decide whether or not to re-
process” nuclear materials. Brazil, the Agency reported, had “great
power aspirations” and its “resentment of US human rights and prolif-
eration policies has heightened Brazilian sensitivities.” Like Argentina,
“the Brazilians view US nuclear nonproliferation concerns in similar
context, often saying that US opposition to the Brazil-West German nu-
clear accord is merely a veiled attempt to constrain Brazilian growth.”
Argentina’s decision to “develop reprocessing technology will al-

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
most certainly prompt Brazil to follow suit.” (Intelligence Report
Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 1, Argentina:
On November 24, the Embassy in Vienna informed the Depart-
ment of State that the International Atomic Energy Agency was “ur-
gently seeking views of USG, Canada, FRG, and UK re an approach to
resolve the no rpt no explosive device issue which Argentina is stead-
fastly resisting in connection with its negotiation of a full-scope safe-
guards agreement” pursuant to its ratification of the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco. Vienna said that while it had become “increasingly concerned
about the intensity with which GOA apparently is pursuing the PNE
issue and the motivations behind this push,” the IAEA’s position repre-
sented a “retreat” from its previous position that “the no rpt no explo-
sive device commitment would henceforth be made explicit in all fu-
ture safeguards agreements.” The Embassy recommended that the
Carter administration coordinate a “negative response to the Agency”
because the “suggested approach is contrary to US policy.” (Telegram
Foreign Policy File, D780484–1054)
The Embassy in Buenos Aires subsequently informed the Depart-
ment that Argentine officials, in particular “hard-liners” in the military
and Foreign Ministry, had “consistently indicated that Argentina must
keep her nuclear options open and maintain the right of PNE’s as the
GOA interprets the Tlatelolco Treaty.” These officials “felt strongly that
this option must be left open because of the regional stability question
and the fact that there is very little trust in the direction future Brazilian
governments will move on a nuclear weapons program, whether under
safeguards or not. The GOA has maintained this same policy on the re-
processing issue.” (Telegram 9362 From Buenos Aires, November 28;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
444.
Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
State1
18001. Dept please pass NSC for Aaron and Pastor. Subject:
Deputy Assistant to President for National Security David Aaron’s
Conversation with Ambassador Sergio Gonzalez Galvez, Director in
Chief for International Organizations, Secretariat of Foreign Relations
1. Following is a memorandum of the conversation which took
place between Mr. Aaron and Amb. Gonzalez Galvez at the Mexican
Secretariat of Foreign Relations (SRE) on October 26, 1978. The conver-
sation covered a wide range of subjects including conventional arms
control, Tlatelolco, Nicaragua, UN, OAS, nonaligned movement,
Belize, and Mexican participation in peace keeping operations. Other
participants are listed at end of telegram.
2. Mr. Aaron opened the meeting by speaking of President Carter’s
interest in revitalizing the spirit of cooperation which had character-
ized the beginning of the Lopez Portillo-Carter Administrations. He
said he would be reporting the results of his visit directly to the Presi-
dent and that he would welcome Gonzalez Galvez views on a wide
range of international issues. He spoke of President Carter’s great in-
terest in Mexican-U.S. relations and expressed the belief that the time
was now ripe for increased emphasis on U.S.-Mexican cooperation.
3. Gonzalez Galvez began by recounting the history of Mexico’s re-
cent efforts for international arms control.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
5. Tlatelolco
Gonzalez Galvez (GG) expressed thanks for the effective support
the U.S. has given the Tlatelolco Treaty, support he knew had been es-
pecially effective with the Soviet Union and Argentina. He then said
that in response to the U.S. request, Foreign Secretary Roel had spoken
to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko asking that the Soviets not reit-
erate the statement they made upon signing the Treaty when they de-
posit their instrument of ratification. Gromyko had been noncommittal,
saying only that the Soviets would seriously consider the Mexican re-
quest. Gonzalez Galvez said the Soviets gave no indication of when
they would ratify. Mr. Aaron emphasized that reiteration of the Soviet
statement would give the U.S. serious problems both because it would
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
cast doubt on the validity of the Treaty and lead to other reservations,
and because it would seriously jeopardize U.S. ratification of Protocol I
of the Treaty. He urged that the Mexicans continue to press the Soviets
not to reiterate their statement. Mr. Pastor added that if the Soviet state-
ment were repeated, a statement from Mexico supporting the U.S. posi-
tion on nuclear transit might be necessary to ensure U.S. Senate ratifica-
tion of Protocol I of the Treaty.
6. Gonzalez Galvez said Mexico strongly preferred not to have to
make a statement re nuclear transit. He noted that his government has
already declared that it would not permit nuclear transit on its territory
and said that Panama had taken a similar position in a declaration
made in 1968. We pointed out that notwithstanding any earlier Pana-
manian statement, the New Panama Canal treaties quite clearly do not
prohibit nuclear transit, and that the new treaties superceded the 1968
Panama statement. GG accepted that point. He added that he had
spoken to the Cubans on Tlatelolco.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
445.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany1
295257. Subject: Supply of Heavy Water to Argentina. Ref: (A)
cret; Exdis. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, and Ottawa. Drafted by John
Bligh (EUR/CE); cleared by Susan Klingaman (EUR/CE), Richard Barkley (EUR/CE),
James Thyden (S/S–O), and Vest; and approved by William Woesner (EUR/CE).
Ministry said that its government “has difficulties with supplying heavy water tech-
nology to Argentina and has told the Argentines so. Basic FRG policy is to refuse to pro-
vide sensitive technology to a nation which is attempting or intending to acquire sensi-
tive nuclear technologies for the full fuel cycle.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy Files, D780471–0410)
cussions with Argentina on nuclear cooperation, the United States “reiterated that (1) it
expected Argentina to complete its ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco; (2) agreement
to NPT-type full-scope safeguards would greatly facilitate expanded cooperation with
the US (e.g., assistance with Argentine export of research reactors); and, (3) heavy water
technology supply would be contingent upon indefinite deferral of its reprocessing
plans. In this context, Dr. Jorge Coll, Secretary-General of CNEA, stated that deferral of
reprocessing was linked to Brazil’s program because of Argentina’s concern about re-
gional stability, and that US policy on the non-supply of heavy water production tech-
nology was driving Argentina toward doing business with the FRG.” (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Assistant Secretary Vest took advantage of November 20 visit
(on unrelated subject) by Ambassador Von Staden to present latter
with following aide me´moire expressing U.S. concerns over non-
proliferation aspects of subject transaction:
Begin text: The Department of State wishes to bring to the attention
of the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany an issue involving
Argentina which is of grave concern to the United States.
The United States is deeply concerned over the prospect of nuclear
weapons proliferation in the Western Hemisphere and has indicated to
Argentina its expectation that that country will complete ratification of
the Treaty of Tlatelolco and accept an international safeguards obliga-
tion covering all of its nuclear activities and precluding any nuclear ex-
plosive use.
In addition, both Brazil and Argentina have been urged to defer
their plans for the development of nuclear reprocessing facilities. The
United States believes that the Argentine reprocessing program is
spurred primarily by a desire to maintain its lead over Brazil and that
this competition could lead to a reprocessing race in Latin America
which would threaten hemispheric stability.
In discussions with Argentina over the last year, the United States
has taken the firm position that it would be prepared to supply heavy
water production technology, which Argentina is seeking, only if Ar-
gentina deferred its reprocessing plans in addition to the steps indi-
cated above.
The United States is concerned, however, that Argentina will at-
tempt to obtain this sensitive technology from other suppliers without
deferring reprocessing.
Representatives of the United States have called the attention of of-
ficials of the Government of the Federal Republic and other potential
suppliers of heavy water production technology to this matter and to
the belief that this technology should not be supplied to Argentina
unless it agreed to defer its reprocessing plans. The Embassy of the
United States in Bonn has been informed that the Government of the
Federal Republic shares these concerns and intends to take a similar
position, if the Federal Republic is approached concerning the supply
of heavy water production technology. The Department of State appre-
ciates this attitude and wishes to ensure that senior members of the
Government of the Federal Republic are aware of the strong interest of
the United States in this issue.
The Department of State believes that it is important that the Gov-
ernments of the United States and the Federal Republic consult closely
on this issue and, in particular, before any binding commitments are
entered into for the supply of this technology to Argentina.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
The Department of State appreciates the Embassy’s consideration
in advising the Government of the Federal Republic of United States’
concern in this matter and looks forward to continued cooperation on
the non-proliferation issue. End text.
2. Von Staden promised that expression of U.S. concerns would
reach highest levels of his government adding that he was sure that
Rouget (Ref A) had already seen to it.
Christopher
446.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the United Kingdom and France1
304639. USMission IAEA. Subject: U.S. Response to Soviet State-
ment on Protocol II to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, also
known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco.2 Protocol II is open for adherence to
nuclear weapon states only and requires them to respect the nuclear
weapon-free zone established by the Treaty and to refrain from using
or threatening to use nuclear weapons against the parties to the Treaty.
The U.S., UK, France and People’s Republic of China have previously
signed and ratified Protocol II.
2. We welcome Soviet signature of Protocol II. However, their sig-
nature was accompanied by a declaration which, inter alia, stated that:
“The final act of the preparatory commission for the denucleariza-
tion of Latin America interprets the Treaty in the sense that the
granting of transit authorization for nuclear weapons requested by
States that are not party to the Treaty shall lie within the jurisdiction of
each State party to the Treaty. In this regard, the Soviet Union reaffirms
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Moscow, Mexico City, USUN,
Vienna, and Panama City. Drafted by Margot Mazeau (ACDA/GA) and Michael
Matheson (L/PM); cleared by Louis Nosenzo (OES/NET), Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP),
Charles Steiner (PM/NPP), George Jones (ARA), Kent Brown (EUR/SOV), Pastor (NSC),
Susan Flood (OSD/ISA), Mark Lissfelt, and Peter Reams (EUR/NE); and approved by
James Michel (L).
2 See Document 437.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
its position that transit authorization for nuclear weapons in any form
would be contrary to the purposes of the Treaty, according to which, as
specifically stated in the Preamble, Latin America must be completely
free from nuclear weapons, and would be incompatible with the non-
nuclear status of the States party to the Treaty and with their obliga-
tions laid down in Article 1 of the Treaty.”
“Any actions carried out by a State or States Party to the Tlatelolco
Treaty that are incompatible with their non-nuclear status . . . shall be
considered by the Soviet Union to be incompatible with the obligations
of those countries under the Treaty. In such cases the Soviet Union re-
serves the right to review its obligations under additional Protocol II.”
“The Soviet Union also reserves the right to review its attitude
toward additional Protocol II in the event of actions by other States pos-
sessing nuclear weapons which are incompatible with their obligations
under the aforementioned Protocol.”
3. It is not clear to U.S. whether this declaration was intended as a
statement of Soviet view as to the legal obligations of the parties, or
only a statement as to how they might react to certain actions by others
which they would regard as politically objectionable even though le-
gally permissible; and we would not want to characterize the statement
one way or the other. Nonetheless, the above parts of the Soviet state-
ment take exception to the negotiating history of the Treaty and are in
conflict with the formal understanding placed on record by the United
States at time of its ratification, and we would not wish to leave them
unchallenged. The USG instrument of ratification of Protocol II in-
cluded the following understanding: “that the United States govern-
ment takes note of the preparatory commission’s interpretation of the
Treaty, as set forth in the final act, that governed by the principles and
rules of international law, each of the contracting parties retains ex-
clusive power and legal competence, unaffected by the terms of the
Treaty, to grant or deny non-contracting parties transit and transport
privileges.” (In fact, the idea of including in the Treaty a prohibition on
granting such transit and transport privileges was explicitly rejected
during the negotiation of the Treaty.) Thus, it is clear that the Treaty
permits the contracting parties to grant transit rights through their ter-
ritories to airplanes or vessels carrying nuclear weapons, and the USG
placed explicit reliance on that interpretation in ratifying Protocol II.
4. We have requested that the Soviets reconsider their declaration
and have strongly urged them not to repeat it upon ratification. How-
ever, they have not given any indication that they are willing to refrain
from repeating it. Soviet declaration will be a negative factor when
Senate considers U.S. ratification of separate Protocol to Treaty (Pro-
tocol I), applicable to non-Latin American States who administer terri-
tory in Treaty’s zone of application.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
5. USG intends to reply formally to the Soviet declaration through
the depositary (the Government of Mexico) and to request the deposi-
tary to circulate reply to all signatories and parties to the Treaty and its
protocols. USG reply could be made either at time of Soviet ratification
or at this time. If statement were made now and if the Soviet Union
were to repeat its declaration on ratification on Protocol II, we would
then reiterate our own position in an appropriate manner. FYI: We
want to have our statement on record when Senate considers U.S. ratifi-
cation of Protocol I next year. End FYI.
6. Proposed U.S. reply follows:
Begin text. The Department of State refers to the note from the Em-
bassy of Mexico, dated June 7, 1978,3 transmitting a copy of the Spanish
translation of a declaration made by the Government of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics on the occasion of its signing of Protocol II to
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America.
The Government of the United States welcomes the signature of
the Protocol by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
publics. However, the Government of the United States does not agree
with the view expressed by the Government of the Union of Soviet So-
cialist Republics in the second sentence of paragraph 5 of its statement
on signature:
“That transit authorization for nuclear weapons in any form
would be contrary to the purposes of the Treaty . . . and would be in-
compatible with the non-nuclear status of the States party to the Treaty
and with their obligations laid down in Article 1 of the Treaty.”
The Government of the United States wishes to reaffirm its posi-
tion, as expressed in the statement accompanying its ratification of Pro-
tocol II, that, as set forth in the preparatory commission’s final act, each
of the contracting parties retains exclusive power and legal compe-
tence, unaffected by the terms of the Treaty, to grant or deny non-
contracting parties transit and transport privileges.
It is therefore the position of the Government of the United States
that the statement made by the Government of the Union of Soviet So-
cialist Republics in no way affects the legal rights and obligations of
any party to the Treaty or its protocols.
The Department requests the Embassy to take the necessary steps
to have the Government of Mexico inform the other parties to the
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Treaty and its protocols of the view expressed by the Government of
the United States with respect to this matter. End text.
7. Since both UK and France are parties to Protocol II, we request
that you advise appropriate British and French officials of the fore-
going, encourage them to make similar replies to the Soviet declaration,
and elicit their views as to the timing of such replies (i.e., whether they
prefer to await Soviet ratification). We will provide copies of above to
Embassies in Washington.
Vance4
4 On December 12, the Soviet Presidium officially ratified Protocol II. Its statement
447.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Otto Lambsdorff and the Question of FRG Heavy Water
Technology Sale to Argentina
Lambsdorff yesterday said it was especially important for the FRG
to sell heavy water technology to Argentina as an accompaniment to its
selling reactors which use heavy water.2 German industry needed to in-
clude this technology in its offer in order to compete with the Cana-
dians for reactor sales. Recently we have had indications that the Cana-
dians may also offer this technology to gain Argentine reactor sales.
Lambsdorff stressed that the FRG would condition the sale on Argen-
tina’s acceptance of safeguards on all Argentine nuclear facilities
2 No further record of this meeting has been found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
(“full-scope”).3 The Canadians have said they would also insist on
full-scope safeguards.
Our position has been conveyed to the Germans4 and Canadians.5
Heavy water production technology should be offered only if Argen-
tina defers its reprocessing plans, as well as accepts full-scope safe-
guards and ratifies the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The basis for our position is
not that heavy water technology will enable Argentina to build a bomb,
but that this technology will make Argentina independent of sup-
plier pressure, thereby removing any lever to get Argentina to defer
reprocessing.
I urged Lambsdorff that the Federal Republic not face the U.S. with
a fait accompli but to raise the matter at a higher level, and in the mean-
time we would review the matter. I suggest you ask that we be given an
opportunity to review the matter before any final decision is reached by
the FRG.
Attached is my request to Tom Pickering for a State-ACDA re-
view.6 (Dr. Mathews is participating.)
Gerard Smith7
United States “was pleased by assurances given by FRG that it would not sell heavy
water technology without receiving assurances parallel to those requested by US (Tlatel-
olco plus full scope safeguards plus delay of reprocessing).” The Germans said that the
final decision “had not been made,” but “asked why full scope safeguards alone were not
enough.” Smith and Pickering argued “that with sensitive facility like reprocessing plant,
possibility of abrogation of safeguards was real and that we did not believe it was good
idea to introduce reprocessing anywhere at a premature stage.” The U.S. Delegation be-
lieved “it is clear that Germans are being pushed by their industry to sell heavy water
technology to Argentina and do not want to make deferral of Argentine reprocessing a
condition.” Indeed, “Smith categorically restated US opposition to such sale.” (National
4 Several months ago George Vest conveyed our position to Ambassador Von
Staden [see Document 445]; I reviewed our position with Hermes in Bonn last month [see
footnote 3 above] and last week in Vienna I was told by the FRG Governor on the IAEA
Board that Schmidt was aware of our position. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 Not found.
6 Not attached.
7 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
448.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
69906. USIAEA. Subject: Supply of Heavy Water Production Tech-
C) Buenos Aires 1787.4
1. (C) Entire text.
2. In response to Morokhov’s questions posed Reftel A concerning
sale of heavy water production technology and heavy water to Argen-
tina, Embassy should convey the following comments to Morokhov (if
he has returned to Moscow) and other appropriate Soviet officials.
(These can also be used to answer Komplektov, per Reftel B.)
3. As Assistant Secretary Pickering informed Morokhov in Feb-
ruary,5 Argentina is currently shopping for heavy water production
technology and has discussed sale of this technology with several sup-
pliers, but principally with Canada and the FRG.
4. Both Canada and the FRG are fully aware of our position (which
we believe is shared by the USSR) that such sensitive technology
should not be transferred as a general rule; and, failing this, our view
that any transfer to Argentina of heavy water technology should be
conditioned on Argentine ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Buenos Aires, Bonn, Vienna,
and Ottawa. Drafted by Anne Stefanas (OES/NET/NEP) and Michael Matheson (L/
PM); cleared by Charles Salmon (T), Robert Kelley (S/AS), George Suchan (PM/NPP),
Robert Sloan (L/N), Richard Williamson (ACDA), Benglesdorf (DOE), Carol Kay Stocker
(EUR), Kent Brown (EUR), Charles Brayshaw (ARA), and George Jones (ARA); and ap-
proved by Michael Guhin (OES/NET/NEP).
ports to effect that Argentina was insisting in its negotiations for purchase of heavy water
from FRG that this sale should be accompanied by a sale of heavy water technology”
from the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files,
whether or not the United States would supply heavy water technology to Argentina.
are expected to present final proposals on Atucha II reactor and related nuclear compo-
nents to the GOA by March 15. Both proposals will include commercial heavy waters
plants and related technology. It is possible that Germany will also propose fast breeder
reactor technology in exchange for Argentine uranium.” Most notably, the Embassy
noted that “neither Canada nor Germany are expected to include any provisions in their
proposals excluding reprocessing.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Files, D790104–0017)
5 See footnote 2 above.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
conclusion of an NPT-type full-scope safeguards agreement with the
IAEA, and indefinite deferral of its reprocessing plans.
5. Morokhov asked about the other suppliers’ conditions for the
sale of heavy water to Argentina for use in its Atucha II reactor. In the
spirit of the suppliers’ guidelines, the US is attempting to remove non-
proliferation considerations from the area of commercial competition
by offering to supply heavy water to Argentina for Atucha II in connec-
tion with the FRG reactor sale on the condition that, should the FRG
win the bid for the Atucha II reactor, the FRG will require NPT-type
full-scope safeguards as a condition of supply. We understand that
Canada will require NPT-type full-scope safeguards as a condition of
supply of heavy water for Atucha II. We hope the USSR would also
adopt the same conditions for supply of heavy water to Argentina for
Atucha II.
6. We intend to continue to emphasize our concerns in this matter.
We believe close consultation between suppliers is very important, par-
ticularly in light of the number of suppliers with whom the GOA is dis-
cussing transfer of nuclear technology and material. We appreciate
consultations with the Soviets on these matters.
7. FYI. Neither the Canadians nor the FRG has yet decided whether
to proceed with the sale of heavy water production technology to Ar-
gentina. In addition, there are indications that Argentina may not insist
that the nuclear sales package include heavy water technology at this
time, although it would still plan to acquire the technology at some fu-
ture time. End FYI.
Vance
449.
Telegram From the Embassy in Ecuador to the Department of
State1
2714. Subject: (U) Opening Session of OPANAL.
1. Entire text confidential.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Mexico City.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. At OPANAL opening session statements were made by several
observer nations and organizations including China, US,2 France,3
Great Britain, the Soviet Union, Finland, Poland, the OAS, and mes-
sages from the General Secretary of the UN, and the Director General of
IAEA. While most of the statements were general comments reaf-
firming support for the principles and objectives of the Treaty of Tlatel-
olco, the statements of China and the Soviet Union deserve particular
attention. Note that report of Chinese and Soviet statements is based on
informal translation.
3. China was supportive of the idea of denuclearized zones and
emphasized the need for the superpowers to recognize the serious
menace represented by the arms race. China also stated that it favored
the total prohibition, destruction and non-use of nuclear weapons. In
specific reference to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, the Chinese called for two
particular developments:
—Dismantling of all foreign military bases in Latin America and
no future establishment of new bases in this region and
—Prohibition of all types of nuclear weapons carriers from both
sea and air space of Latin America.
4. The Soviet Union reiterated its reservations as stated in its initial
signature of Protocol II in May 1978. They reaffirmed their statements
that transit of the zone would be incompatible with the Treaty and that
the Soviet Union reserved the right to review its adherence under any
of these circumstances. However, the Soviet Union also called for ac-
tion by Argentina, Brazil and Chile to complete their adherence to Tla-
telolco and emphasized the contribution of the NPT to the peaceful use
of nuclear energy through international cooperation. They also stated
policy similar to that of the US on preference for Tlatelolco parties. In
discussions following the session, Soviet Delegate Shelepin reiterated
the importance of adherence to the Treaty by Argentina, Chile and
Brazil and of the possibility of our two countries working together not
only to achieve this, but also to encourage NPT adherence and in the
area of the Tlatelolco preference policy.
2 On April 24, Ambassador to Ecuador Raymond Gonzalez spoke to OPANAL. He
said that the Treaty of Tlatelolco “represents a unique pledge by Latin American nations
to forego the acquisition of nuclear weapons, and sets an example for all nations to follow
in the pursuit of world peace.” President Carter, he noted, considered the Treaty “a par-
ticularly important component of world-wide efforts to inhibit nuclear proliferation, as
well as a central measure to the maintenance of the security of the entire hemisphere.”
File, D790194–0426)
3 During a state visit to Mexico, French President Valery Giscard d’ Estaing signed
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. (Telegram 3926 from Mexico City, March 9; National

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
5. In discussions with the Mexican Delegation, by far the largest
and most influential, Mexican Delegates inquired about the status of
the instrumented fuel rods, and whether the US was still waiting for a
formal note from the Foreign Ministry. Would appreciate current status
on these issues. ASAP.
Gonzalez
450.
Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
State1
12955. Vienna for IAEA. Subject: Treaty of Tlatelolco/NPT Review
1. (C—Entire text.)
2. Summary: OPANAL SecGen foresees Brazilian final accession to
Treaty of Tlatelolco, but believes that Cuba remains negative and Ar-
gentina’s ratification continues in doubt. Latin American prepara-
tions for NPT Review Conference are at very preliminary stage. End
summary.
3. Emboffs met July 31 with OPANAL SecGen Hector Gros Espiell
for tour d’horizon. Regarding Treaty of Tlatelolco, Gros said that Bra-
zilians are waiting for U.S. and France to complete ratification of Pro-
tocol I before depositing their own Treaty ratification. On Argentina,
Gros said that ratification prospects remain discouraging despite past
assurances that Argentina would move ahead. Gros asserted that Mex-
ican FonSec Castaneda had recently urged ratification on Argentine
Confidential. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Caracas, the U.S. Interests
Section in Havana, Moscow, Vienna, and all U.S. Consulates in Mexico.
the “desirability of Mexican contribution to work on post-INFCE institutional arrange-
ments, Pakistan, and U.S.-Mexican nuclear cooperation” with Roel and Gonzalez Galvez
“surprise” that Castro Madero said that Argentina would not ratify the Treaty of Tlatel-
olco given that during his recent trip he “had been assured that ratification presented
no problem for Argentina.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Ambassador here—but efforts of GOM and OPANAL thus far have not
been successful.
4. Gros opined that any renewed efforts to encourage Cuba to ad-
here to Treaty will probably have to await both completion of Latin
American ratifications and “political changes” in Washington (that is,
improved U.S.-Cuban relations). Gros confirmed earlier reports that
Mexican President Lopez Portillo had raised Tlatelolco with Fidel
Castro during latter’s May visit to Mexico. According to Gros, Castro
was not receptive and Tlatelolco was omitted from Joint Communique´
at his insistence.
5. Regarding NPT Review Conference, Gros said that no reactions
have yet been received to OPANAL’s solicitation of Latin American
(LA) views. Gros said that LA representatives will probably meet in
January or February to elaborate common position for Review Confer-
ence, including concrete suggestions for better implementation of NPT
Article IV (peaceful nuclear cooperation) by nuclear-weapon states.
Gros remarked that Soviet Ambassador is meeting with him this week
because of Moscow’s concern that LA states might seek to denounce or
undermine NPT at Review Conference—a concern Gros apparently
does not share.
6. Turning to LA nuclear organizations, Gros said that he is consid-
ering seeking to work out an agreement between IANEC (the OAS
Inter-American
Nuclear
Energy
Commission)
and
OPANAL—
whereby function of former would be limited to technical/scientific
questions, while latter would have monopoly in political field. (Com-
ment: Key GOM arms control figure Ambassador Sergio Gonzalez
Galvez remarked to Gerard Smith in May that IANEC is excessively
oriented toward Brazil, Argentina and Chile (see Ref A). Gros’ effort to
work out agreement presumably parallels GOM’s effort to maintain
primacy of OPANAL in LA nuclear affairs.)
7. On conventional arms control, Gros expressed pessimism over
prospects for Mexican initiative—given unsettled LA political situation
following Nicaragua.4 (Drafted by Jon Glassman.)
Lucey
Debayle and the assumption of power by the Sandinistas on July 19.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
451.
Intelligence Cable
IN 2896699A
Washington, August 7, 1979
[Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control
452.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, August 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Canadian Heavy Water Technology to Argentina (C)
Canada’s recent decision to transfer heavy water technology to Ar-
gentina without a requirement that the Argentine reprocessing pro-
gram be deferred represents a serious defeat for the position we have
consistently taken on this question.2 The impact upon our more general
position with respect to national reprocessing plants is likely to be mag-
nified because Canada has been such a close partner with us in non-
proliferation matters. (C)
It would be extremely difficult for the Canadian Government to re-
verse this decision, but there is a fall-back position they could adopt
which would still maintain substantial control over reprocessing activ-
ities in Argentina. If Canada were to require an understanding that any
heavy water produced in Argentina following the transfer would be
presumed to be based upon Canadian technology, and that any special
nuclear material irradiated through the use of such heavy water re-
quired prior Canadian consent before reprocessing, substantial con-
trol would be maintained while permitting Argentina the option
of building its proposed facility. The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
Schlesinger and Seignious.
ronto Star indicated that the Government of Canada had renewed its pledge to sell a nu-
clear reactor to Argentina as well as a heavy water plant “without additional clauses or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
would require us to obtain such a provision if we were to make such a
transfer, and we would not be asking Canada to do more than we
would be required to do under our own legislation. The precedent in-
volved would not affect future Canadian transfers of heavy water, only
production technology. (C)
Unless you perceive substantial objections to such an approach, I
suggest that you carry out a demarche3 of this kind within the next
week. The prospects for success may not be bright, but I believe we
have an obligation to try. (C)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Brzezinski wrote “*” after the word “demarche” and wrote “With the Canadians
wanting a visit from the President (who is concerned about this matter) it is a propitious”
[the remainder of Brzezinski’s comment is missing in the original].
453.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Ecuador, Argentina, and Nicaragua1
212082. Subject: The Secretary’s Meeting With Foreign Minister
Pastor.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
Treaty of Tlatelolco
The Secretary said that he had understood from the Foreign Min-
ister’s predecessor that Argentina would move on Tlatelolco, and he
asked about the status of it.
The Foreign Minister said he wanted to be frank. Argentina had
various sources of energy, among them nuclear plants solely intended
for peaceful ends, for the development of the country, and to comple-
ment the country’s hydroelectric capacity. Argentina had now reached
the stage of being able fully to implement its energy plan. An obstacle
to this is the strong pressure being applied with respect to safeguards.
He believed the GOA’s point of view is a just one. If Argentina can
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to all American Republic diplo-
matic posts. Drafted by Michael Adams (ARA/ERA); cleared by Pastor (NSC), L. Paul
Bremer (S/S), and Robert Steven (S/S–O); and approved by Vaky (ARA).

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
complete its energy objectives it has no objection to full and complete
safeguards. Argentina is fully determined to sign Tlatelolco but wants
to be in a position to take a few steps to fulfill its energy plan. It hopes
to finish negotiations for a heavy water plant in the next two months.
Once these measures are achieved, Argentina plans adherence to the
ban on biological warfare and to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
The Secretary said he had not understood there were conditions in
the previous Joint Communique´.
The Foreign Minister noted that at the time the circumstances he
referred to had not existed.
The Secretary again asked when Argentina could sign.
The Foreign Minister repeated this could be in a couple of months
after Argentina has arranged purchase of the heavy water plant. The
Secretary observed that he had not understood that Argentina was
pressed on the matter such that it could not abide by the communique´.
He assumed Argentina’s stated intention would be carried out as indi-
cated in the communique´. The Foreign Minister’s response was the first
indication of a different view prevailing in Argentina. President Videla
had told President Carter that Argentina would ratify Tlatelolco and
this was reflected in the communique´.2
The Foreign Minister insisted the “central concept” had not
changed; what was different were new circumstances which Argentina
had to take into account before signing.
Vance
2 See Document 437.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
454.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Heavy Water Production Technology to Argentina
With reference to your August 7 memorandum to the Secretary2
on Canada’s recent decision not to go along with our request that it re-
quire Argentine deferral of reprocessing for the supply of heavy water
production technology, we agree it is important to move ahead quickly
to seek the strongest assurances the traffic will bear against possible
misuse of the technology. We also agree that the Canadians would not
likely reverse their decision and, therefore, that our approaches now
should focus on other key elements on which we wish to see a common
supplier position for supply of this technology.
We have already informed the Canadians, Germans, and Swiss
that we attach considerable importance to continuing supplier discus-
sions to ensure common supplier positions on measures in addition to
requiring Argentine acceptance of NPT-type safeguards. We have also
asked the Canadians whether they would require the reprocessing con-
trols noted in your memorandum. We expect to discuss these matters
in detail with the Canadians, Germans and Swiss later this week.
In our strategy for these follow-on discussions and demarches, we
consider it important to emphasize those additional elements which
are most realistically achievable recognizing that we have already
spent considerable leverage and that our leverage among the three sup-
pliers varies substantially. Their willingness to support stronger meas-
ures also varies substantially. As will be noted, we are particularly con-
cerned that pressing the Canadians hard on reprocessing controls now
could further drive the sale to the Swiss and Germans under less strin-
gent controls and, thus, adversely affect US-Canadian relations without
any non-proliferation gain. At the same time, we are concerned that
pressing the Swiss and Germans hard on the matter would not only
have very little chance of success but also diminish our chances of get-
ting their agreement to key supplier controls.
2 See Document 452.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
In this light, a prime goal of our approaches will be to ensure
common interpretation of how the Nuclear Supplier Group (NSG)
Guidelines are to be applied to protect against Argentina later building
unsafeguarded facilities with the technology and without violating any
agreement. As you know, the Guidelines entail bilateral requirements
for safeguards as well as controls over retransfer of the technology or
produced heavy water and controls on facilities produced through the
technology. Although not explicit in the Guidelines, we will wish to en-
sure that the suppliers include a presumption that any facility built
within at least 20 years and using the same type of technology will be
considered as built with the transferred technology and subject to the
same conditions.
There may well be differences among the three suppliers and our-
selves over how the NSG Guidelines are to be carried out. However, we
hope to be in a strong position in this regard since we will be working
from the Guidelines to which we can expect suppliers to adhere. We
consider common interpretation on these bilateral requirements very
important. Such requirements provide a safety net against Argentine
construction of an unsafeguarded reactor in the event Argentina were
later to withdraw from a full-scope safeguards agreement. (Such agree-
ments normally contain withdrawal clauses.)
We plan to focus our approaches as well on the importance of re-
quiring a provision that safeguards be applied on Argentine heavy
water plants and heavy water to protect against the scenario of possible
diversion to clandestine reactors. The IAEA is still developing aspects
of such safeguards, and we will need to continue to work with the
IAEA and other concerned countries to develop the most promising
safeguards approach.
In addition, we intend to continue to urge supplier agreement to
seek Argentine adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco in connection with
their negotiations for heavy water production technology. Argentina
has declared its intention to ratify the treaty and its ratification would,
of course, add further political and legal inhibitions to possible misuse
later of this or other technology in the nuclear area. Also, Argentine ad-
herence is a necessary step to the treaty’s entering into force for Brazil
and Chile.
This is not part of the NSG Guidelines, and other suppliers may
well question whether this should be required in addition to Argentine
acceptance of NPT-type safeguards. Also, the Argentines have made
clear to us that they are not going to ratify Tlatelolco before they have
concluded arrangements for the supply of heavy water production
technology. We recognize that all the suppliers are not likely to require,
and Argentina is thus unlikely to accept, Tlatelolco adherence as an ab-
solute precondition for agreeing on heavy water production supply.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
However, we believe we should continue to underline the importance
of Tlatelolco adherence to the suppliers. Their pressing the point at all
with Argentina could help assure favorable action by Argentina later
on the treaty.
With respect to the reprocessing controls noted in your memo-
randum, as noted, we have already questioned the Canadians on this
point and hope to get a readout from them later this week. If the Cana-
dians were to include such a requirement in their proposal, we would
be in a position to pursue it with the other suppliers. However, while
we agree that this kind of control would be highly desirable, we do not
believe that it is achievable. It would in effect grant the supplier of
heavy water technology control over the reprocessing of essentially all
nuclear fuel in Argentina, including fuel from the German reactor as
well as indigenously supplied fuel in indigenously built reactors.
In the unlikely event that the Canadians were to agree to seek such
a control, the Germans could and probably would argue that their com-
mitment not to undercut the Canadians applied only to NPT-type safe-
guards and possible linkage to deferral of reprocessing, but not to this
kind of extended “contamination.” It appears even more certain that
the Swiss would not agree. Thus, the main result could well be to make
the sale of heavy water production technology by the Germans and
Swiss appear more attractive to the Argentines, thereby making us take
the blame if the Canadians lose the sale (which appears probable). Such
a result would seriously damage our relations with Canada without
any non-proliferation benefit being achieved.
Finally, all three potential suppliers may view such a suggestion as
going beyond the approaches we have been seeking thus far because of
the extended contamination noted above. They are unlikely to be im-
pressed with arguments based on our law which is, at any rate, am-
biguous on this point. To make such controls a centerpiece of our next
approaches, therefore, could well be at the cost of achieving some of the
other highly important conditions outlined in this memorandum.
With these factors in mind, we believe our next steps should con-
centrate on those elements which have a realistic chance of being
achieved not only with the Canadians but also with the Germans and
Swiss. In view of the competition for supply of this technology, sup-
plier agreement remains the key to securing additional assurances
against its misuse.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary3
3 Bremer signed the memorandum for Tarnoff.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
455.
Telegram From the Embassy in Brazil to the Department of
State1
1. (C—Entire text)
2. In conversation with Brazilian Foreign Minister on September
11, I inquired whether statement by Foreign Ministry spokesman3 on
ratification by non-Latin American countries of protocols to Treaty im-
plied that Brazil might be willing to waive Treaty into effect once that
had happened. His reply was negative. He said that all requirements
must be met before Brazil would consider Treaty in force with respect
to Brazil. He ticked these requirements off and they included Cuban
adherence. He smiled and said that once Soviet Union and other
non-Latin countries adhere, Soviet Union might just tell Cuba to ratify
also. He said that he was aware Cuba was using Guantanamo as bar-
gaining chip. He offered no basis for his comment except the interest of
the USSR in control of proliferation and strong influence of USSR on
Cuba.
Sayre
Confidential. Sent for information to Buenos Aires and Moscow.
“recent movement on the Treaty by other countries” including the Soviet Union, the
United States, and France, “Dept believes this may be a useful occasion to raise this issue
in very low-key fashion with appropriate GOB officials to ascertain GOB position on this
matter. At its discretion, Embassy is also authorized to encourage positive action by
Brazil to waive conditions to have the Treaty enter into effect.” (National Archives, RG
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
456.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, October 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation—Argentina (U)
The President has asked that our concern about safeguard arrange-
ments2 in connection with the German and Swiss contracts to supply a
reactor and a heavy water plant to Argentina be made public. In par-
ticular, he wants the public to be informed of the differences be-
tween those arrangements and the safeguard conditions sought by
I would appreciate it if you would arrange for an early statement
on this matter by the Department’s spokesman, taking into account fur-
ther diplomatic efforts we may contemplate to influence the safeguard
conditions to be applied by Switzerland and the FRG. The text of the
statement should be coordinated with Jerry Oplinger of the NSC
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Not found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
457.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation: Proposed Public Statements on Swiss and FRG Contracts with
Argentina
REF:
Your Memorandum to Secretary Vance of October 18, 19792
We have carefully considered the action proposed in your memo-
randum of October 18 in the context of further diplomatic efforts we are
contemplating to influence the safeguard conditions to be applied by
Switzerland and the FRG to nuclear sales to Argentina. Our judgment
is that we should hold off public statements until it is clear that our dip-
lomatic efforts have been unsuccessful. We plan to undertake the fol-
lowing next steps:
—We will consult as called for by the London Suppliers Guide-
lines with Canada, the FRG, the Swiss and possibly the UK on the safe-
guard requirements. The FRG has already agreed in principle to such
consultations. Gerard Smith, when he is in Bonn this week for
post-INFCE discussions, will say to Genscher that we wish to consult
with the above states on Argentina. We expect Genscher will assent to
this. We will then contact the Swiss and other participants to arrange
the consultations.
—In these consultations we will emphasize that Argentina is an
exceptional case in order to avoid a debate about the merits of requiring
full-scope safeguards on a generic basis: sensitive heavy water tech-
nology as well as reactor sales are involved; Argentina has split its
order among a number of suppliers in part to avoid the full-scope safe-
guard requirement; and suppliers have a shared responsibility to pre-
vent this “divide and conquer” strategy from succeeding.
—We are considering letters from the Secretary to Genscher and
Swiss Foreign Minister Aubert to reinforce our concerns on this matter.
We believe our diplomatic efforts have some chance for success
and would be endangered by going public now with our concerns.
Upon Gerry Smith’s return about November 8 we will assess whether
2 See Document 456.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
diplomatic efforts are still worth pursuing and how and when to make
this matter public.3
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
3 On November 5, Brzezinski replied “The President desires a public statement on
this matter in the near future, focusing on the sensitivity of the Swiss heavy water tech-
nology transfer to Argentina and the differences between the safeguard requirements at-
tached to that transfer and those sought by Canada. I would appreciate it if the State De-
partment would release a factual and analytical public statement, cleared by the NSC
staff, by November 9.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, November 5; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 1,
458.
Memorandum From Jerry Oplinger of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Argentine Safeguards: Hoist on our own Petard? (C)
Behind our last minute efforts to persuade the Swiss and Germans
to impose full-scope safeguards on Argentina may lurk a nasty di-
lemma for the U.S. (S)
Unlike Canada, we do not normally require “NPT-type full-scope
safeguards; we require “de facto full-scope.” The difference is simply
that Canada requires an indefinite commitment to keep everything
safeguarded in the future; we only require that everything in country
now be under safeguards. The theory behind our looser requirement is
that the recipient’s need for continued enriched fuel supply will nor-
mally deter subsequent acquisition on unsafeguarded facilities. (C)
But this theory breaks down in the Argentine case; their program
is based on heavy water reactors which use unenriched fuel. They have
their own uranium, and lack only the capability to produce heavy
water in large quantities to reach potential independence from outside
Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
supply. The Swiss are now filling that gap. Unless they agree to the Ca-
nadian safeguards formula, the Argentines could build a complete fuel
cycle in the future free of safeguards, and thumb their nose at outside
suppliers. That is why in this particular case we have strongly backed
the Canadian safeguards formula, and are pressing it on the Swiss and
Germans. (S)
But we will probably fail. We will then face the safeguards ques-
tion ourselves. We are negotiating to supply research reactor fuel to Ar-
gentina, and a U.S. firm has been awarded over $55 million in key com-
ponents for the German reactor sale itself. Will we insist on NPT-type
safeguards, as we are telling the Swiss and Germans they should do
(and lose the business), or will we ignore our own advice and revert to
our normal de facto standard? (S)
There will be strong arguments for business as usual; we do not
have the leverage to insist since the Argentines can go elsewhere. But
we will be accused of applying a double standard, and the Canadians
will be severely bent out of shape. In this case, I think we simply must
practice what we have been preaching. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
459.
Telegram From the Embassy in Argentina to the Department
of State1
9680. New Delhi for Ambassador Smith. Subject: (S) US/Argen-
tine Nuclear Consultations. Ref: (A) State 3009372 (B) State 3006633
1. (S—Entire text).
2. The Embassy strongly feels that a continuing nuclear relation-
ship with Argentina is essential toward attaining US long-range goals
for non-proliferation. By continuing active cooperation with Argentina,
we will remain on the inside of nuclear policy-making and maintain di-
rect knowledge of and some degree of influence over Argentine nuclear
policy and programs. Without this continuing direct contact and co-
operation, the US will be forced to depend on other countries in the
future to assure Argentina’s adherence to safeguards and other non-
proliferation issues. We do not feel the US can depend fully, for ex-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Bern, Bonn, Brasilia, New Delhi, and
Ottawa.
Embassy that “It has been decided that we will not issue a public statement at this time
concerning Swiss safeguard requirements for the sale of heavy water production tech-
nology to Argentina. Instead, we will continue our diplomatic efforts.” (National Ar-
Embassy to remind Argentine officials that “(A) Argentina is, of course, aware of US
views regarding full-scope safeguards and ratification of Tlatelolco and nuclear coopera-
tion with Argentina; (B) Argentina is also aware US has consulted with other potential
suppliers about nuclear cooperation with Argentina and Argentine nuclear programs;
and allegation that US has falsified or distorted any information on Argentine program is
completely unfounded, and we have not distributed any fake photographs” of alleged
Argentine nuclear reprocessing plants. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Files, P840163–1510)
had reiterated the points made in telegram 300633, Argentine officials worried “that the
US has, in their opinion, imposed US national policies on Germany and Switzerland by
pressuring them to demand an NPT-type FSS agreement before supplying nuclear tech-
nology or equipment, which goes beyond NSG guidelines. There seems to be a general
feeling in Argentina that the US has a campaign against Argentina to deny nuclear tech-
nology, which has created a mutual distrust between the two countries and seems to be
the core of the problem.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files,
pleased Department has decided not to issue a public statement at this time concerning
Swiss safeguard requirements for HWT. This would have completely ruptured US/Ar-
gentine nuclear relations and would probably have a strong negative political impact as

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
ample, on Germany and/or Switzerland as agents through whom to
carry out US nuclear policy, the US message for non-proliferation must
be conveyed by the US itself where possible.
3. As mentioned in Reftel (C), we do not feel that Argentina should
be written off from the standpoint of a US nuclear relationship or a con-
tinued US influence. The USA has many friends within top CNEA
management and other GOA circles concerned with nuclear policy that
respect US overall non-proliferation policies and US technologies.
However, they are discouraged by what they feel is a US campaign to
deny technology necessary to Argentina to develop its nuclear industry
on an independent basis and become a nuclear supplier in South
America.
4. As suggested in Reftel (A), embassy officers reiterated to GOA
nuclear officials, including Jorge Coll and Abel Gonzalez, just last week
that US nuclear policy has remained the same and our continuing con-
sultations with other suppliers is based on our belief that worldwide
application of international safeguards over all peaceful nuclear pro-
grams is a legitimate concern of the US as well as of all other countries.
In addition, as mentioned in Reftel (C), we have reiterated the impor-
tance the US attaches to Argentina fulfilling its commitment to ratify
Tlatelolco and to continue its negotiation with the IAEA for a FSS
agreement and furthermore have emphasized that these actions would
certainly enhance possibilities of expanded US/Argentine cooperation.
5. SciCouns is scheduled to meet again this week with CNEA safe-
guards committee to review US/Argentine relationship and discus-
sions on latest Argentine policy on the ratification of Tlatelolco. In fact,
we feel, as stated previously, the most effective and long-lasting way of
obtaining a FSS agreement for Argentina is through ratification of Tla-
telolco and an arrangement with Brazil to wave it into effect and follow
up with a FSS agreement based on the Treaty.
6. A high-level visit to Argentina would give the impression of US
interest and desire for continued cooperation and could be approached
on a step-by-step basis beginning with an official note outlining US
conditions for release of (1) three kilograms of depleted uranium for
uranium plate fuel testing, and (2) ten kilograms of 20 percent enriched
uranium for fuel plate fabrication, and (3) for provision of 20 percent
enriched uranium for the RP–0 in Peru and RA–6 in Bariloche. The
HEU for the RA–3 request could be handled separately since we under-
stand now this fuel may not be needed until the end of 1980. The next
step could be a high level visit to Argentina by Asst. Secy. Pickering
and/or Amb. Smith. The specific objectives and benefits of such a visit
are the following:
—Maintenance of an ongoing dialogue at a high level.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Open and candid discussion of US/Argentine nuclear relation-
ships and non-proliferation policy.
—Discussion of US/Argentine cooperation in lieu fuels for Argen-
tine reactors.
—Discussion of expanded US cooperation and sales that could be
facilitated by Argentine ratification of Tlatelolco and followed by a FSS
agreement with the IAEA based on the Treaty. This arrangement could
be discussed in context of Argentine/Brazilian cooperation and possi-
bilities of waving Tlatelolco into force.
—Expanded cooperation could center around US assistance in de-
velopment of Argentine research reactor program and certain fuel cycle
technology and helping Argentina become a reliable nuclear supplier
in Latin America. This assistance would include a US commitment for
continued supply of 20 percent enriched uranium and cooperation
with Argentina in nuclear assistance to third countries.
—Discussions on possibilities for an amended cooperation agree-
ment that could include the above items and others such as (1) orga-
nized exchange of experts, (2) exchange of radiation safety information
on a regular basis, and (3) credits for sales of US equipment and
supplies.
7. We would not expect any miracles to emerge out of a visit of this
sort; but CNEA leaders, particularly Castro Madero, Jorge Coll, Mar-
tinez Fabini, and Antonio Carrea would be highly receptive to talks on
these subjects. As we have mentioned in the past, the Argentines at this
point are primarily interested in a sympathetic US view of their nuclear
programs and policies and would appreciate frank discussions on the
whole range of issues. In the final analysis, the benefits would be con-
tinued cooperation, the opportunity for US direct influence in the Ar-
gentine nuclear policy, and perhaps persuasion toward a permanent
international safeguard regime.
Castro

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
460.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Australia1
307827. For Asst Secy Pickering. Following Repeat Bern 6724 Ac-
tion State info Bonn Buenos Aires 27 Nov 79.
Qte. Bern 6724. Subj: US-Swiss Nuclear Supply Consultations. Ref:
1. C—Entire text.
2. Summary: Amb Gerard Smith and party accompanied by Amb
Vine met with Sec of State Weitnauer, legal advisor Bindschedler, and
other Swiss officials morning of Nov 26. End summary.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.]
7. Smith then turned to the problem of Argentina which, he said,
could become another Pakistan unless it accepted a commitment to
safeguard future facilities. There were hemispheric implications to
which the US was keenly sensitive. Two years ago Argentina had as-
sured the US they would ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco, [less than 1 line
not declassified] they may not intend to do this but rather intend to keep
their weapon option open. Smith said that the President had a personal
interest in this problem and had asked Smith to speak to the Swiss.4
Given the propensity of the press in the US to discover and report on
situations of this sort, Smith could not guarantee that the Argentina sit-
uation and US concern would not be dealt with in the American press.
If so, the White House might have to take a position reflecting US-Swiss
differences in approach.
8. Swiss side explained in detail the safeguards arrangements they
had worked out, and emphasized that Switzerland had abided by all its
NPT and NSG commitments in establishing safeguard and other con-
trols on its supply of heavy water production technology. Switzerland
believes one cannot ask for more than is required by Swiss obligations
under international law. The Swiss could not accept as a given that Ar-
Confidential; Exdis for Assistant Secretary Pickering. Drafted by Stephen V. Noble (OES);
and approved by Lynn Turk (S/S–O).
sion not to issue public statement concerning Swiss safeguard requirements on supply of
heavy water production plant to Argentina eliminates an almost certain drag on possible
Swiss cooperation.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D790536–
0418)
4 Carter’s request was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gentina would not meet its commitments, and believed that their con-
trols (which Bindschedler spelled out) excluded Argentina’s capi-
talizing on Swiss technology to produce unsafeguarded special nuclear
material. Swiss were strongly of the view that Argentina could build a
heavy water plant itself, and thus escape all controls, if Switzerland
went too far with its conditions. Weitnauer noted that if there is press
discussion in the US on this point, Switzerland can regard itself on safe
ground. He noted that the Swiss have done their “utmost.”
9. Smith emphasized that the US was not suggesting an embargo
on the sale of Swiss heavy water technology to Argentina. He urged
that, as we work on development of a more comprehensive post-
INFCE regime we not prejudice future negotiations by permitting Ar-
gentina to develop an unsafeguarded capability. He noted that Argen-
tina is prepared to pay a half billion dollars more to buy reactors from
the FRG in order to avoid the ful-scope safeguard required by Canada
for the same transaction. (Von Arx noted Argentines had experienced
huge overrun in earlier Canadian reactor sale, and that this had been
reason they gave little credence to low Canadian bid.)
10. Swiss pointed out that Pakistan is clearly a special case where
there is near term danger. They do not see Argentina as in the same cat-
egory. Von Arx indicated that Switzerland had urged Argentina to
ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco but does not believe it will do so until
Cuba does and the US ratifies Protocol I. He noted that Argentina has
expressed concern that supplementary inspection rights held by
OPANAL could threaten commercial secrets. Van Doren later returned
to this subject and urged that Swiss make clear that they are proceeding
on the understanding that Argentines will fulfill their public and pri-
vate commitments to ratify Tlatelolco and promptly complete the safe-
guards agreement called for on that Treaty.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.]
12. Comment:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.] As to renego-
tiating their exchange of letters with Argentina, Swiss appeared im-
movable. They do not share US assessment regarding Argentina’s in-
tentions and feel they have taken every step required of them to
prevent misuse of technology they supply. But they did say they would
continue to urge Tlatelolco ratification and would consult with FRG
and compare notes on these respective safeguards approaches. They
are, moreover, prepared to work with the US and others to develop a
comprehensive system in which full-scope safeguards will be the fu-
ture norm. Vine. unqte.
Vance

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
461.
Telegram From the Embassy in Brazil to the Department of
State1
10578. USIAEA. Subject: Status Report on Non-Proliferation: 1979,
The Transition From Geisel to Figueiredo. Ref: (A) Brasilia 7869;2
cret. Sent for information to the U.S. Interests Section in Baghdad, Bonn, Buenos Aires,
Madrid, Mexico City, and Vienna.
the Brazilian representative to the IAEA, said “that Brazil would not waive the entry-
into-force requirements” of the Treaty of Tlateloloco. He also said “that the Treaty was
designed as a whole and it would not make sense unless all Latin American countries
adhered and unless the major powers accepted the protocols.” (National Archives, RG
3 See Document 455.
Caracas by Brazilian Foreign Minister Guerreiro, the Brazilian and Venezuelan gov-
ernments “concluded a general agreement for cooperation in peaceful applications of nu-
clear energy. According to the GOB Foreign Ministry, cooperation is planned to be lim-
ited to personnel training in Brazil and uranium prospecting techniques and will not
include technology transferred from the US or FRG.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy Files, D790357–1212)
tion of Brazilian nuclear specialists, headed by NUCLEBRAS President Paulo Nogueira
Batista, visited Iraq in early October for further discussion of a possible nuclear agree-
ment between the two countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Files, D790488–0082)
the visit of the Iraqi Vice President a secret agreement was reached between Iraq and
Brazil under which Iraq could obtain plutonium from Brazil.” A spokesman from the
Brazilian Foreign Minister “denied ‘categorically’ that Brazil had entered into a secret
agreement and said that the report ‘is entirely out of the question.’ He stressed that Brazil
does not have functioning nuclear reactors capable of producing plutonium, thus indi-
cating that the transaction could not possibly be implemented.” (National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. (S—Entire text).
2. Begin summary: The transition in 1979 from Geisel to the Fi-
gueiredo administration bought few major changes to Brazilian non-
proliferation policies. The GOB continues to refuse to consider the NPT
told Pickering on October 24 that “there was pressure from those in the nuclear energy
field in Brazil to terminate nuclear relations with the US altogether and give the business
to URENCO or Brazil’s own enrichment plant when it came on stream, rather than rene-
gotiate the US-Brazil agreement. Carvalho said that he wanted to continue cooperation
with the US and wanted to find out what the US was willing to do to avoid a renegotia-
tion and fulfill its supply commitment for Angra I.” Pickering said “we were not de-
manding renegotiation of the agreement but needed confirmation that all of Brazil’s nu-
clear activities were under safeguards.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy Files, D790515–1126)
official “denied a press report of Oct 13 that the GOB is planning to renounce its agree-
ment with the US for cooperation in peaceful uses of atomic energy. He commented that
the possibility had not even been raised.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy Files, D790481–0646)
Mines had “publicly stated October 1 that the Brazilian nuclear program with West Ger-
many had slowed down and that the eight 1300–MWS originally envisaged under the ac-
cord would not be built until 1995 (when the accord expires). Even this estimate appears
optimistic according to informed sources which indicate that present plans call for only
four power plants to be built by 1995.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Files, D790460–0882)
cost estimates, and “an apparently unrealistic schedule calling for completion of the fuel
cycle technology transfer by 1986 and for all nine reactors of the Brazilian nuclear pro-
gram to be in operation by 1995 continues to be defended in public by the Minister of
Mines and Energy, but statements and plans by other government officials and agencies
do not support this.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D790553–
1042)
counts, General Dirceu Coutinho, the former head of Nucleim, the uranium enrichment
subsidiary of NUCLEBRAS, “urged that the Brazilian reactor construction program be
suspended after three units presently contractor for, until nuclear power became eco-
nomically competitive in Brazil and Brazil could develop a viable enrichment system.”
Embassy “confirmed press reports” that “Argentina and Brazil are negotiating agree-
ment for peaceful nuclear cooperation.” Such cooperation would “cover uranium
mining, training, long term research and industrial exchange,” including “one sensitive
area: laser production of heavy water.” Representatives from both Argentina and Brazil
“ruled out any military or PNE application.” The Embassy said “such bilateral coopera-
tion would serve to improve capabilities and hence independence of both nations in nu-
clear technology. However cooperation could also serve to open each nation’s nuclear
programs and to create trust between two potential nuclear rivals. Hence we support
Embassy Buenos Aires’ assessment that nuclear cooperation between Brazil and Argen-
tina is on balance in US interests.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Files, D790519–0839)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
or to waive Tlatelolco into force. It also continues to foreswear any ac-
tion contravening Tlatelolco’s objectives and any intentions of devel-
oping a nuclear explosive device. The major new developments of non-
proliferation concern in 1979 were: (a) a more active nuclear diplomacy,
with GOB negotiating nuclear arrangements for cooperation in peace-
ful applications of nuclear energy with Argentina, Venezuela, and, of
most concern, Iraq; and (b) a marked slow-down in the nuclear pro-
gram undertaken with the West Germans. Of the factors causing the
GOB to defer decisions to undertake costly new projects envisaged
under FRG–GOB nuclear accord, the troubled economy stands out as
the most important and the least susceptible to change. If the nuclear
power development continues to drag, there will be correspondingly
less incentive to expand future enrichment and reprocessing capabil-
ities beyond the experimental stage. The U.S. continues to have little in-
fluence on GOB nuclear policies. Our early full adherence to the Tlate-
lolco protocols would be well received here. A clear message to the
GOB restating U.S. requirements for continued cooperation—perhaps
tied to Tlatelolco protocal adherence—might prepare the way for a re-
sumption of a more active nuclear relationship. End summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
462.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
22524. For Deputy Secretary Christopher. Subject: FRG Sale of Nu-
clear Reactor to Argentina—Safeguards Issue. Ref: New Delhi 22430.2
1. (Secret—Entire text).
2. Action requested: See paragraph 13.
3. Summary: We are concerned that the safeguards negotiations
for the sale of a nuclear reactor by the FRG to Argentina may result in
something less than full-scope safeguards or their equivalent on Argen-
cret; Nodis.
of Germany was “very disturbed” that the “US was not [nit] picking and trying to dictate
tactics and FRG resented this. If we kept it up it would not help cooperation.” (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tine facilities. This matter has the potential for developing into a
problem in U.S.–FRG relations. I suggest you call in Ambassador
Hermes for discussions on the Argentine deal. End summary.
4. As you know, the U.S. has been pushing very hard to get the
FRG to require full-scope NPT-type safeguards (over all Argentine nu-
clear facilities) in its sale of a nuclear power plant (Atucha II) to
Argentina.
5. This effort has been underway for some time. In addition to the
demarche´s by the Embassy, there have been several visits by Ambas-
sador Gerard Smith and Assistant Secretary Tom Pickering and many
by other representatives of the Department and of ACDA during which
this subject has been discussed and the U.S. position reiterated.
6. The U.S. originally asked Canada, the FRG and Switzerland,
who were bidders on the reactor and heavy water manufacturing plant,
not only to require full-scope safeguards on the sale of both of these fa-
cilities but also to require Argentina to postpone indefinitely the repro-
cessing of nuclear fuel.
7. While the bidders were unwilling to tie reprocessing to these
sales, the U.S. was given to understand that Canada and the FRG
would require full-scope safeguards. Further, the FRG repeated many
times that it would “not undercut” the Canadians by offering softer
safeguards to Argentina.
8. Late last July, we heard a new theme from the FRG,3 namely that
it would require full-scope NPT-type safeguards if it sold both the re-
actor and the heavy water plant to Argentina, but if the order were split
and the FRG sold only the reactor (which turned out to be the case),
then Germany would consult with its partners (U.S., Canada and
Switzerland) before defining the safeguards package to be offered to
Argentina.
9. With this change in tone and the deviation from what we and the
Canadians had been led to believe, namely that the FRG would adhere
to the same position as Canada and require full-scope NPT-type safe-
guards in connection with even a reactor-only sale, both the U.S. and
Canada initiated another series of demarche´s.
10. We and Canadians were then told that the FRG would again
approach Argentina and request full-scope NPT-type safeguards but if
these were not accepted by Argentina, the FRG had developed a “prag-
matic solution” to the problem which would avoid the objectionable (to
Argentina) full-scope NPT-type safeguards terminology but would be
a de facto equivalent. The FRG expressed confidence to Ambassador
3 Not found.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
Smith and the Embassy that it could obtain Argentine agreement to the
“pragmatic solution.”
11. Now, in the cable received by the Embassy from Gerry Smith in
New Delhi, reporting his conversation with State Secretary Haunschild
(Reftel), it appears that the initial negotiating position of the FRG will
not be to request full-scope safeguards, but rather will be the “prag-
matic solution.” Further, it appears, [1 line not declassified] that the
opening negotiating position of Argentina will be much less than full-
scope safeguards, or the pragmatic solution. In fact, it will be less than
the nuclear suppliers’ group guidelines. (We also have seen [1 line not
declassified] despite assurances we have had to the contrary, Argentina
has no intention of signing the Tlatelolco Treaty after completion of the
deal with the FRG and Switzerland.)
12. If one assumes that in the course of negotiations some compro-
mise is reached between the opening positions of the FRG and Argen-
tina, the result clearly will be less than the full-scope safeguards we de-
sire, and may well leave the door open for Argentina to pursue a
nuclear option outside of international safeguards leading to nuclear
weapons capability.
13. Action requested: In light of this very serious and possibly de-
teriorating safeguards position, I recommend that you call in Ambas-
sador Hermes and inform him of the serious concern of the U.S. that the
FRG may be heading for a compromise on safeguards which not only
leaves the world vulnerable to the development of a nuclear weapons
capability in Argentina but also can establish a very undesirable prece-
dent at a time when we all are seeking stronger safeguards against
proliferation.
14. I am concerned that this whole matter has the potential of de-
veloping into a problem of considerable import in U.S.–FRG relations.
For this reason, in addition to proliferation considerations, I believe it
would be desirable to discuss the situation frankly with Hermes (who
was closely involved in the negotiations with Argentina in his previous
position) to make sure that the FRG understands at a high level the
risks of the course they apparently are contemplating.
Stoessel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
463.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Approval of Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) Exports (U)
The attached package2 from the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Non-
Proliferation (which includes State, DoD, DoE, and ACDA) requests
your approval of 7 export licenses for the shipment of HEU to Argen-
tina, Belgium, West Germany, The Netherlands, Japan, France and
Sweden. Of the 7 cases, 6 are non-controversial. (U)
The Argentine case, however, raises some significant policy prob-
lems. Argentina has requested 12 kgs of HEU to refuel the US-supplied
RA–3 research reactor. Argentina has agreed in principle to a
three-year cooperative program to convert the RA–3 for the use of 20%
enriched fuel. Approval of the current request would keep the reactor
operating during that period, and is therefore important to our objec-
tive of achieving conversion to safer fuels. (C)
This request must be considered, however, in the light of the
transfer of heavy water production technology from Switzerland to Ar-
gentina. This transfer will close the last major gap in Argentina’s fuel
cycle, and give Argentina the potential ability to operate an unsafe-
guarded reprocessing plant in the future. Because of this, we have
strongly and repeatedly urged the Swiss and Germans to use this op-
portunity to require Argentina to accept the more stringent Canadian
safeguards standard, which goes beyond the normal requirement of
other suppliers (including the US) by requiring full-scope safeguards
on all future nuclear activities. Both Switzerland and the FRG have re-
jected this approach; the Germans have said they will try to achieve its
“practical equivalent,” but the prospects for success are poor. (C)
The Ad Hoc Group feels that despite the safeguards question, we
should meet the Argentine request in order to preserve the opportunity
to convert the reactor to lower-enriched fuel. While there is no contrac-
tual commitment to provide the HEU fuel, and no alternative supplier
at this time, the Ad Hoc Group believes that this supply can be distin-
guished from the German/Swiss contracts as the continuation of an ex-
isting supply relationship rather than a major new commitment. (C)
tialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 Not attached.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
I believe that you should withhold approval of the Argentine re-
quest until the outcome of the current FRG/Argentine safeguards ne-
gotiations is known, for two reasons: (C)
—Approval now on lesser safeguards conditions than we have
urged on the FRG could signal a softening of our position and affect the
negotiations; (C)
—A final decision on continuing to supply HEU should take into
account the specifics of the safeguards arrangements the FRG is able to
negotiate. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. That you approve Executive Branch recommendations to the
NRC for the issuance of licenses for export of highly enriched uranium
as described in the attachments, except for the Argentine request. (C)3
2. That you defer a decision on the Argentine request and ask that
it be resubmitted with a new analysis and recommendations when the
outcome of the FRG/Argentine safeguards negotiations is known. (C)
DEFER DECISION
APPROVE REQUEST
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
4 Carter checked the “Approve Request” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand
margin. Underneath the options line Carter wrote “ace to p. 2 of Ad Hoc memo J.”
464.
Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
State1
2240. Subject: Call for U.S. Ratification of Protocol One of Treaty of
Tlatelolco.
1. (Confidential—Entire text.)
2. OPANAL Secretary-General Ambassador Hector Gros Espiell
presented memorandum to us, February 7, calling for prompt U.S.
ratification of Protocol One of Treaty of Tlatelolco. (Protocol One ap-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Paris, the U.S. Interests Section in Havana,
and the Consulates in Guadalajara, Hermosillo, Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juarez
(pouch), Matamoros (pouch), Mazatlan (pouch), Merida (pouch), and Neuvo Laredo

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
plies Treaty’s denuclearization provisions to territories for which sig-
natories are de jure or de facto “internationally responsible” within the
geographical zone of application of the Treaty. The United States
signed Protocol One on May 26, 1977.)
3. Gros Espiell explained that the memorandum is worded some-
what peremptorily in hope that this will help U.S. process of ratifica-
tion. He added that he will present a similar memorandum to the
French next week urging Protocol One ratification to coincide with
Mexican President Lopez Portillo’s planned visit to Paris in May. In re-
viewing memorandum with Gros, we noted that USG fully supports
Protocol One and that U.S. ratification is question of legislative tactics,
not of executive intent. Informal translation of OPANAL memoran-
dum follows.
4. Begin text. President Carter signed Additional Protocol One of
the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the United States on May 26, 1977. This pro-
tocol was sent to the Senate for approval prior to ratification in May
1978. The Foreign Relations Committee began its analysis in public
hearings that received wide journalistic coverage. After this prelimi-
nary analysis, as far as we know, it has not returned to be an object of
consideration of the committee.
5. The General Conference of OPANAL in its sixth regular period
says in this regard, “2. Calls on the Governments of the United States
and France to proceed as soon as possible to the ratification of Addi-
tional Protocol One.” The United Nations general assembly in its Reso-
America, “. . . to make every effort to ratify as soon as possible Addi-
tional Protocol One of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco.)”
6. The absence of ratification of Additional Protocol One by the
United States of America, almost three years after its signature, deeply
preoccupies the Latin American State-parties to the Treaty of Tlatel-
olco. This absence of ratification would appear to demonstrate little in-
terest in the question of military denuclearization of Latin America.
Such an attitude on the part of the United States of America—in certain
form incompatible with the repeated declarations of President Carter
and Secretary of State Vance of full and total support for the Treaty of
Tlatelolco—prejudices Latin American efforts to denuclearize the con-
tinent militarily and affects all policy regarding peaceful use of nuclear
energy in Latin America, reducing the force of United States’ efforts in
this area and affecting negatively negotiations to obtain the signatures,
ratifications, and waivers still lacking for the Treaty of Tlatelolco
(Cuba, Guyana, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
7. At a time in which the ratification of the SALT II Treaty has been
indefinitely postponed,2 it is extremely important that the United States
not reduce its support, so often proclaimed and invoked, of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco. And, today, the only formally effective way of undoubted
transcendence of realistically manifesting this support is in the ratifica-
tion of Additional Protocol One. All the credibility of United States
policy on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin America is
compromised, at the present time, if it does not proceed with urgency
to ratify Additional Protocol One. End text.
8. Comment: While we believe the OPANAL memorandum is
more a product of Ambassador Gros’ own making than a reflection of a
ground swell of opinion among Latin American States, the Ambas-
sador’s message provides food for thought. Gros indicated, inciden-
tally, that he will be discussing with Mexican Foreign Secretary Cas-
taneda next week (in addition to a possible reply to the U.S. statement
on transit rights in connection with Soviet adherence to Tlatelolco Pro-
tocol Two)3 the possibility of a multilateral approach to Cuba on Tlate-
lolco signature. The possibilities for such an approach, he said, appear
heightened in the wake of Nicaraguan and Jamaican endorsement of
Tlatelolco signature by all states of the region in joint communique´s
with the GOM, January 24 and February 6 respectively. Gros added,
however, that U.S. ratification of Protocol One would appear to be a po-
litical, albeit not a juridical, necessity in order to undertake such an ap-
proach to the Cubans.
9. Action requested: please inform us of the current status of Pro-
tocol One ratification and provide us with text of reply, if Department
desires to make one, to OPANAL’s memorandum. (Drafted: Jon D.
Glassman)
Ferch4
2 On January 3, Carter requested that the Senate delay consideration of the SALT II
3 Not found.
4 On February 19, the Department of State replied that “it would prefer not to re-
spond to OPANAL memorandum in writing. Please inform Gros Espiell that Department
has received memorandum and will take appropriate opportunity to pass its substance
informally to Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which as Gros Espiell is aware is con-
sidering ratification of Protocol.” While the United States remained committed to Pro-
tocol I, it could not guarantee quick ratification given the “number of other treaties which
would be ahead of Protocol I on the Senate Calendar.” (Telegram 44793 to Mexico City,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
465.
Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
State1
4484. Department pass to American Republic Collective Vienna for
USIAEA. Subject: Cuba Formally Declines to Adhere to Treaty of
Tlatelolco.
1. (C) Summary: The Government of Cuba has formally requested
that OPANAL—the executive organ of the Treaty of Tlatelolco—in-
form Latin American signatories of the Treaty that Cuba does not now
find it possible to adhere to the Treaty (which requires formal renuncia-
tion of the nuclear weapons option.) The Cubans spell out conditions
which would permit them to consider Treaty adherence. These condi-
tions incorporate earlier Cuban stances, albeit stated in extremely
broad and far-reaching terms: dissolution of bilateral and multilateral
military and security treaties between the United States and the Latin
American States, the “return of territory occupied by U.S. military
bases” in Latin America and the dismantling of these bases, the termi-
nation of “militarist and aggressive” policies in Latin America made
possible by the U.S. “colonial presence,” and the ending of threatening
U.S. military maneuvers and efforts to create intervention forces in the
hemisphere. End summary.
delivered to OPANAL by the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City in the
second week of March. (OPANAL Secretary-General Ambassador
Hector Gros Espiell believes that delivery of the note may have been
held up as a result of the furor over the Soviet Afghan invasion.)2 The
Cubans request that the text of the note be circulated to all Treaty
of Tlatelolco signatories. (Distribution will be made the week of
March 17.)
3. (C) The Cuban note responds to the call by the OPANAL Gen-
Treaty of Tlatelolco. Ambassador Gros Espiell stated that, to his knowl-
edge, the Cuban note constitutes the first instance in which Havana has
formally communicated its conditions for adhering to the Tlatelolco
Treaty. Given the far-reaching nature of Havana’s stated conditions,
which go beyond anything that could reasonably be achieved even in
the unlikely event of a U.S.-Cuban bilateral rapprochement, Ambas-
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to the U.S. Interests Section in Havana,
Moscow, the Mission in Geneva, Vienna, and all Consulates in Mexico.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
sador Gros opined that Cuba wished to send a clear message of intran-
sigence to the other Latin American States. (Gros remarked on the in-
teresting contrast between the tone of the Cuban note and Moscow’s
praise of the Treaty of Tlatelolco at the February Vienna INFCE
review.)
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
8. Comment: The Cuban note will certainly disappoint the GOM
which is pressing for French notification of Tlatelolco Protocol One
during President Lopez Portillo’s visit to Paris in May and a Brazilian
waiver to allow entry into force for that country during Lopez Portillo’s
scheduled July visit. The Soviet reaction is also of some interest since
the Cuban note could be read as an implicit rebuke of Soviet signature
and ratification of Tlatelolco Protocol II. In light of the Cuban note, we
would expect that the GOM and other States of the region would be-
come increasingly interested in the state of safeguard negotiations on
the Soviet-supplied nuclear power plant being constructed near Cien-
fuegos, Cuba. (Drafted: Jon D. Glassman)
Ferch
466.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Nuclear Consultations
PARTICIPANTS
Argentina—
Vice Admiral Carlos Castro Madero, President, CNEA
Dr. Antonio Carrea, Advisor to CNEA President
Dr. Hugo Erramuspe, Director of Research and Development, CNEA
Dr. Carlos A. Kroll, Coordinator of General Secretariat, CNEA
Dr. Jorge Martinez Fabini, Manager of Law Division, CNEA
Ing. Alejandro Placer, Advisor to CNEA President
Drafted by Clifton Metzner. The meeting took place at the Comisio´n Nacional de Energı´a
Ato´mic (CNEA). Copies were sent to the Ambassador, the Deputy Chief of Mission, the
Science Counselor, the Defense Attache´, the Bureau of Security Assistance, Science, and
Technology, the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, the Bureau of Oceans and Scientific
and Environmental Affairs, and the Secretary.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Ambassador at Large Gerard C. Smith
Ambassador Rau´l H. Castro
Maxwell Chaplin, DCM, AmEmbassy Buenos Aires
Claus W. Ruser, ECA Director
Allen W. Locke, Deputy Special Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters
Clifton G. Metzner, Jr., Science Counselor, AmEmbassy Buenos Aires
Admiral Castro Madero opened by welcoming Amb. Smith and
his group and wished them a fruitful stay, adding that the Commission
would do its best to make it so. Amb. Smith remarked that he was
happy to be back in Argentina after his last trip in November, 1977,
with Secretary of State Vance.2 He said he was sorry that he could not
attend the asado (barbecue) that was to be offered in his honor by Ad-
miral Castro Madero on Thursday, March 27, but because of pressure
of business he had to return to Washington on Wednesday, March 26.
Amb. Smith said he hoped safeguards would not become an issue
for discussion since each party’s position is already well known. He
categorically denied that the U.S. had pressured or tried to block other
countries’ efforts to transfer technology or equipment to Argentina. He
said that the U.S. positions on full-scope safeguards had been given to
supplier countries. Far from blocking any exports to Argentina, the U.S.
had sought to be of help by offering to make heavy water available.
Admiral Castro Madero mentioned there had been a number of
comments in newspapers and other sources that the U.S. had pressured
Switzerland and Germany to demand fullscope safeguards for the sales
of equipment,3 and several U.S. senators had tried to block these sales
to Argentina. He added that this information was mostly gathered
from the press, in the U.S. and Argentina. However, Castro Madero
said he was pleased with Amb. Smith’s remarks that the U.S. had not
tried to block these sales.
Amb. Smith then discussed non-proliferation in broad terms and
indicated political solutions would have to be reached on a worldwide
as well as a regional basis. He cited the dangers of the India and Pak-
istan nuclear arms race. He asked if Argentina had any ideas to prevent
this prospective proliferation. India had exploded a device in 1974 for
“peaceful purposes”. The Pakistanis now are reacting to that develop-
ment. Pakistan is constructing a reprocessing plant (originally with
French assistance) which has no commercial significance, which they
claim is for peaceful purposes. Pakistan is also constructing a produc-
tion size plant to enrich uranium. India has recently hinted that it may
2 See Document 426.
3 See Charles A. Krause, “U.S. General Asks Argentine Aid on Embargo,” Wash-

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
have a need for nuclear weapons. What are the possible political solu-
tions in South Asia? We (the U.S.) would welcome help in finding
solutions.
Smith then called attention to the serious problems concerning
Iran and terrorism and the possibility that plutonium in the future
could get into the hands of terrorists when more countries are in a posi-
tion to obtain plutonium.
Amb. Smith asked how Argentina, when it became a responsible
world nuclear supplier, would condition its exports. Castro Madero re-
marked that the South Asian situation was certainly not equivalent to
the South American position. He added that so far no country had de-
veloped nuclear weapons through a nuclear power program. This, he
said, would not be the way to reach a weapons program. He added that
Brazil and Argentina were in the process of reaching a nuclear agree-
ment for cooperation which should alleviate fears of an arms race in
South America. This, he said, naturally, is not a complete answer to the
problem but global approaches are difficult to implement. He said the
best guarantee for non-proliferation is through strong country alliances
and cooperation. According to Castro Madero, denial of technologies to
developing countries has been counter productive and has not been
successful in preventing nuclear proliferation. Smith said that a denial
policy alone could not hope to succeed. It must be accompanied by po-
litical initiatives.
Amb. Smith turned again to the Pakistan situation and indicated
that Pakistan had centrifuges for enrichment of uranium and asked if in
order to be a more reliable supplier (in the Argentine sense) the U.S.
should sell Pakistan better centrifuges, thus enabling it to enrich more
uranium for a nuclear bomb. These are the difficult issues driving U.S.
export policies and non-proliferation. He questioned if Argentina were
a major supplier in the world, would it sell reprocessing technology, for
example, to any country that asked for it? What type of safeguards
would they require.
Smith expressed a hope that U.S. export licensing procedures
could be made more flexible. He said that regional and worldwide po-
litical solutions must be found for proliferation problems. The U.S. was
certainly not pointing out Argentina as a special case.
Amb. Smith then moved to post-INFCE discussions and indicated
he hopes the U.S. would take action to become a more reliable nuclear
supplier, and to modernize present nuclear licensing procedures. He
allowed that the INFCE studies will have to be analyzed, and it will
have to be decided what should be done with the findings. Smith asked
Castro Madero how the GOA felt in this regard. Castro Madero indi-
cated that Argentina was in favor of the formation of a committee com-
posed of interested countries to review the INFCE studies and establish

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the terms of reference for approaches to the problems involved. The in-
ternational plutonium study and spent fuel management were two im-
portant ones from the Argentine point of view. The Committee, he felt,
should come directly under the IAEA Director General to give it more
flexibility. Amb. Smith agreed that the working parties should report to
the Director General.
Amb. Smith then asked Castro Madero what the results were of
the Brazilian visit to Argentina. Castro Madero indicated this was a
follow-up to his visit to Brazil in January and was to establish the
guidelines for an overall agreement and define the areas of mutual in-
terest for cooperation. Both countries, he said, were willing to sign this
agreement. He said that Argentina had been interested in looking
ahead in the distant future for a broader Latin American nuclear alli-
ance, but this was not in the cards for the near future since most Latin
American countries want to keep their freedom of action. He hoped
that the Argentine/Brazilian accord could be a catalyst for the begin-
ning of a political solution in this area.
Amb. Smith then referred to information he had received that
Cuba would not be interested in signing or ratifying the Treaty of Tla-
telolco. He said that the primary reason given by the Cubans was the
U.S. must first dissolve its bilateral and multilateral arms agreements in
South America and, particularly, remove the Guanta´namo base from
Cuba. Castro Madero said he did not have any information on this
subject.
The discussion then turned to bilateral affairs, and Amb. Smith
mentioned the supply agreement between Peru, the U.S., Argentina,
and the IAEA for the provision of enriched uranium for the Peruvian
reactor. He also referred to a 10 MW research reactor Argentina was
constructing for the Peruvian program and asked with what other
countries Argentina may be developing supply cooperation. Castro
Madero said that Bolivia and Uruguay both are interested in research
reactors and that the enriched uranium would have to come from the
U.S. He pointed out the U.S. was restricting the export of enriched ura-
nium to Argentina for the Peruvian reactor and other requests, which
would curtail their program to develop their own low enriched fuel
fabrication plans. He said Argentina had furnished an official commit-
ment to the U.S. last September that all facilities were under safe-
guards. Nonetheless, this apparently was not acceptable, and the U.S.
has now asked for additional requirements for safeguards over all nu-
clear activities which go beyond the original agreements. At that point,
Dr. Antonio Carrea indicated it would be very difficult to furnish the
U.S. with a confirmation that all facilities and materials are under safe-
guards every one, two, or three months during the time each export
order would be pending before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
The Argentines said in any event they could not act on the latest U.S.
suggestion since it had not been formally communicated to them. Mr.
Locke explained that the reason the U.S. requested the 90-day notifica-
tion was to cover the period the NRC and other U.S. agencies were
making their reviews. In any event, it was agreed that some solution
could be found. This problem could be discussed further to determine
what arrangement could be worked out agreeable to both parties. Amb.
Smith said we understand what the problem was, and hoped a solution
can be found. At this point the meeting was ended.
After the meeting, Mr. Placer, CNEA Safeguards Chief, mentioned
to the Science Counselor that the problem of exchange of notes and
90-day notification on pending uranium exports was really not the
major problem, but that the deletion of the wording in the note refer-
ring to deuterium not supplied by the U.S. is more important and
would have to be resolved before an agreement could be reached.4
visit. “Conditions for our visit,” the Ambassador said, “were not auspicious” given that
Castro Madero was in Moscow “at the Soviets’ invitation” while a “high-level German
Delegation” was in Buenos Aires “to complete negotiations for the Atucha II reactor.”
Smith noted that in his talks with Videla and other Argentine officials, “we stressed the
seriousness with which we view the international situation, that there will be no ‘lurch
towards de´tente,’ and our aim to strengthen relations with Argentina.” Nevertheless,
Smith said “There was no encouragement during my talks that Argentina will ratify Tla-
telolco any time soon; on full-scope safeguards we agreed to disagree. Argentina’s nu-
clear program is well advanced and will move ahead under able leadership. Our central
objective must be to prevent the emergence of a nuclear arms race in the hemisphere.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
467.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany1
79756. Subject: Vance/Genscher Letter on Argentine Supply.
1. Entire text confidential.
2. We continue to believe that it is extremely important that the
FRG not relax its safeguards conditions for nuclear supply to Argen-
tina. The failure, thus far, of the FRG and Argentina to reach agreement
on safeguards has increased pressure within the FRG for such relaxa-
tion, and we understand a decision was made at a meeting of the Nu-
clear Cabinet to go ahead with the reactor sale to Argentina, trying to
obtain the best safeguards conditions possible. Accordingly, the Am-
bassador is requested to call on Genscher as soon as possible and de-
liver the following letter from the Secretary:
3. Quote: Dear Hans-Dietrich: I am writing you about our common
goal of limiting the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation which re-
mains an objective of transcendent importance. Since we last discussed
this issue it has been the subject of continuing contact between our two
governments, and I wish to underline my support for the strong posi-
tion which I understand your negotiators have been taking in their dis-
cussions with the government of Argentina.
However, I must tell you quite frankly that I am concerned over
the information which Ambassador Hermes gave Ambassador Smith
March 192 regarding the decision by the Nuclear Cabinet to weaken
your position. Let me stress my conviction that your posture on safe-
guards conditions should remain firm. We believe that a policy of pa-
tient firmness is correct, realistic and in our common non-proliferation
interest.
I am asking Ambassador Stoessel to deliver this letter personally
and to stress our desire to cooperate with you in this effort. We will also
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Bern, Buenos Aires, and Ot-
tawa. Drafted by Anne Stefanas (OES/NET/NEP) and Erwin Von Den Steinen (EUR/
CE); cleared by Pickering (OES), Allen Locke (S/AS), William Salmon (T), George Suchan
(PM/NPP), Charles Van Doren (ACDA/NP), L. Paul Bremer (S/S), Ronald Bettauer (L),
George Jones (ARA), Robert Galluci (S/P), John Whitman (ARA/ECA), and Ward
Barmon (EUR/RPE); and approved by Vance. Stoessel delivered the letter on March 28.
File, D800157–0130)

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
keep you informed about our discussions on nuclear matters with the
government of Argentina. Sincerely. Cyrus Vance. Unquote.
4. In delivering this letter, Ambassador is requested to make fol-
lowing points:
—I know you are aware of our concern about FRG requirements
for nuclear supply to Argentina. We have not raised this concern re-
cently at a high level while your negotiators have been discussing the
matter with GOA officials. Naturally, we are anxious to learn as soon as
possible of any Argentine response to your proposal, which we were
gratified to learn, included the issue of Argentine adherence to the
Treaty of Tlatelolco.
—The Secretary also has written to Federal Councillor Aubert on
this subject.3 Although we have had no formal reply to the letter,
we understand that Sulzer signed a contract with the Argentines on
March 14.
—In light of the Swiss decision, it is all the more important that the
FRG holds to the strongest possible safeguard conditions.
—I understand that the FRG Nuclear Cabinet met last week and
decided to continue nuclear negotiations with Argentina, during which
it would seek the best possible safeguards conditions. (FYI: FRG Am-
bassador Hermes called Ambassador Smith March 19 to report this. In
subsequent conversation with Department officer, FRG Embassy Sci-
ence Counselor refused to go beyond Hermes’ report, other than to say
that no deviation from position expressed by Lambsdorf to Smith Feb-
ruary 15 was intended.4 Department assumes FRG position to be that
expressed by Lambsdorff, i.e., that FRG has resolved to complete re-
actor sale and will settle for best safeguards conditions obtainable. End
FYI.)
—In addition, Ambassador Gerard Smith will be visiting Buenos
Aires March 24–25. He will be discussing a range of subjects, following
up on General Goodpaster’s earlier visit. He does not intend to discuss
the subject of Argentina’s negotiations with other nuclear suppliers.
We wish to assure your government the US will insist that Argentina
confirm that all of its facilities are safeguarded as a condition of any nu-
clear supply from the United States. As mentioned in Secretary Vance’s
letter, we will continue to provide you additional details concerning
our position through your Embassy in Washington.
Vance
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
468.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Minutes—PRC Meeting on Argentina (C)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Arms Control and Disarmament
Warren Christopher, Dep.
Spurgeon Keeny, Dep. Director
Secretary
Richard Williamson, Nuclear
John Bushnell, Dep. Ass’t.
Exports Div. Chief, Bureau of
Secretary
Nonproliferation
Defense
Joint Chiefs of Staff
W. Graham Claytor, Jr., Dep.
Lt. General John Pustay
Secretary
Central Intelligence
Frank Kramer, Principal Dep.
Jack Davis, NIO for Latin America
Ass’t. Secretary
White House
Agriculture
David Aaron
James Starkey, Dep. Under
Henry Owen
Secretary
National Security Council
Commerce
Thomas P. Thornton
Luther Hodges, Dep. Secretary
Robert Pastor
Abraham Katz, Ass’t. Secretary
for Internat. Economic Policy
and Research
Energy
Woody Cunningham, Ass’t.
Secretary for Nuclear Energy
Bushnell began the meeting by discussing Argentinian relations
with the Soviet Union. He pointed out that the current government is
unlikely to get close to the Soviets and this provides a certain implicit
limitation on the process of Soviet/Argentinian ties. The Argentine
Government is playing a short-term game in the grain, trade and per-
haps nuclear area.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
Keeny, discussing nuclear matters, said it is not clear what the op-
tions are. The Soviets are interested in some nuclear cooperation with
meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
the Argentinians but there has been minimal activity to date.2 Thus
there does not seem much to preempt there. Our own relations with
Argentina are another question. We do not want to (indeed legally we
cannot) expand these relations unless they accept full-scope safeguards
and ratify the Tlatelolco Treaty. We do have some flexibility though on
whether we should continue to cooperate in marginal ways within the
law. The question is whether we are willing to supply things that at
some future date might be related to a nuclear weapons program.
Bushnell said there is no problem because what we are supplying is
for their research program. The issue is whether we want to break a nu-
clear dialogue with them completely and perhaps turn them to the So-
viets. He hopes that we might be able to make greater progress next
year when there will be a new administration and leadership on nu-
clear matters. Thus he asked, should we break the dialogue now or con-
tinue to do “minor” things.
Keeny said it depended on which items were involved.
Claytor said that the nuclear non-proliferation policy is bankrupt in
general and that we should do absolutely everything we can under the
law to cooperate with Argentina.
Keeny inquired whether that would include the provision of tri-
tium. Perhaps the only thing the Argentinians want are things that
cause no problem for us. We should look at the specifics.
Christopher pointed out that the President has certainly not aban-
doned the nuclear non-proliferation policy.
Claytor countered that the policy had been ineffective and that the
Soviets are always ready to jump in where we are unable to extend
cooperation.
Bushnell observed that there were very few license requests
pending from the Argentinians and there probably would be no
problem over the next six months or so.
Christopher, returning to the general topic, said he believed that the
group should support the middle option. We should give due weight
to positive trends in the human rights area but should not try to repeal
2 On April 17, INR reported that “US countermeasures in the wake of Afghanistan
have stimulated further Soviet efforts to exploit Argentine policy differences with the US,
particularly in the commercial area.” INR further noted that Castro Madero had “an-
nounced that excellent results had been achieved at Argentine-USSR nuclear talks held in
Moscow in late March to explore the possibilities of nuclear cooperation. The Soviets, ac-
cording to one CNEA official, said that if US-Argentine negotiations for enriched ura-
nium were not successful, the USSR would meet Argentina’s enriched uranium require-
ments. Possible Soviet supply of heavy water and heavy water technology may have
been discussed, although Soviet officials have privately reiterated to us Moscow’s oppo-
sition to such transfers.” (Bureau of Intelligence and Research—Analysis: April 17; Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment3 at this time since that would be
impossible with the present Congress and politically unwise. This Op-
tion B needs fine tuning from the Interdepartmental Group; what we
should do in the coming months is to warm up our relationship with
Argentina. Perhaps in 1981 we will be able to have an initiative on the
military side, including training at least.
Hodges said he was encouraged by Christopher’s summation, for
the trends in human rights are important. The Commerce Department
also supports Option B.
Aaron said that we needed a specific program to improve our rela-
tions. The options as stated in the paper are too static. Our goals should
be first, to maintain a nuclear relationship that will result in Argentine
accession to the Tlatelolco Treaty; secondly, a commercial policy that
makes clear that we want the hydroelectric contract and will pursue it;
third, there is no possibility of changing the military legislation now;
fourth, there is a major OAS vote coming up and how we react will be a
signal to them. We should relate that to the policy issues. Overall, we
should have a tone that rests somewhere between Options B and C,
leaving out for the time being any change in our military supply policy.
The Inter-departmental Group should set up an 18-month program
with benchmarks for our progress and for Argentine performance.
At the same time Aaron noted that there is no reason to improve re-
lations dramatically with Argentina now directly after they have stuck
their finger in our eye on the grain issue. We should make clear our irri-
tation with them at this time and then pick up the pieces with a new ad-
ministration when it comes into office. We will not be able to get very
far with Videla. We should take the opportunity of the new adminis-
tration, however, for turning a new page. If we move to improve our
relations with them now we will simply not have the respect of the
Argentinians.
Claytor said that he saw Option C as the desirable goal, less the re-
peal of the Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment which would be impos-
sible. We should do all that we can with the Argentine military to re-
store relations between our two armed services. At the moment we are
driving them to the Soviets. The Soviets are our greatest global problem
and we are simply letting small things interfere with our dealing with
this problem.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
3 The Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment to the 1976 Foreign Assistance Act prohib-
ited the supply of U.S. military equipment to Argentina and Chile after October 1, 1978.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
469.
Telegram From the Embassy in Argentina to the Department
of State1
6609. Subject: (S) Possible Argentine Ratification of Tlatelolco.
1. S—Entire text.
2. During an informal conversation with a member of President
Videla’s staff, I asked about recent Argentine press reports that the
GOA is studying the ratification of Tlatelolco. The official said that the
study was in fact completed and was now in the Presidency. We dis-
cussed at some length the specifics of the bureaucratic process the
study had run through. With some apparent hesitation at his indiscre-
tion, the official ventured the assessment that Videla would decide to
proceed with the ratification. Ratification could not, of course, take
place if perceived by the Argentine public as occurring in response to
US pressure. For this reason, the step had not been seriously considered
while Argentina was still negotiating the reactor/heavy water plant
purchases with the FRG and GOS. One of the suggestions as to what a
possible high-level Argentine emissary to Washington might do had
been to let him carry the news of an affirmative decision.
3. Comment: The source was not clear about the timing of the deci-
sion and its announcement. Presumably, if taken at all, President
Videla would wish to do this before leaving office. (It is also interesting
to note that the study is ready for decision just before President
Videla’s visit to Brazil.) The discussion also left unclear what pressures
opponents of an affirmative decision might still bring to bear in these
final stages of the review process, which falls into the period in which
the three armed forces must make a final determination of the next
President. A number of variables evidently will go into this final deci-
sion, among them (to an unknown degree) the evolution of US-
Argentine relations over the next six months, both tone and substance.
As to the existance of the study, I have no doubt. This is the second time
the study has been mentioned in confidence by a high Argentine offi-
cial, several months apart and under different circumstances. I see no
reason to question their veracity at this juncture.
Ruser
Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
470.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Nuclear Export to Argentina (C)
The attached memorandum (Tab A)2 requests your decision on the
conditions under which the Executive Branch should recommend that
the NRC approve an export license for a major component for the
Atucha II reactor in Argentina. The US company may lose the contract
by default unless we inform Argentina that we are prepared to make a
favorable recommendation within the next week or so. (C)
The decision is being put to you because agencies are divided on
the conditions under which we should recommend NRC approval of
this export. State, DoE, Commerce and DoD believe that we should
settle for the minimum requirements of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Act for components of this kind: i.e., (1) IAEA safeguards on the export
itself, (2) a no-explosive use pledge, and (3) a US veto on any retransfer.
ACDA believes that we should in this case go beyond the minimum
legal requirements and insist upon Argentine progress toward ratifica-
tion of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and/or toward NPT-type full-scope
safeguards. (C)
The ACDA recommendation would be consistent with our past
position on exports to Argentina. Atucha II was part of the Swiss/
German deal last year whose safeguard conditions were of great con-
cern to us. In that case, we made strenuous but unsuccessful efforts to
maintain a common supplier front insisting upon NPT-type safe-
guards, which are not required by US law. All agencies are agreed that
we should insist upon this level of safeguards, even though not re-
quired by law, for a complete reactor or a component such as a pressure
vessel. Thus ACDA argues that our general policy goes beyond the
minimum legal requirements, that this is entirely appropriate for Ar-
gentina, and that we should stick with it. (C)
The majority opinion is based on the view that this component
does not constitute sufficient leverage to move the Argentines on safe-
tialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed is an undated memorandum from the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Non-Proliferation to Carter outlining the options, which was attached to a Sep-
tember 4 cover memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski.

Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
guards, and that the net impact of refusal on our non-proliferation ob-
jectives would be negative. (C)
On balance, I support the majority position favoring approval of
the sale. It is a very close call, however, and should the NRC refuse to
go along, you would have to send the case to Congress. You do not
need another Tarapur. State is fairly optimistic on the NRC, and our
own checks suggest that the Commissioners will not object provided
that the three legal requirements are met squarely and unambiguously.
But there are serious reservations in NRC about adequacy of formula-
tions on these points negotiated with Argentina in the past and State
has suggested that “indirect” assurances may be all the Argentine
traffic will bear. If you approve the sale, I would suggest that your ap-
proval be subject to the negotiation of clear and unambiguous Argen-
tine assurances, and that the bureaucracy be admonished that similar
future exports should be subject to political review at the Departmental
RECOMMENDATION:
Option 1:
That we recommend NRC approval of the export, subject
to the assurances required by Section 109(b) and other ap-
plicable provisions of the Atomic Energy Act. (Recom-
mended by State, Commerce, Energy and Defense.) (C)3
NSC concurs but believes that approval should be condi-
tioned upon the receipt of direct and unambiguous Argen-
tine assurances. (C)4
Option 2:
That we defer action on this and similar exports pending
some Argentine progress on ratification of the Treaty of
Tlatelolco and/or progress toward acceptance of NPT-
type full-scope safeguards as outlined above. (Recom-
mended by ACDA.) (C)
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
4 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.

The United Nations Special Session on
Disarmament
471.
Telegram From the Department of State to All North Atlantic
Treaty Organization Capitals1
26795. Subject: UN Special Session on Disarmament.
1. Begin summary: The 31st United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) adopted a resolution calling for a Special Session of the Gen-
eral Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD) to be held in 1978;2
SSOD Preparatory Conferences (PrepCons) are scheduled for March,
May and September, 1977. We have concluded that US interests would
best be served tactically by adopting a positive posture towards the
SSOD and plan to participate constructively in the SSOD PrepCons.
2. This message (A) provides background information on the
SSOD and (B) solicits reporting from addressees in order to identify
those issues which we might want to examine more closely prior to and
during the upcoming SSOD Preparatory Conferences.
3. We believe that action addressees (except India, Sri Lanka, and
Yugoslavia, see para 11 B and C), which include the NATO allies, are
likely to share many of our interests. We would anticipate a greater di-
vergence of views on disarmament issues between US and most info
addressees. At the discretion of each Embassy, action addressees may
take soundings of host governments on their views regarding the
SSOD PrepCons and the SSOD itself. While no approach to host gov-
ernments should be made at this time by info addressees, the Depart-
Confidential. Sent also to USUN, USNATO, Canberra, Vienna, Madrid, Stockholm,
Tehran, Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Cairo, Monrovia, Rabat, Kinshasa, Buenos Aires,
Nassau, Brasilia, Bogota, Caracas, New Delhi, Colombo, and Belgrade. Sent for informa-
tion to Dacca, the Interests Section in Baghdad, Kathmandu, Algiers, Cotonou, Bujum-
bura, Tripoli, Port Louis, Lagos, Khartoum, Tunis, Lusaka, Sofia, Berlin, Budapest,
Warsaw, Bucharest, Moscow, Prague, Georgetown, Mexico, Panama, Lima, the Mission
to the IAEA, Islamabad, and Addis Ababa, and the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by David
Macuk (IO/UNP); cleared by Gerald Helman (IO/UNP), William Stearman (ACDA),
Bartholomew, Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P), Martin Goldstein (DOD/ISA), Allen Holmes
(EUR/RPM), Wesley Kriebel (IO/ML), Jon Glassman (EUR/SOV), Stephanie Perry
(NEA/RA), Louise McNutt (EA/RA), John Whiting (AF/RA), John King (ARA/RRP),
Jack, Seymour (EUR/EE), and Robert Homme (EUR/RPE); and approved by Donald
Toussaint (IO).

Special Session on Disarmament
ment would appreciate post’s analysis of host country outlook on
SSOD and possible means of dealing with it. End summary.
4. Background: Dissatisfaction with the slow progress on multi-
lateral disarmament issues among many of the states not aligned with
the US or the Soviets has resulted in pressures for giving greater mo-
mentum to disarmament through a meeting in which all states could
participate. In August, 1976, the Conference of Heads of States of Gov-
ernments of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Colombo, discussed the
issue in its political declaration and adopted a resolution calling on the
UN to convene a Special Session of the GA to review the problem of
disarmament and to promote a program of priorities and measures in
the disarmament field.3
resolution calling for a Special Session of the General Assembly de-
voted to disarmament to be held in New York in May–June, 1978. The
resolution established a Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) with the
mandate of examining all relevant questions relating to the Special Ses-
sion. The PrepCom is scheduled to meet at UN Headquarters, New
ence will be organizational in nature and deal with procedural issues;
May conference will develop the SSOD agenda; the September prepa-
ratory conference will prepare the draft of SSOD resolution for presen-
tation to the 32nd General Assembly.
6. Member states have been asked to submit country views on the
SSOD to SYG Waldheim by April 15, 1977.
7. Members of the PrepCom are:
—Western European and others: US, UK, France, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, FRG, Italy, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Turkey;
—Asian: Bangladesh, Cyprus, India, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Malaysia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka;
—African: Algeria, Benin, Burundi, Egypt, Ethiopia, Liberia,
Libya, Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Sudan, Tunisia, Zaire, Zambia;
—East European: (proposed) Bulgaria, GDR, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, USSR, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia;
—Latin: Argentina, Bahamas, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Guyana,
Mexico, Panama, Peru, Venezuela.
8. US attitude: In the past we have opposed proposals for an SSOD.
We were skeptical that an SSOD could have any meaningful results, ar-
guing that it would invite rhetorical posturing and unrealistic disarma-
ment proposals, intrude on the activities of the CCD, and inject extra-
3 “Resolution of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-
4 The date in the telegram is in error; the Resolution is actually dated December 21.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
neous complications into negotiations such as MBFR and SALT. While
these potential disadvantages have not disappeared, the situation
changed tactically with the decision of the Non-Aligned Heads of State
at Colombo to bring about an SSOD. The large bloc of votes which the
Non-Aligned commands at the UN made an SSOD unstoppable. Faced
with this situation, we concluded that US interests would best be
served tactically by adopting a positive posture towards the SSOD. At a
minimum this would allow us, in cooperation with allies and others
who may share our views on specific issues, more effectively to employ
tactics—in the Preparatory Committee and subsequently in the SSOD,
designed to avoid confrontation and allow us to influence the course of
procedural and substantive preparations to our advantage. Moreover,
a positive approach would allow us, together with our allies, to pursue
and shape specific initiatives which might develop that appeared likely
to further our arms control or other objectives.
9. Our Delegation to the 31st UNGA was therefore instructed to
join in the consensus approval of a resolution calling for the convening
of an SSOD and to explain that the US plans to participate construc-
tively in the careful preparation which will be needed to bring about a
successful SSOD.5
10. General instructions: A. Action addressees should plan on
making informal soundings based on the guidance provided in para 12
sufficiently before Feb. 14 to allow reporting to the Department by that
date. We are interested in your assessment of how the host government
views on those issues likely to arise during the PrepCons. Our most im-
mediate concern involves the March 7–11 PrepCon which will deal
with organizational matters. Reporting should include the names of
heads of Delegations likely to be attending PrepCon. Except where
deemed necessary by posts, or when instructed otherwise, precedence
of reporting need not exceed priority level. Where report is of consider-
able length, post may want to pouch document to Department with
summary of report sent by cable.
the consensus adoption on a vote for a SSOD resolution. The Department of State also in-
structed the UN Delegation to make a statement that noted that “unrealistic public expec-
tations can be stimulated by the promises often associated with large conferences and are
just as frequently disappointed. Public understanding and public support of arms control
measures are too important to risk this.” The U.S. therefore “approaches the proposal for
a Special Session on Disarmament with both caution and hope. We are cautious because
of the size of the conference and the fact that its objectives remain vague and unspecified.
We are hopeful, however, because of the strong interest on the part of many UN members
for such a conference and the seriousness of purpose which accompany the sentiments
expressed regarding the necessity of its success.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D760444–0885)

Special Session on Disarmament
B. Info addressees should at this time make no approach to host
governments on the SSOD. We would appreciate, however, posts’
analysis of host country attitude toward SSOD (see A above) and pos-
sible means of dealing with it.
11. Special instructions:
A. For US Mission NATO: We seek full and close consultations on
SSOD activities with our NATO allies and selected countries which
have been extensively engaged in our arms control efforts in the past.
Such consultations should help in avoiding unnecessary confrontation
and should permit the US, our allies, and their friends to influence the
course of procedural and substantive preparations to our mutual ad-
vantage. While such consultations could take place on a bilateral ad hoc
basis, we believe that a multilateral meeting of NATO representatives
would also be useful in coming to a basic understanding of national po-
sitions and the development of a common strategy and tactics. Toward
this end, US mission NATO should address question of SSOD at the
next PolAds meeting, drawing as appropriate on information in paras 4
through 9 and on guidance in para 12, noting that we will also be dis-
cussing SSOD bilaterally with PrepCon members, but that we believe
subject is of importance to allies, and urging that discussions be devel-
oped in future PolAds meetings to consider the upcoming SSOD
PrepCons and the April 15 country views submission. Mission should
note that the most immediate question concerns the March 7–11 SSOD
PrepCon, which will deal with organizational matters such as chair-
manship, voting, rules of procedure, financial questions, formation of
subcommittees, and the role of observers. Mission should seek agree-
ment on early date for PolAds discussions on SSOD. We would also ap-
preciate US NATO views on holding a special meeting of disarmament
experts very early in April to exchange views on the national submis-
sions to the UN SYG on the SSOD which are due on April 15. We would
not envision such a meeting as replacing the regular meeting of disar-
mament experts scheduled for April 21–22.
B. For Belgrade: Begin FYI: We believe GOY has played and will
continue to play an important role in development of SSOD. We have
an interest in working closely with the Yugoslavs in view of both this
fact and in view of its leading role among Non-Aligned. Since GOY
may not share US interests to same degree as other action addressees,
however, we wish to avoid committing USG to special consultative re-
lationship with GOY on SSOD. End FYI. With this in mind, Embassy
should approach Krivokapic, referring, to his own request for early US-
Yugoslav bilateral talks preparatory to SSOD (see Belgrade 405),6 ex-
Foreign Policy File, D770024–0230.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
pressing our interest in working constructively and positively in the
SSOD process. You may draw on guidance in para 12, adding that we
wish to work step-by-step so that each phase can be successful. You
may note in this regard that we welcomed Yugoslav efforts at the last
UNGA to produce a balanced SSOD resolution which we were able to
support.
C. For New Delhi, Colombo: In addition to Yugoslavia, we con-
sider that the helpful efforts of other key Non-Aligned countries are
necessary to allow the SSOD process to develop in a manner which will
best serve US interests. Embassy should therefore approach host gov-
ernment to state US recognizes and appreciates efforts made by Non-
Aligned at 31st UNGA to introduce moderate SSOD resolution which
could receive support of the US. Drawing on guidance para 12, you
should express US interest in continuing to work constructively and
positively in SSOD process, adding that we wish to work step-by-step
so that each phase can be successful. FYI. However, since host gov-
ernment may not share US interests to same degree as other action ad-
dressees, Embassy should avoid committing US to special consultative
relationship with host government. End FYI.
12. General guidance for action addressees: During informal con-
sultations with host governments on SSOD, posts may draw on the
following points as appropriate, modifying them to suit the specific
circumstances:
—We supported a consensus resolution last fall calling for a Spe-
cial Session of the General Assembly to discuss disarmament in the
hope that, with adequate preparation, it could make a realistic and con-
structive contribution to the broader objectives of arms control and
disarmament.
—First conference of the recently constituted Preparatory Com-
mittee takes place March 7–11. That meeting will consider organiza-
tional and procedural questions germane to that committee and the
Special Session.
—Preparatory conferences will meet on at least two other occa-
Committee will develop the SSOD agenda and draft a resolution for
presentation to the 32nd General Assembly.
—It is also expected that the Committee will determine the types
of action to be taken by the SSOD i.e., general declarations, specific
agreements, planned studies, expert commissions, etc.
—(Particularly because your government is a member of the Pre-
paratory Committee.) The US, at this time, would welcome your views
on questions of an organizational, or procedural nature, and any other
issues regarding an SSOD that are of concern to your government.
—We look forward to working with the government of ( ) (during
the various meetings of the Preparatory Committee and) prior to and
during the Special Session to achieve the most positive result possible.
Vance

Special Session on Disarmament
472.
Memorandum from the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to President Carter1
Washington, February 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Official Visit by United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim
I. OVERVIEW
A. Issues Waldheim May Raise
1. Overall Relations
Waldheim will seek an expression of your support of his efforts
generally. He will expect you to characterize the policy of your Admin-
istration towards the United Nations.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
7. Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD)
The General Assembly last November decided to hold a Special
Session in 1978 on disarmament to give new political impetus to negoti-
ations generally, to assert the interest of the UN in the field and to de-
velop a program for future multilateral efforts. Three preparatory con-
ferences are to be held during 1977 beginning in late March.
We have adopted an open-minded attitude toward the proposal,
indicating our willingness to participate actively and with constructive
ideas. We recognize that the Special Session, as a prominent and highly
political forum, presents some risks of confrontation, polemics, and
recommendations that we might not be able to accept. At the same
time, however, we see some potential for useful action at the session in
such areas as nonproliferation and conventional arms limitation and
perhaps on a comprehensive test ban.
The Secretary General’s role in the preparation is largely formal
and administrative, although the Secretariat is expected to be charged
with preparing background reports and the Secretary General is certain
to submit his own views in a special report to the session when it
convenes.
Memos. Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Talking Points (If Raised)
—The United States is taking an open-minded attitude toward the
Special Session on Disarmament and will participate actively in the
process.
—We see a potential for a constructive outcome from the session if
all approach it in a spirit of cooperation and with a commitment to
work toward realistic and generally acceptable results.2
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
2 Carter and Waldheim met on February 27 but the Secretary General did not raise
the SSOD issue. The memoranda of conversation is scheduled to be printed in Foreign Re-
lations, 1977–1980, vol. XXV, United Nations; Global Issues.
473.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization1
67750. Hold for opening of business. Subject: PolAds’ Discussion
of UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD). Ref: A) USNATO
1. Final draft of US report on its views to UNSYG on SSOD has not
yet been completed. Mission should therefore draw on this message in
its discussions at March 28 PolAds’ meeting.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to the Mission in Geneva. Sent
for information to London, Paris, Bonn, and USUN. Drafted by Michael Congdon
(ACDA/IR); cleared by William Stearman (ACDA/IR), Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P), Gerald
Helman (IO/UNP), and Bartholomew; and approved by John Hawes (EUR/RPM).
ment expert nor the French disarmament expert would be able to attend the March 28 Po-
litical Advisors meeting on SSOD. The Mission therefore recommended that the “most ef-
fective way to elicit and exchange of allied views on response to UN SYG on SSOD would
be to circulate to PolAds a paper setting forth US views on this issue.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
and Commonwealth Office told the United States that it was “likely that May [SSOD]
PrepCom will be less substantive than heretofore anticipated in view of the fact that
many nations will not have prepared their reports.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770098–0966)

Special Session on Disarmament
2. USG has adopted positive approach to SSOD. Most recently,
President Carter’s UN speech4 indicated that we would make a strong
and positive contribution to the SSOD. In such a forum it may be pos-
sible to reach agreement on certain broad principles of arms control
and disarmament negotiations agreements, and to identify priorities by
drawing attention to areas ripe for early attention; Session should also
have responsibility to assess capacity of current institutions to handle
tasks on the international arms control and disarmament agenda. This
is not to say, however, that it should have mandate to prescribe new, or
abolish old, institutions without agreement of principal participants in
arms control process.
3. US Rep should also indicate USG willingness to consider sub-
stantive discussions on specific arms control issues by SSOD or its com-
mittees. This does not repeat not mean USG foresees negotiating role
for Special Session or its committees in concluding specific arms con-
trol measures. It does mean USG is open to possibility that Session
might encourage broad agreement on specific measures in light of
atmosphere which develops during preparatory phases and during
Session itself. US Rep should state that we are not in a position to
identify what those issues may be at this point in the process.
4. US Reps should indicate that we recognize the whole gamut of
traditional arms control topics will probably be raised at the Session.
We shall want to emphasize that the first requirement for meaningful
arms control agreements involving the major powers is the active sup-
port of those powers. We wish to avoid the danger that sensitive nego-
tiations could be adversely affected by contentious political debate in
the SSOD, or that alliance interests could be damaged in larger forum.
5. US Rep should also indicate we would like to see final acts or
documents receive widest possible agreement. USG therefore sees
some value in working with responsible members of Non-Aligned
Movement, e.g. Yugoslavia, during preparatory phases and at Session
to bring about such agreement. Yugoslav approach may, however, be
somewhat too specific and we believe greater level of generality may
prompt wider adherence.
6. Final documents may include:
A) Overview of where we stand in disarmament process (what Yu-
goslavs have called “taking note of results achieved so far, drawing up
balance sheet,) including review of progress and problems over past
decade. Yugoslavia’s original position was that, “this appraisal should
be devoid of extreme demands and superfluous verbal criticism of
4 The text of Carter’s Address to the United Nations General Assembly, March 17, is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
leading military powers for past failures.” One criterion of the value of
such final document, we believe, should be its adherence to this caveat.
B) Priorities, drawing attention to areas ripe for early attention. We
do not repeat not envisage here a comprehensive negotiating program,
complete with timetable, of the sort more radical members of the Non-
Aligned might favor. Rather, we believe it may be possible to reach
agreement on identifying the most outstanding issues.
C) General principles to govern arms control negotiations and
agreements. Depending on climate of meeting, statement of principles
could be so highly general as to be meaningless, or so specific and di-
rected at certain countries as to be damaging. We would prefer a mid-
dle ground which concentrated on principles of existing and possible
future agreements and on gaining wide adherence. We would judge
specific formulations on their individual merits.
D) The capacity of current institutions to promote progress on
arms control and disarmament as a means of bringing about greater na-
tional and international security and peace. We believe question of pos-
sible revision of CCD and UN structure on disarmament questions will
certainly come up at Special Session, and we wish to contribute respon-
sibly to the debate. We believe the CCD to be a good multilateral forum
for pursuing our interests. Any proposed changes to the CCD would be
viewed from this perspective, and thorough justifications for change
would be needed to gain our agreement.
7. In general we believe Special Session should avoid problems of
UN First Committee5 by adopting broad framework for consideration
of specific proposals and avoiding consideration of national shopping
lists of pet projects. It will also be important to avoid being bound by
traditional patterns of First Committee work, such as adoption of mass
of discrete and often unrealistic resolutions. In our view success of
Session will depend in large measure on determination of all partici-
pants to forgo the kinds of polemical exchanges and confrontations
which have so often characterized disarmament debates in the UN First
Committee.
8. If it does so, Special Session can provide significant opportunity
for fundamental reexamination of disarmament problem in its full
scope. Session can focus on basic questions such as extent to which
arms control and disarmament measures can help make the interna-
tional system safer for all nations, large and small; role of UN in pro-
moting greater understanding of all aspects of disarmament problem;
and, finally, what positive action each nation, as well as UN as an orga-
5 The UN First Committee, or the Disarmament and International Security Com-
mittee, deals with disarmament and other security-related questions.

Special Session on Disarmament
nization of nations, can take to begin difficult movement toward na-
tional and international security at lower levels of armaments.
9. We will have further thoughts on the SSOD agenda which we
will convey to NATO as they are developed. For working purposes,
agenda items could parallel one or more of the possible final docu-
ments described para 6 above. We plan to distribute US response to
SYG to NATO prior to submission.
10. Finally, you should emphasize to PolAds importance we attach
to continued detailed consultations on SSOD as national planning
evolves. Issues at stake in SSOD are so closely related to fundamental
concerns of NATO that they must be dealt with on the basis of the
highest standards of NATO consultation.
Christopher
474.
Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the Department of State and the Mission to
the United Nations1
2348. Subject: NATO Disarmament Experts Discussion of UNSSOD.
ment experts, discussion of the UN Special Session on Disarmament fo-
cused on the need for intensified allied consultations in preparation for
the 1978 meeting; replies to the UNSYG; the probable role of the Soviets
at the meeting; the need for dialogue with the Non-Aligned; and the
upcoming meeting of the Preparatory Committee. Consensus of the ex-
perts favored a special PolAd meeting to be held in late May to discuss
further the Non-Aligned position paper2 and a Canadian suggestion
that a PrepCon subcommittee be established to begin drafting the final
conference document. End summary.
Confidential. Sent for information to all NATO capitals, Belgrade, the Mission in Geneva,
and Moscow.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. Of the eleven nations represented, seven (Norway, UK, US,3
Canada, France, the Netherlands and Italy) stated that they have
drafted but not yet submitted their replies to the UNSYG. Both Den-
mark and Turkey have already done so. In light of their plans to circu-
late their draft replies to the other Delegations, experts did not give de-
tailed summaries of their positions.
3. The FRG (Ruth) emphasized the necessity for Western consulta-
tions with the Non-Aligned states leading up to the SSOD. He cited re-
cent discussion in Bonn with the Yugoslav Representatives to the
NACC and the seriousness with which the Non-Aligned are approach-
ing disarmament issues. According to the FRG, these states view the
1978 meeting as the first in a series to be held under UN auspices. The
German position was widely supported: Belgium and the UK stressed
the need for such consultations with Non-Aligned leaders, notably Yu-
goslavia. Denmark (Schoen) viewed the SSOD as an opportunity for
the West to improve its image in the developing world and urged that
it adopt an active stance at the conference.
4. Belgium (Onkelinx) and Denmark expressed similar expecta-
tions regarding the Soviet role at the SSOD noting that the USSR ap-
peared to have lost interest in the conference. Several Delegations
noted that lack of support for a World Conference on Disarmament
(WDC) accounted for Soviet aloofness. Canada suggested that will-
ingness to consider follow-on SSOD’s could further deflate Soviet
WDC efforts. However, the UK (Edmonds) questioned Soviet motives,
citing Soviet demarche´s to Italy and the FRG as well as the UK for bilat-
eral consultations with the USSR on SSOD issues. France (Mistral)
warned against complaency regarding Soviet inactivity, and foresaw a
renewed campaign to link SSOD with WDC.
5. Turkey (Ulucevik) noted that the most recent version of the
Non-Aligned paper was identical to the earlier draft4 with the addition
of references to a WDC. France (Mistral) categorized the text as an ex-
3 Earlier in the day, the Carter administration said that the “Special Session offers
an opportunity to come to grips, in a concentrated manner, with some of the fundamental
problems in the disarmament field.” Nonetheless, the session “will need to do more than
seek agreement on abstract priorities determined without reference to their achievability,
on general principles for disarmament that may or may not contribute to the solution of
specific problems, or on a rigid programme and schedule of action seeking to determine a
long-range process inevitably dependent on a multitude of factors subject to unforesee-
able change. Such efforts, if not kept in perspective, could result in obscuring the Ses-
sion’s paramount purposes and divert its attention from more urgent problems.” The
United States also cautioned that the Session “must be regarded as one step in a very long
and arduous process. That process is nothing less than improving the security of all na-
tions and their peoples and building a world order in which human energies and talents
are devoted more fully to meeting the basic needs of all humanity.” (Telegram 90685 to
0860)
4 Not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
haustive catalogue of disarmament procedures and warned that if the
SSOD were to base its work on this document, the conference would be
unable to reach conclusions. The US (Sloss) shared this opinion, but
saw some encouraging signs of pragmatism, resulting probably from
Yugoslav influence. The Netherlands (Bruyns) cited a covering memo5
which indicated that the draft was intended to assist the Non-Aligned
in preparing their replies to the UNSYG and not to limit their scope.
The FRG (Ruth), referring to its recent consultations with the Yugo-
slavs, viewed the Non-Aligned as open to consultation with the West,
but Belgium (Onkelinx) warned that the Non-Aligned might be more
receptive to Soviet initiatives than Western ones and that an alliance be-
tween the East and the Non-Aligned might easily arise at the SSOD.
6. The UK (Edmonds) said first PrepCon had gone as well as could
be expected and noted that handling of disarmament issues at Fall
UNGA would have considerable impact on the SSOD, perhaps dis-
tracting interest from PrepComs.
7. Canada (Hammond) said his government believed SSOD’s
success or failure would depend heavily on content of final document
of the session, and degree of consensus it had gained. For this reason
Canada was proposing in its reply to SYG the establishment of a
drafting subcommittee at the May meeting to begin work immediately
on the final document. France (Mistral) questioned whether the
PrepCon’s mandate included such activities and other Delegations (US,
UK) pointed out disadvantages of drafting too early, as this might lead
to debate over language rather than content and interfere with national
re-examinations of arms control issues in preparation for the SSOD. A
UK proposal that allies begin work on a Western preliminary draft for
use at an appropriate future time, perhaps the 3rd PrepCon, found
wide support. Delegations also agreed that the scope of the final docu-
ment, which all recognized as inevitable, be neither too general nor too
specific and that Western collaborative effort would be necessary to en-
sure the production of a suitable text.
8. The FRG (Ruth) stressed the need for the intensification of allied
consultations in preparation for the SSOD. A UK suggestion for further
discussion of the Non-Aligned paper (para 5) and of Canadian pro-
posal for a drafting subcommittee (para 6) was widely supported. The
Netherlands indicated that such discussion might appropriately be
held first in the PolAds. The chair (Pabsch) stated that he would pass on
in his report to the NAC the consensus of the meeting calling for a spe-
cial meeting of the PolAds in the second half of May devoted to these
issues.
Perez
5 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
475.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
United Nations1
104340. Subject: Second Meeting of PrepCom of UN Special Ses-
sion on Disarmament: Guidance for US Delegation.
1. Begin summary: This message provides guidance on key issues
expected to arise at the second meeting of the Preparatory Committee
for the Special UNGA on Disarmament. It supplements the position
paper prepared for the first meeting2 as well as the general statement of
US views contained in our response to the SYG’s request for views
(State 90685).3 Specific guidance is set out below on (A) the agenda of
the Special Session, (B) role of the Secretariat, (C) non-governmental or-
ganizations, and (D) scheduling of further PrepCom work and interses-
sional working arrangements (May through August). Additional guid-
ance will be provided as needed. End summary.
2. Guidance for second meeting of PrepCom of UN Special Session
on Disarmament:
I. Introduction:
The first meeting of the PrepCom was concerned largely with the
election of a Chairman and Bureau, participation, rules of procedure,
and the role of the Secretariat and other questions regarding support.
We expect the second PrepCom meeting to devote its attention to:
A. Development of the agenda of the Special Session,
B. Role of the Secretariat,
C. Role of non-governmental organizations (NGOS),
D. Scheduling of further PrepCom work and intersessional
working arrangements (May through August), and
E. Creation of subcommittees or working groups.
This paper provides general guidance for the US Delegation on
these issues. Additional guidance will be provided as needed, taking
into account the Delegation’s reporting and recommendations.
II. A General Approach and Objectives:
Our general appoach to the Special Session on Disarmament is that
contained in the US letter of April 22, 1977, to the Secretary General,
Limited Official Use; Immediate. Sent for information to USNATO and the Mission in
Geneva. Drafted by David Thompson (ACDA/MA/IR) and David Macuk (IO/UNP);
cleared by Flowerree, Lyall Breckon (PM/DCA), Gerald Helman (IO/UNP), Martin
Goldstein (DOD/ISA), and Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P); and approved by Charles Maynes
2 Not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
and the Delegation should draw on it in its private and public com-
ments. Our immediate objective at the second PrepCom meeting is to
work for an agenda which will reflect a realistic set of objectives for the
Session. It should be general in its phrasing, neither anticipating the ne-
gotiation of specific arms control measures nor prejudging the results
of the Special Session.
As at the first PrepCom meeting, we will want to strengthen the
cooperative atmosphere that has existed so far by making it clear that
Non-Aligned moderation facilitates our ability to be forthcoming.
III. Consultations and Coordination:
We will wish to continue to pursue actively consultations with all
major actors and to strengthen our interest in on-going processes of
open dialogue.
The Delegation should maintain especially close relations with our
allies on the PrepCom, as well as with the Western group in general.
Consultative group meetings consisting of NATO members, Japan,
Austria, as well as the special WEOG working group established dur-
ing the first PrepCom should be continued.
Consultations with the Soviets will also be important in view of
our common interests in such areas as SALT and the CCD; the Delega-
tion should make clear to the Soviets that we share important interests
which could be adversely affected by the Session and we hope to work
together throughout the preparatory processes to protect such in-
terests. We do not expect, however, to develop a fully coordinated ap-
proach with the Soviets in light of our different approaches to certain
elements of the Session; e.g., the World Disarmament Conference issue.
In consultations with key Non-Aligned, neutral and developing
countries, the Delegation should seek to encourage openness, modera-
tion, cooperation, and avoidance of block positions and atmosphere of
confrontation. We will seek to give concrete evidence of our willing-
ness to be flexible and to carefully consider reasonable Non-Aligned
concerns. As at the first Preparatory Committee meeting, the Delega-
tion should keep in close touch with leading Non-Aligned and neutral
Delegations, including those of Yugoslavia, Sweden, Argentina, Brazil,
Iran, and Egypt, as well as others that may emerge as major players.
IV. Issues:
(1.) Agenda of the Special Session: We have indicated in our sub-
mission to the SYG that the US will adopt a flexible attitude toward the
agenda. Although we would prefer an agenda that simply sets out an
organizational framework (e.g., general debate, adoption of final docu-
ments), we are prepared to go along with the general trend in favor of a
more thematic agenda along the lines proposed in the Non-Aligned in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
erally acceptable formulation, the Delegation should attempt to:
A. Keep the number of items to a minimum and as broad as pos-
sible; each item (other than general debate) should constitute a frame-
work for a final document or section of document (if there is only one).
B. Avoid inclusion of specific arms control topics as agenda items.
C. Avoid tendentious, prejudicial, or judgmental language (such
as the reference in the Non-Aligned paper to “stagnation” in disarma-
ment or possible Soviet efforts to have an item on the “need” for con-
vening a WDC).
D. Avoid language that might create false expectations by ap-
pearing to promise more than is possible; specifically, we believe it
would be inadvisable at this point to commit the Session to adoption of
a “declaration of principles of disarmament.” While it may be possible
to develop some generally acceptable “principles” (or more modest
“guidelines”) we believe this prospect should be kept open for the
present by referring to the basic “declaration” as a declaration on disar-
mament or a political declaration.
All of these considerations have a bearing on the handling of the
particular and probably contentious question of a World Disarmament
Conference (WDC). The Delegation should make clear to others that
our position on WDC has not changed. We continue to consider the
Special Session a separate and self-contained proposition unrelated to a
WDC and we do not believe its status and significance should be un-
dermined by efforts to make it subordinate to or a step toward a WDC.
The Delegation should seek to discourage inclusion of a WDC on the
agenda. If such inclusion appears inevitable, we are prepared as a tac-
tical measure to accept mention of the WDC question on the agenda as
one of the institutional and organizational issues to be discussed at the
Session, on a par with the UN First Committee, the CCD, the UNDC,
and the UN Secretariat. We would not, however, favor isolating WDC
as a special topic for consideration.
steering group had given the Mission a paper containing a potential agenda for the SSOD
or a World Disarmament Conference. The agenda included four elements: “(A) review
and appraisal of the present international situation in light of the stagnation in the field of
disarmament, the continuing of the arms race and close interrelationship between disar-
mament, international peace and security and economic development; (B) adoption of a
declaration of principles on disarmament; (C) adoption of a program of action on disar-
mament; (D) review of the role of the UN in disarmament, of disarmament mechanisms,
including the question of convening a WDC.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770124–0635)
other Dels indicate general expectation that second meeting of Special Session PrepCom
will not go much beyond development of skeletal agenda for the Session along lines pro-
posed in Non-Aligned ‘information paper’.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770150–0251)

Special Session on Disarmament
Accordingly, the Delegation should seek to maintain the phrasing
used in the Non-Aligned paper as a suitable compromise—i.e., review
of the role of the UN and of disarmament mechanisms, including the
question of convening a WDC. The Delegation should seek further
guidance if agreement on a formula of this kind cannot be reached.
(2) Role of the Secretariat:
Mission’s report (USUN 1290) suggests that there may not be sig-
nificant pressure for substantive studies by Secretariat at this stage. We
are prepared to consider any proposals that might be made, but would
not favor any studies requiring additional expenditures.
We see no advantage in opposing a request that the Secretariat pre-
pare a report organizing the views contained in responses to the SYG
into general categories or “themes,” although, in view of the vastly dif-
ferent approaches taken by various governments, we doubt that any
precise categorization will be possible or that the results will be of great
value. A committee request for such a report should be as specific as
possible, making clear that the document should not attempt to inter-
pret views, assess trends, or draw conclusions.
We have no objection to the preparation of the following support
documents by the Secretariat:
—Presentation of disarmament resolutions adopted by the Gen-
eral Assembly.
—A paper on existing principles and proposals for the conduct of
disarmament negotiations.
—A description of existing structures and machinery for disarma-
ment negotiations.
—A compilation of presentation in thematic form of responses to
the secretary general’s request for country views on the SSOD . . . pro-
vided the costs of such services fall within currently budgeted Secre-
tariat funds ($90,000).
(3) Non-Governmental Organizations: Assuming the statement on
NGOs to be prepared by the Chairman and rapporteur accurately re-
flects the agreement reached at the March 31 Bureau Meeting (USUN
PrepCom agreed that NGOs should be “welcomed but that they have no right to ‘partici-
pate’.” This reflected the “deep and general fear” of “NGO ‘agitation’ or ‘interference’ in
Special Session,” as the Soviet bloc was “adamantly opposed to NGO involvement”
while “many Western Delegations fear domestic reverberations if ‘their’ NGOs, often af-
filiated with opposition political parties, are allowed any status; and many Non-Aligned
seem to have vague fears that NGOs will inject extraneous (or even relevant) issues em-
barrassing to them.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770119–
0388)
that it found “no objection to NGO participation formula” proposed in telegram 1027.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(4) Scheduling of further PrepCom work and intersessional
working arrangements: we believe it will be important to maintain a
pattern of informal consultations and discussions during the summer
so that Delegations can gain a clearer understanding of the positions of
different governments and identify areas of likely agreement and pos-
sible disagreement to facilitate greater understanding of the expecta-
tions of different governments and identification of likely areas of
accord and disagreement. Since there appears to be a growing expecta-
tion that discussions at the 32nd UNGA will significantly shape the
course of preparations during 1978 as well as the Special Session itself,
it is essential that a groundwork of common understanding be laid be-
fore then.
We do not believe that elaborate arrangements need be made for a
series of informal meetings during the summer having a specific man-
date (e.g., to report to the PrepCom in September). But we would
strongly favor action at the May meeting to make possible periodic in-
formal meetings for exchanges of views on the proposed agenda items
and other issues. The Delegation should work with others to develop
support for such meetings and to take the necessary administrative
steps to make them possible.
Should it become obvious that the second Preparatory Committee
meeting will not go beyond the development of a skeletal agenda for
the Session (e.g., along the lines proposed in the Non-Aligned “infor-
mation” paper), we would be prepared to consider a 4th, and as yet un-
scheduled Preparatory Committee meeting to take place during the
spring of 1978 to allow further consideration of a detailed agenda by
the Preparatory Committee.
(5) Creation of subcommittees or working groups: the Delegation
should not object to a decision in principle on the creation of subcom-
mittees or working groups of the whole corresponding to the major ele-
ments of the agenda and to the anticipated components of the final
document. Care should be taken to avoid creation of a WDC sub-
committee or a sub-committee focused on the so-called disarmament-
development link. Further guidance on these issues will be provided as
needed in the light of developments at the PrepCom meeting and the
Delegation’s recommendations. Our major procedural concern with re-
spect to the establishment of sub-committees or working groups would
be to avoid an excessive amount of simultaneous meetings. We would
prefer that subcommittee meetings be held at different times during the
preparatory phase. If there is a proposal to establish any sub-committee
or working group with a mandate to continue its work on an interses-
sional basis, the Delegation should report the details and further guid-
ance will be provided.
Christopher

Special Session on Disarmament
476.
Memorandum of Conversation1
London, May 9, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
UK—Foreign Secretary Owen
Deputy Under Secretary Hibbert
Mr. Ferguson, Principal Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary
France—Foreign Minister DeGuiringaud
Political Director DeLaboulaye
Mr. Andreani, Director for European Affairs, Foreign Ministry
FRG—Foreign Minister Genscher
State Secretary Van Well
Mr. Terfloth, Foreign Ministry Press Spokesman
Mr. Weber, Foreign Ministry Interpreter
US—Secretary of State Vance
Assistant to the President Brzezinski
Assistant Secretary Hartman
Mr. Hunter, NSC Staff
Mr. Dobbins (Notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
The UN Special Session on Disarmament
Gencher felt that they should take very seriously and begin to pre-
pare as soon as possible for the UN Special Session of Disarmament.
There were elements of this meeting which the West could turn to its
advantage. For instance, the West might wish to call attention to the
fact that its ability to contribute to Third World economic development
was limited by the arms burden imposed on it by the East.
Owen suggested that the preparations for CSCE, which went for-
ward concurrently in NATO, EEC, and the Council of Europe, offered a
model for preparation for the UN session. Gencher noted that there
were a larger number of countries involved in the special session than
in the CSCE. One must seek to avoid a polarized UNCTAD type situa-
tion. This was why this was an urgent question. Once opinion on these
issues became formulated, it would be very difficult to exert any influ-
ence. Close cooperation with the U.S. was essential, which was why he
raised the matter with the four power forum.
The meeting took place at 10 Downing Street. The memorandum is scheduled to be
printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Owen suggested that the four Political Directors might look into
this matter and report to the Ministers. Vance thought this a good sug-
gestion. If, he said, there were issues included which didn’t seem to fit
in other forums, then they should consider dealing with them among
the Four.
DeGuiringaud said that he was quite willing to have the Political
Directors discuss the issue, although he was not sure that they would
be able to agree on a common position. They might have common goals
but different approaches. Owen said that for the moment, their task
would be to look at the procedural questions of how they might even-
tually reach substantive agreement. It was agreed that the Political Di-
rectors would do a paper on preparations for the Special Session on
Disarmament for Ministers’ consideration at their next meeting.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
477.
Memorandum of Conversation1
New York, September 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Preparation of Final Documents for the UN Special Session on Disarmament
PARTICIPANTS
United States:
Mr. Lawrence Weiler, ACDA, Coordinator for the UN Special Session on
Disarmament
Mr. John Hirsch, US Mission to the UN
Mr. Michael Congdon, ACDA/MA/IR
Yugoslavia:
Mr. Dzevad Mujezinovic, Deputy Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the
UN
Mr. M. Mihajlovic, Yugoslavia Foreign Ministry
Mr. Miljenko Vukovic, Counselor, Mission of Yugoslavia to UN
COPIES TO
See attached sheet2
fidential. Drafted by Michael Congdon (ACDA/MA/IR). The meeting took place in the
Indonesian Lounge of the United Nations General Assembly Building.
2 Attached but not printed.

Special Session on Disarmament
Weiler stated at the outset of the discussion that the United States
wished to be as helpful as it could over the next several months to en-
sure that the Special Session is a success. He observed that the easy part
of the preparatory process and procedural matters is now over and that
we now face the much more difficult problem of preparing the final
outcome. He said he believed all countries needed to do a lot of think-
ing, not only about the prospective documents, but also what we all
want to see the SSOD produce in terms of new ideas and initiatives.
Weiler said he assumed that our two countries were in agreement in
wanting the SSOD to be productive, to cause things to be different, to
create an improved climate for arms control and disarmament discus-
sions, and to give an impetus to disarmament efforts. Further, he be-
lieved one goal should be to ensure that no one group of countries
stands aside in the process. It was his personal opinion that the session
ought to stimulate public support for disarmament efforts and pro-
gress. This, he admitted, would have more effect on some governments
than others; it was certainly true in the case of the United States. If the
result of the conference were to be contentiousness, it would produce
an adverse reaction in the US, while improving public support would
be a major accomplishment toward our arms control and disarmament
objectives.
He said that he wished to highlight a few points in the non-aligned
draft Declaration on Disarmament;3 not exhaustively, but as indicative
of the careful language necessary in drafting a document of this type in
order to achieve the greatest possible support:
—The final documents, in order to gain wide support, should refer
to some progress in disarmament efforts, albeit not enough, for, indeed,
some progress had been made.
—They should also acknowledge the fact that there is not just one
arms race, but many, all over the world.
—The program of action should avoid rigid time schedules which
give an air of artificiality to what is produced.
—The documents should reflect an emphasis on the nuclear side of
the disarmament question, but not to the exclusion of conventional
weapons (not necessarily limited to conventional arms transfers) and
the need for reducing conventional weapons and force levels. For un-
derstandable reasons, attention to problems of conventional arms has
almost fallen away and been forgotten, while force levels produce con-
cerns that, whether perceived or real, affect other political perceptions.
—The problem of non-proliferation should be reflected in these
documents. If the SSOD does not contribute to efforts to strengthen
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nonproliferation, and if it, instead, weakens these efforts, thoughts
about general disarmament become academic. Whatever opinion one
has of the NPT, he said, one central objective of the treaty was to buy
time to get on with other arms control activities. For, whenever there is
proliferation, it makes it more difficult to move forward on arms con-
trol and disarmament. This is in addition to the dangers to international
security produced by proliferation. Thus, the documents must reflect
that there cannot be increased prospects for arms control if there is fur-
ther nuclear proliferation.
—The documents should make another point about the impor-
tance of merely halting or freezing arms competition, for this is the pre-
requisite to reversing arms build-ups and to disarming, which may in
many cases be easier than reaching agreement on where to stop. He
said there is a certain tendency to depreciate any step that does not in-
volve reductions, which is not reflective of realities.
—It is also necessary that the documents avoid code words such as
“dissolution of military blocs.”
—We should also seek precision of language in these papers if they
are to gain widespread support, noting that the nonaligned paper, if
taken literally, called for immediate nuclear disarmament.
—Halting “nuclear weapons testing,” was a phrasing that, of
course, was not acceptable to the US.
—It is hard to tie savings from disarmament automatically and
mechanically to development assistance. The documents should point
out that the savers too will benefit from the redirected resources which
would emerge from disarmament programs since this is a major incen-
tive for disarmament efforts.
—The SSOD, and therefore also the documents, should stimulate
public involvement—more openness, more information. There is much
concern world wide about the unknown in national security postures,
and we are concerned that this is a stimulus to arms racing.
—It is important that new ideas be reflected in the SSOD and, if
possible, also in the documents. While it is too early to promise any
specific new ideas out of the US, we believe the menu must be enriched
by all participants.
—Decisions on machinery for disarmament should follow deci-
sions on the Program of Action. We believe it is essential not to turn a
negotiating body into a voting body (such as the UNGA). This would
change the nature of the forum and it would no longer be a real negoti-
ating body.
Weiler reiterated that he was only speaking personally, and that he
was not trying to give an exhaustive summary of comments on the
Nonaligned paper, but only trying to highlight for the Yugoslav dele-

Special Session on Disarmament
gation the trend in our thinking and the general nature of our assess-
ment of the document, and only in a very preliminary way.
The Yugoslav delegation thanked Mr. Weiler for his comments
and said they were extremely valuable as an indication of US interest
and of US thinking on the SSOD. Mujezinovic said he would not take
the time to answer the individual points made by Mr. Weiler at this
time, but rather, he said, would address the question of how we might
proceed in the drafting exercise. The Yugoslav Government, he noted,
had sought and continued to seek more governmental points of view as
to the eventual shape of the final documents. Ideally they would like to
see the US views set forth, but still, based in part on the existence of sev-
eral drafts of the declaration, they felt in a rather good position from
which to proceed. The Soviet/Eastern European papers (USUN 27114
by several Western delegations (USUN 2942),5 Australian and Norwe-
gian drafts, and Japanese and UK comments on earlier papers all re-
flected various governmental positions. He said his delegation would
continue to seek grounds for a final document, but cautioned that they,
as was the case with most of the nonaligned, did not have the great ex-
pertise in disarmament matters possessed by the larger powers. He
said the nonaligned would now have to produce a new draft, of the
type produced by others, and try also to arrange the text according to
what would appear to be an acceptable format.
Turning to some comments in general on the thrust of Mr. Weiler’s
presentation, Mujezinovic said his government wished the special ses-
sion to “dramatize” the lack of progress in disarmament over the past
three decades, and to generate both a common policy toward stimu-
lating negotiations, and also political will to enter serious negotiations.
They sincerely hoped to produce an outcome which would be accept-
able by consensus, but he was doubtful whether this would be possible,
particularly on some contentious issues such as the need for continuing
alliance systems and the question of the peaceful uses of nuclear en-
ergy. He recalled Mr. Weiler’s emphasis on non-proliferation and said
that, in the view of his government, what was needed was a “new
system” to prevent nuclear proliferation, and he saw the SSOD as a nec-
essary first step in this field. His government felt it was ironic that the
very states which were committed to nonproliferation were accused in
fact and by implication of endangering the nonproliferation regime.
Most nonaligned agreed that nuclear weapons and proliferation were
Foreign Policy File, D770306–0503.
5 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
dangerous. What they did not understand was why the nuclear armed
states should accuse them of endangering the regime. His own country
was a member of the NPT. “We are the sole countries obeying nuclear
non-proliferation (sic.),” he said, “and perhaps to our economic detri-
ment.” He said there was a great resentment at what he called the “slap
in the face” received by the non-aligned at the NPT review conference,6
where the nuclear powers, the real proliferators, in response to calls for
further action on their Article VI obligations,7 treated the non-nuclear
weapon states as if they were seeking to undermine the treaty.
Changes in emphasis and an understanding of the legitimate
rights of the non-nuclear states to pursue economic development, he
said, are necessary on the part of the nuclear weapons states, and nu-
clear nonproliferation cannot be pursued through suppliers’ cartels
such as the London Group.
In more general terms he referred to the need for more responsive
disarmament mechanisms, mechanisms flexible enough to embrace the
opinion of the large number of non-militarily powerful states who have
a vital interest in bringing about a safer world. There should be a
change in perception of the interests of these states in disarmament. In
this regard, he said, Mr. Weiler’s emphasis on conventional arms put
the cart before the horse. We must begin to eliminate the most dan-
gerous weapons first, he said, and in the context of progress on this
front, it might then be possible to move to progress on conventional
arms. Conventional arms restraint and reduction haven’t gotten off the
ground because the most responsible states have not yet started the
process. Once they do other states will join in.
In conclusion, each side expressed appreciation for the views of
the other, and they agreed to remain in close touch, particularly at the
time of the UN General Assembly debate on disarmament and during
the subsequent preparatory committee meetings.
7 Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty declared that signatories must pursue
“negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament” and make progress towards a treaty
“on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.”

Special Session on Disarmament
478.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, January 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Specific US Initiatives for the SSOD
This memorandum describes five possible specific initiatives that
the United States might propose at the SSOD. These initiatives are in-
tended to take advantage of the opportunities for significant progress
in arms control that the SSOD offers, and to respond positively to the
concerns of SSOD participants.
Unhappily, possibilities for US initiatives that could be acceptable
within the United States government do not correspond precisely to the
priorities of the developing countries and the nonaligned, or to favorite
themes of the NGOs. Still it seems best to pursue initiatives that have
real rather than apparent content, even if they are less responsive to the
expressed demands of other participants in the Special Session.
We think the problem is not one of overloading the system, but
rather identifying at most two or three specific initiatives that the
United States can present.
The memorandum also outlines the course we propose to pursue
in developing positions on other issues that are not likely to be the sub-
ject of specific US initiatives.
If, in the course of our work over the next few weeks, we are able to
identify additional promising initiatives, we will send you further re-
ports on any major possibilities.
Possible Specific Initiatives
1. Nuclear Non-Use Assurances. We might want to take an initiative
in the area of nuclear non-use assurances to support our non-
proliferation objectives, while maintaining alliance deterrence capabil-
ities. Specifically, we could revive a formulation that we proposed to
the Soviets in 1968 in the NPT negotiations and that became the basis
for our adherence in 1971 to Protocol II2 of the Treaty of Tlatelolco—
non-use against non-nuclear weapon states party to the NPT (or other
binding international non-proliferation commitments) except those en-
Working Paper on International Mechanisms for Disarmament, August 1976–July 1978.
Confidential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gaged in aggression in association with a nuclear weapon state. The
pledge thus would not apply to Eastern Europe in the event of a
Warsaw Pact attack. Nor would it apply to a North Korean attack on
South Korea inspired or supported by China or the Soviet Union. It
would apply to those states most deserving from the non-proliferation
perspective, i.e., those formally renouncing nuclear weapons that do
not have nuclear power protectors. The initiative would therefore help
create a more balanced non-proliferation regime. The pledge would
take the form of a unilateral US policy statement, and we might also call
on other nuclear powers to undertake corresponding restraints. Our in-
itiative would, of course, have to be preceded by consultations with
NATO and Asian allies. We propose to develop a specific proposal for
inter-agency coordination.
2. Cutoff-Transfer. Since 1956, Administrations of both parties have
proposed a cutoff by nuclear weapon states in the production of fis-
sionable materials for weapons use. Associated with a cutoff, the US
still has on the table a proposal to transfer agreed amounts of such ma-
terials to peaceful purposes (e.g. 60,000 kgs. of U–235 by the US, pro-
vided the Soviet Union transfers 40,000).
A US failure to follow up on this proposal would be hard to ex-
plain. This Administration may be able to seize the opportunity to pro-
pose something even more meaningful at the SSOD. We could, for ex-
ample, serve non-proliferation and disarmament objectives, and the
interests of the developing countries, by proposing that a quantity of
weapons grade U–235 be diluted to reactor fuel and transferred to an
international nuclear fuel authority, bank, or other appropriate deposi-
tory. Such an initiative could be proposed as part of a cutoff agreement,
or undertaken separately by the US to show our desire for progress.
In the latter instance we might call on the Soviets for a similar
undertaking.
I recommend that we take up the matter directly with the Presi-
dent after State and ACDA have worked out a specific proposal. If the
President thought the proposal had merit, the next step on the transfer
could be a direct request from him to Harold Brown, George Brown
and Jim Schlesinger for a quick appraisal from their perspectives. They
could confirm that an adequate supply is available for this purpose. Be-
cause the cutoff is still technically US policy, it might not require a
formal interagency review. We probably should inform the Soviets be-
fore formal presentation at the SSOD.
3. Prohibition of ASAT Systems. In March, you proposed to the So-
viet leaders that we begin a bilateral negotiation to ban ASAT systems.3
3 See Document 3.

Special Session on Disarmament
The President has approved (September 23, 1977) the concept of a gen-
eral ban on ASAT systems as the goal of the proposed negotiation with
the Soviet Union on this subject.4 SCC agreement on the details of our
position has not yet been reached, however, so that the negotiation has
not yet been scheduled. We should press for development of a US posi-
tion so that we can get this negotiation started. We could then cite this
on-going negotiation in the SSOD as one of the many initiatives on
arms control undertaken by this Administration and could use the
SSOD to build up support.
If, however, we have not been able to initiate this negotiation, the
SSOD provides an appropriate forum to achieve this established objec-
tive as a national initiative rather than as a formal agreement. The Pres-
ident could announce at the SSOD that it was the intention of the US
not to test or deploy anti-satellite systems designed for physical attack
on satellites, as long as other countries followed the same policy.
This simple formulation would not affect our plans to develop
electronic warfare capabilities in this field. Although obviously di-
rected at the Soviet Union, the formulation basing our intention to ban
ASAT on the actions of all countries in this field would somewhat ob-
scure the bilateral nature of the issue and put additional pressure on
the Soviets to curtail their activities in this area. Since the issue is essen-
tially one of tactics and politics, we would propose to prepare a joint
State-ACDA memorandum for the President on this initiative.
If we are unable to agree on a position that would permit the start
of bilateral negotiations, and are not prepared to launch this national
initiative at the SSOD, we could propose that the SSOD consider a pos-
sible international convention on non-interference with satellites. It
could not yield as prompt or as effective control over the threat to our
satellite capability, but it would be, at least, a useful minimum step.
This proposal could be examined on an interagency basis.
4. Preference Assistance for Non-Proliferators. The SSOD will provide
an appropriate forum to present and explain our non-proliferation pro-
gram. Some third-world countries have criticized recent US non-
proliferation policies and the London Suppliers’ Group as efforts to
deny nuclear technology to developing countries, and as a “violation”
of our obligation under Article IV5 of the NPT to assist in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. Although there is some non-aligned support for
our non-proliferation objectives, this polarization along North-South
lines on nuclear issues is damaging to US non-proliferation interests. In
order to gain more support from developing countries, and to give de-
4 See Document 11.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
veloping countries further incentives to become or remain parties to the
NPT, we would propose an announcement, at the SSOD, of substan-
tially enhanced cooperation for developing countries party to the NPT
or to other binding international non-proliferation commitments.
Among the forms of preference we are examining are:
—Some preference in the terms and conditions of Ex-Im Bank fi-
nancing. We pledged to undertake such measures during the NPT Re-
view Conference, but have not yet carried out that pledge;
—The transfer of a substantial quantity of material enriched to a
maximum of only 20% for use in research applications. The material,
which could be used instead of weapons grade HEU, could be obtained
from HEU currently contained in and excess to the needs of our
weapons stockpile. This transfer, which would amount to no more than
1,000 kgs., could be done in conjunction with the transfer initiative de-
scribed above, or independently. In either event it should be coordi-
nated with the international fuel bank concept being developed in
INFCE.
—Establishment of a special fund for the fabrication, supply, and
ultimate return of research reactor fuel.
These latter two measures, in addition to the other advantages,
would also serve to give countries an incentive to move away from
weapons-usable highly-enriched uranium to low-enriched fuel in their
research reactors.
We would plan to prepare a specific proposal for inter-agency
coordination.
5. Confidence Building Measures. Regional stability is central to
peace and security throughout the world. Confidence building and sta-
bilizing arms control measures can dampen the sense of insecurity that
preoccupies countries in many regions, by reducing the chances of set-
ting off or escalating conflict between nations.
Following the example of the CSCE confidence building measures
(CBMs),6 to which the United States has subscribed, we could propose
in the SSOD that ways to apply CBMs and other stabilizing measures
be explored for areas of regional tension. For example, regional agree-
ments on pre-notification of military maneuvers, and preannounce-
ment of movements of major military forces could go a long way to
foster mutual confidence and security about military behavior that
6 Included in Basket One of the Helsinki Final Act is a document on Confi-
dence-Building Measures and Certain Aspects of Security and Disarmament. The confi-
dence-building measures were designed to reduce the “dangers of armed conflict and of
misunderstanding or miscalculation of military activities which could give rise to appre-
hension.” The Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed

Special Session on Disarmament
otherwise might be perceived to be potentially hostile. Moreover, they
could provide a foundation for regional arms control cooperation that
could eventually lead to more significant agreements to limit and re-
duce forces and to ease the burden of defense expenditures on national
budgets.
Neither the UN nor existing regional organizations now have the
technical expertise for a serious effort to promote stabilizing measures
between interested nations. The United States could propose to
strengthen the international machinery for this purpose, making our
own experience available in the process. We would propose to prepare
a coordinated proposal, working initially with PM.
In addition to these possible specific initiatives, we are continuing
to work in four other areas in preparation for the SSOD.
1. Disarmament-Development Link. It will be hard to escape ad-
dressing Third World interests in assuring that any savings from “dis-
armament” will be ascribed to economic and social development in the
Third World. This Administration’s self-restraint initiatives (B–1)7 and
arms control achievements (SALT8 and CTB prospects) will go some
distance to show seriousness about arms control. Nevertheless, this
will not be adequate for many developing countries, which draw dis-
tinctions between disarmament (which presumably generates signifi-
cant savings) and arms control (which, aside from the ABM Treaty, has
not). Aside from continuing support for the Norweigian initiative
(longer term study for the disarmament/development link),9 and the
need to avoid any automatic linkages, we have two approaches in
mind:
1) an attempt to achieve acceptance of the principles of common
obligations (for both developing and developed countries) to preserve
scarce resources otherwise devoted to armaments, and
2) to point out that any transfer of savings which might be possible
would be facilitated by some internationally acceptable accounting in-
7 Carter canceled funding for the B–1 bomber, a supersonic, low-level penetration
IV, National Security Policy.
8 The Carter administration continued the Nixon and Ford administration’s com-
mitment to the SALT II negotiations with the Soviet Union, which aimed to replace the
SALT I Interim Agreement with a long-term agreement to limit strategic offensive
9 The Norwegian initiative was actually written by the Nordic countries including
Sweden, Finland, and Norway. Telegram 4486 from USUN, November 10, contains the
text of the proposed resolution, which called for the “curtailment of expenditures on ar-
maments” which would “facilitate the availability of greater resources for economic and
social development, particularly to the developing countries.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770426–0762)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
strument. For the latter purpose, UNSYG’s current military expendi-
ture reporting initiative seems the most hopeful.
Possible US approaches range from SSOD endorsement of mutual
obligations, as principles, through increased openness and standard-
ization of military expenditure reporting, to proposals establishing spe-
cial development and security funds. These will be reviewed on an in-
teragency basis (at NSC staff suggestion), under ACDA chairmanship,
to identify those that have enough merit for SSOD consideration.
Whatever proposals we can come up with in linking disarmament
and development are likely to be too watery a gruel even for the under-
nourished world. I believe, therefore, that we should plan on making
our presentation as a response to LDC initiatives, rather than as a US
initiative, although our initial general presentation in the SSOD should
stress our sympathetic concern about the problem.
2. Comprehensive Test Ban and CW Treaty. You are familiar with the
issues involved in presentation of a CTB to the Special Session. This
possibility should be borne in mind, but cannot presumably be re-
solved until late winter or early spring, depending on the progress of
the negotiations and the reactions of the CCD after it convenes at the
end of the month.
If a CW Treaty emerges from the CCD in time, the question of how
it should be brought before the Special Session will need to be ad-
dressed—but not yet.
3. Conventional Arms Transfers. Restraint is a major Administration
initiative, which we will have to pursue in the SSOD, both to maintain
our credibility and to sustain our multilateral restraint efforts outside
the UN. Many LDC’s object to restraint as a discriminatory echo of the
NPT and a way of limiting Third World arms acquisitions while devel-
oped countries remain free to produce arms for their own needs. Our
options for meeting this LDC objection without inhibiting our own de-
fense are very limited. We will acknowledge the Third World concern
that their legitimate defense needs must be met, and we will argue that
restraint serves LDC interests, such as lowering tensions and pro-
moting development. A realistic SSOD objective would be to seek some
recognition in the conference documents (i.e., Declaration of Principles
and Program of Action) that restraint is desirable.
We are working with PM on an intensive series of bilateral consul-
tations to take place before and during the SSOD to develop greater in-
terest in and support for the Administration’s policies. The success of
this effort will presumably be reflected in the SSOD’s final documents,
as well as in continuing negotiations.
4. Further Encouragement for Nuclear Weapons Free Zones. The United
States has already approached the French and the Soviets to encourage

Special Session on Disarmament
adherence to Protocols I and II of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.10 We would
plan to raise this question with them again before the Special Session
begins, urging them to make an announcement at the Session.
We would anticipate that the topic of additional nuclear weapons
free zones will receive considerable attention during the SSOD. We
would plan to review the tactical situation during the PrepComs to de-
termine whether to press for a more open attitude towards NWFZs,
particularly in Africa.
5. Future Arms Control Forums. We are preparing an options paper
on possible changes in the present co-chairmanship arrangements that
will still be consistent with the special position of the US and the USSR
in the forum. We will also be working with State and within the two
upcoming PrepCom sessions on other proposals for new forums or
changes in existing forums.
I look forward to your reactions to these specific initiatives out-
lined above, as well as any comments you may have on other activities
described, so we can proceed expeditiously with our program of work.
479.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, and
the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke)1
Washington, February 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Backstopping Committee for the UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD)
As you are aware, the United Nations General Assembly will be
meeting in a Special Session on Disarmament from May 23 to June 28,
1978. Three meetings of the Preparatory Committee for the SSOD
Working Paper on International Mechanisms for Disarmament, August 1976–July 1978.
Confidential. Copies were sent to Gilligan, George Brown, and Turner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(PrepCom) have already been held and a fourth is now going on,
through the end of this month. A final PrepCom is scheduled to begin
April 10, lasting about two weeks.
The United States has taken a positive approach to the SSOD both
in private discussions and in public. In addressing the United Nations
Permanent Representatives on March 17, 1977,2 President Carter said,
“Working with other nations represented here, we hope to advance the
cause of peace. We will make a strong and positive contribution at the
upcoming Special Session on Disarmament (of the UN General As-
sembly), which I understand will commence next year.”
As the Special Session itself approaches, there is a need for the U.S.
Government to develop positions on substantive issues now being de-
bated in the PrepComs, and to formulate plans for U.S. participation in
the SSOD, including initiatives that the United States may wish to put
forward unilaterally. Therefore, there should be established under the
NSC Special Coordination Committee an interagency committee to
coordinate the U.S. Government’s activities with respect to the SSOD.
You should designate a representative to this committee with a rank
equivalent to and not lower than that of Deputy Assistant Secretary.
The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency will be the lead agency
for SSOD matters, and will chair the Backstopping Committee which
will refer policy issues to the SCC for guidance.
I would appreciate your communicating to the Director of the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency the name of your repre-
sentative on the SSOD Backstopping Committee at your earliest con-
venience. The NSC staff representative will be Samuel P. Huntington.
David Aaron
Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Special Session on Disarmament
480.
Note From President Carter to Secretary of State Vance and
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 27, 1978
Cy & Zbig
We need to evolve soon US position re UN Disarmament Confer-
ence. We’re in danger of being clobbered by all nations for arms sales &
by Soviets on ER weapons.
J.C.
cellaneous. No classification marking. Carter hand-wrote the note. Brzezinski forwarded
the note under cover of a February 27 memorandum. (Ibid.)
481.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Special Session on Disarmament
In your note of February 272 you expressed concern about (1) our
overall position at the UNGA’s Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) next May/June; and (2) our vulnerability in the SSOD context
on arms sales and ER weapons issues.
We have committed ourselves to a positive and forthcoming ap-
proach to the Special Session. We intend to be receptive to the views of
others and to put forward new ideas of our own at New York.
To carry out this approach we are working on a three point program:
I. Working from the base of our current arms control policies we
are developing guidance for our SSOD delegation which will en-
2 See Document 480.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
courage support for these policies and which will exploit positive
achievements. We will emphasize our SALT and CTB efforts, our
non-proliferation programs, and our CW and RW negotiations.
II. Recognizing that our current efforts in the disarmament field
cannot produce sufficient demonstration of momentum by the time of
the SSOD, we are examining what possible specific arms control initia-
tives the US might be able to put forward which would have merit in
themselves and which would strengthen our overall position. Pro-
posals being considered include: (1) Cut-off by nuclear weapons states
in the production of fissionable materials for weapons use; (2) Some
forms of preferential assistance for peaceful use of nuclear energy by
countries that have adhered to the NPT; (3) An international agreement
for reporting on nuclear accidents; and (4) A proposal to meet Third
World demands that the developed countries recognize a relationship
between
savings
from
disarmament
and
economic
and
social
development.
These possible initiatives are being analyzed carefully to deter-
mine their feasibility and effectiveness. We will also have to weigh how
we will surface any one or more of them that we finally approve. The
disarmament-development initiative represents at once an area of great
interest among the LDC’s and the area in which it will be difficult for us
to advance a sufficiently specific proposal.
III. We will be instructing our delegation for the final session of the
SSOD Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) session in April so they can
play an active role in developing draft language for a Declaration on
Disarmament and a Program of Action, key elements of a final SSOD
document. We are also consulting with Allies and a number of non-
aligned states on the question of possible modifications in the multi-
lateral disarmament machinery (the UN and the CCD).
Our soundings thus far and our experience at the meetings of the
PrepCom, the most recent of which ended on February 24, have con-
vinced us that Third World expectations are extremely high. What the
non-aligned—led by India and Yugoslavia—really want is for the US
and Soviets to come to some sort of agreement that will constitute a
“breakthrough” in the direction of nuclear disarmament. This expecta-
tion goes beyond SALT and CTB agreements, which they assume will
be achieved by that time and, thus, the Soviet proposal for a ban on ER
weapons would likely find a receptive audience. If SALT and CTB are
still pending, we can expect an even greater sense of disillusionment
among the non-aligned and greater difficulty in promoting our other
arms control objectives in the SSOD.
On their part, the non-nuclear weapon states want to receive assur-
ances that nuclear weapons will not be used against them. Two Allied

Special Session on Disarmament
countries—Canada and the UK—are planning to propose formulas
providing such assurances at the Special Session.
Most UN member states want to have a greater voice in disarma-
ment decisions. While we want to be responsive to this desire, we in-
tend to protect the negotiating effectiveness of bodies such as the CCD.
We are fully conscious of these considerations as we move forward
in our planning.
Obviously, a six-week conference of 140 nations is not an effective
context within which specific arms control agreements can be negoti-
ated, and thus major breakthroughs cannot be expected. At best, we
can hope to start a process which may lead to significant progress in
subsequent negotiations. While offering constructive initiatives our-
selves, therefore, we will also seek to moderate or reduce unrealisti-
cally high expectations on the part of the LDC’s and non-governmental
organizations.
All of our work is now being carried out in the Interagency Back-
stopping Committee, chaired by ACDA, which the NSC recently estab-
lished. We recognize that if we are to achieve our goals, we must accel-
erate our preparations. We will have to be able to respond to others’
initiatives as well as to field our own. It’s clear that key SSOD policy
issues will have to be addressed very soon by all interested agencies at
high levels.
On the two specific issues which you raised in your memorandum
we have the following observations:
Arms Sales. At the several PrepCom meetings that have been held
and in ongoing bilateral and multilateral consultations, we have sought
support for universal adherence to conventional arms transfer re-
straint. There is substantial resistance among the LDC’s to endorsing
arms transfer restraints. We (and the other arms suppliers) must expect
to take some flak at New York on this issue, unless we can succeed in
making the case that all nations would profit from restraints that re-
duce risks and costs while permitting legitimate defense needs to be
met.
ER Weapons. We have proposed to our Allies that we link ER
weapons and arms control in a way that would offset anticipated Soviet
propaganda at the SSOD.3 Our proposal would focus attention on the
modernization of the Soviet theater nuclear system and would involve
a ER Weapon/SS–20 tradeoff. While there was general agreement at
the last NAC (February 24) that an arms control strategy for ER
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
weapons is needed,4 additional consultations will be required before
we can come up with a NATO position. Most of our Allies, including
Bonn, agree with us on the need to put the ER decision behind us before
the SSOD and the NATO summit.
4 Not found.
482.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, March 27, 1978
Subject
The US Position on Cut-off in Production and Transfer of Fissionable Materials
for Use in Nuclear Weapons
We believe that an interagency study should be completed as soon
as possible on the desirability of proposing at the UN Special Session
on Disarmament (SSOD), negotiations on a cut-off in the production of
fissionable materials for nuclear weapons. We should also study the
desirability of transferring agreed amounts of enriched uranium from
US and Soviet weapon stockpiles to peaceful purposes. Even without a
transfer, a cut-off agreement would represent a major step in our efforts
to halt and reverse the nuclear arms race.
[4½ lines not declassified]
While a preliminary assessment by ACDA concludes that such an
agreement could advance US security interests,2 we believe a compre-
hensive examination of the issues involved in cut-off and transfer
should be undertaken immediately by all appropriate Executive
Branch departments and agencies. The impact on US nuclear force
planning options should be analyzed under a variety of possibilities,
ranging from projections of likely force levels to various higher op-
tions. We should assess the impact on Soviet capabilities, and the extent
memorandum.
2 Not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
to which such constraints on the Soviets would reduce our own re-
quirements. A cut-off and transfer proposal would involve important
national security issues, but we believe this Administration’s commit-
ment to nuclear arms control requires that we give the most serious
consideration to reaffirming our previous proposals in this area.
A cut-off proposal has been advanced in various forms by four
previous US Administrations, beginning with that of President Eisen-
hower. We will have to face this issue in any event at the Special Ses-
sion, for it is part of the Program of Action of the non-aligned, and may
be advanced as a suggestion by some of our allies as well.
A cut-off and transfer would be complementary to SALT TWO and
a Comprehensive Test Ban, and could be presented as a logical follow-
on to those treaties. Together with these ongoing efforts, it is regarded
by non-nuclear weapon states as one of the primary requirements to
maintain and strengthen the NPT and the overall non-proliferation re-
gime. Proposing such negotiations would demonstrate our intention to
deal ultimately with a central issue of nuclear disarmament—halting
the continued production and stockpiling of nuclear weapons. As such,
it directly addresses the concerns expressed by Prime Minister Desai
and hence would improve the prospects for obtaining Indian accept-
ance of full scope safeguards—one of our priority non-proliferation
objectives.
It is not clear that reaffirming a cut-off and transfer proposal
would lead to productive negotiations with the Soviets. They have in
the past rejected the cut-off, and Brezhnev’s November 2 proposal for a
halt in the production of nuclear weapons,3 beginning with a ban on
“neutron weapons,” carries obvious difficulties for the US. The likely
Soviet rejoinder would be a call for negotiation of a production ban on
nuclear weapons as well as on fissionable materials. They have infor-
mally indicated to us in New York during the Special Session Prepara-
tory Committee meetings that a cut-off could be a corollary to a
weapons production ban. We could counter that such a ban applicable
to all nuclear weapons states appears unattainable now, but as evi-
dence of our desire for progress, the US stands ready to initiate discus-
sions now on materials cut-off.
We could also consider transferring an agreed quantity of highly
enriched uranium from our special nuclear weapons material stockpile,
diluted to lower enrichments, to applications supporting US non-
proliferation objectives (e.g. research on more proliferation-resistant
fuel cycles). This offer could be conditioned on Soviet willingness to do
3 The “Address by President Brezhnev Before the Central Committee of the CPSU:
Halting the Production and Testing of Nuclear Weapons [Extract],” November 2, 1977, is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the same. Such a materials transfer would serve disarmament and non-
proliferation objectives, and it is something specific that could be ac-
complished sooner than a cut-off agreement.
Despite the uncertain prospects for early completion of negotia-
tions on a cut-off, it would be productive to make such a proposal at the
SSOD, and would give substance to our expressed desire to move in the
direction of nuclear disarmament. It would also help to fulfill the
pledge you made to the General Assembly last March that the US
would make a strong and positive contribution to the SSOD.4
As has been the case when the US has advanced the proposal in the
past, the United Kingdom has expressed some concern about the idea
of a cut-off proposal because of the effect such an agreement could have
on its nuclear weapons program. This concern might be eased by exten-
sive advance consultations and by initially proposing only US-Soviet
exploratory discussions. Should such discussions take place and pro-
vide the basis for beginning serious negotiations, we would again
consult with the UK to see whether their concerns could be met
adequately.
It should be noted that while any inspection of Soviet territory
would be difficult to negotiate, one of the advantages of our present
cut-off proposal is that on-site inspection requirements would be han-
dled by an international body (IAEA). Furthermore, such inspection
would be limited to safeguards to preclude the diversion of nuclear
materials to weapons purposes. Previous US proposals (in the 1960’s)
had included IAEA inspection of shutdown military facilities, as well
as civil facilities, and US adversary inspection rights for suspected clan-
destine activity—both of which were strongly opposed by the Soviets.
[7 lines not declassified] This is a critical issue that should also be ad-
dressed in the interagency study.
We recommend that you sign the memorandum at Tab 15 directing
the preparation of an interagency study of the issues involved in reaf-
firming at the SSOD US proposals to negotiate an adequately verified
cut-off and transfer agreement.
5 Not attached.

Special Session on Disarmament
483.
Memorandum from Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 31, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position on Cut-Off in Production and Transfer of Fissionable Materials for
Use in Nuclear Weapons
Yesterday, I was informed that a memorandum for the President
had been sent to the National Security Council staff asking that an in-
teragency study be conducted on the desirability of proposing at the
UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD) negotiations on a cut-off
of fissionable materials for nuclear weapons and the transfer of en-
riched uranium from stockpiled weapons to non-aligned nations for
peaceful purposes.2 I agree that a thorough analysis of these important
issues may be useful. However, I do not believe that it would be in our
best interest at this time to initiate a chain of events that is implicitly as-
sumed to lead to a reaffirmation of a cut-off or transfer proposal of the
sort we first made in 1963, at the upcoming SSOD. Rather, we should
await the outcomes of the current CTB and SALT negotiations before
we consider proposals to further constrain our freedom of action in the
nuclear weapons area. Only when these negotiations are completed
will we have a firm understanding of our future weapons needs and be
in a position to address a cut-off of production of fissionable materials.
The strategic situation has changed since the United States first ad-
vanced a cut-off proposal in 1963.3 At this time, we enjoyed a signifi-
cant advantage over the Soviet Union in terms of nuclear weapons ma-
terials. [6½ lines not declassified] The potential political advantages of
reaffirmation of the cut-off and transfer proposal must be weighed
against current and projected U.S. need. The projections of require-
ments may have to be modified based on SALT outcomes. We must
avoid being constrained on future weapons decisions because of a lack
of availability of weapons grade materials.
To meet the fissionable material requirements of the FY 78–80 Nu-
clear Weapons Stockpile Plan approved by the President in PD/
stricted Data.
2 See Document 482.
ment 313.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
quire all the material currently available, plus the output of the Depart-
ment of Energy’s three operating production reactors through 1985.
Should a SALT agreement not be reached, options to increase rapidly
our strategic forces capability by beginning new or accelerating
planned systems (e.g., SLCMs, GLCMs, CMC) are likely to require all
the above material and the restart of some reactors currently main-
tained in standby status. In addition, some strategic options such as the
MX5 would require more highly enriched uranium than is currently
available for the weapons program. Thus, a cut-off or mandated
transfer out of stockpiles could pre-empt our ability to deploy systems
currently under development. Additionally, continued production of
tritium
is
mandatory
to
maintain
operational
warheads
now
stockpiled.
[1½ lines not declassified] The Soviets have consistently opposed
IAEA safeguards for any of their facilities. It is therefore unlikely that
they would agree to any intrusive verification provisions that allowed
for on-site inspection. [7 lines not declassified]
In addition to the technical difficulties associated with a cut-off ini-
tiative, the diplomatic utility of such an effort is also open to serious
question. The U.S. has offered similar proposals on at least four other
occasions, and the Soviets have rejected each one. It is no more likely
that the U.S.S.R. will accept this initiative than it has the others. Given
that this initiative would be only a reintroduction of a very old idea that
has never produced any tangible results, and given that the Soviets are
likely to respond negatively, the effort could be attacked by some
non-nuclear weapon states as a calculated and empty gesture on the
part of the United States.
Some of our closest allies appear to be opposed to the idea of a
cut-off or transfer. For example, the British, in reaction to a similar Ca-
nadian proposal, argued in February6 that a cut-off would be “injurious
to the development and refurbishment of UK nuclear weapons,” and
thus harmful to the UK as well as the NATO nuclear deterrent. They
noted that a cut-off would be [less than 1 line not declassified] and went so
Weapons Stockpile,” December 27, 1977, is scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
5 The proposed MX (Missile Experimental) Missile was a Multiple Independently
Targeted Re-entry Vehicle (MIRV) nuclear weapon that the Carter administration consid-
ered deploying on railroad tracks as a mobile system. For more on the MX, see Foreign Re-
6 The British objection to the Canadian proposal is in telegram 2787 from London,
Canadian proposal was not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
far as to enlist U.S. support in helping dissuade the Canadians from
pursuing this proposal.
There are clearly major differences of view among the various
agencies, about the national security effects, political feasibility, rela-
tive effect on U.S. and Soviet stockpiles, and verifiability of such an ini-
tiative. It is unfortunate that lack of prior consultation with the Depart-
ment of Defense in the formulation of the memorandum has prevented
any attempt to compose them before it was forwarded to the President
for his decision.
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shares these views.
Harold Brown
484.
Memorandum from Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 1, 1978
SUBJECT
The Vance-Warnke Proposal Regarding a Cut-off of Production and Transfer of
Fissionable Materials2
I have now had a chance to peruse the subject memorandum on
fissionable materials production cut-off and transfer. My comments are
as follows:
1. Given a production cut-off, there is no way, repeat no way, to ful-
fill the stockpile objectives embodied in the Presidentially-approved
nuclear-weapon stockpile paper.
2. The alternatives facing the President under such conditions
would be simple. We could fail to produce the weapons for the stra-
tegic forces—the Trident, Minuteman III upgrade, and the Cruise Mis-
sile—prospectively entering into inventory. Alternatively we could
achieve constraint by a substantial drawdown of tactical weapons. This
would imply a significant withdrawal from the [number not declassified]
weapons now deployed in Europe with all that that would entail for
2 See Document 482.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Alliance relationships and the MBFR negotiations. Additionally, we
might attempt to straddle the issue by some drawdown from the tac-
tical weapons stockpile while reducing strategic force objectives.
3. One of the Savannah River reactors now is devoted to the pro-
duction of tritium. A cut-off of tritium production, since it has a half life
tially eliminate stockpile effectiveness in a few years.
4. Substantial production of highly enriched uranium (HEU) is in-
dispensable for fueling the nuclear navy. While the proposal is obscure
on this point (since it would presumably cover all such materials that
could be used in weapons), it seems difficult to imagine that we would
accept conditions in which we were unable to provide sufficient fuel for
Polaris, Poseidon and other nuclear powered vessels.
5. [5½ lines not declassified] To suggest that the IAEA, with minimal
clout, a spotty track record, and modest resources, could enforce such
an agreement strikes me as quixotic.
6. Given the requirement for some reactor products (i.e., one or
two operating reactors to produce tritium to maintain operable
weapons) and given the requirement for highly enriched uranium pro-
duction to provide fuel for naval reactors, any agreement acceptable to
us would imply the type of qualifications and ambiguities which the
Soviets could continuously exploit in raising questions regarding our
compliance.
7. Weapons production by the Department of Energy is responsive
to DOD requirements as established by the President. Our force struc-
ture is designed in response to national security objectives, which are
themselves constrained by ratified arms control agreements such as
SALT I and prospectively SALT II. It would seem to me that the appro-
priate initial determination is that of the force structure. Requirements
for weapons and, derivatively, for fissionable materials should flow
from that initial determination—without the imposition of an arbitrary
limitation on materials. We can be assured that the Soviets will not fail
to derive their fissionable material requirements in this manner. We
should take care to avoid haphazardly constraining our own force
structure through such a Procustean device.
8. While I have no inherent difficulty with a study of the issue,
since it is likely (for the reasons developed above) to put to rest this
type of long speculated-on initiative, I do have serious concern with the
proposed crash-effort study. The Special Session on Disarmament has
long been scheduled. Why could not this issue have been developed in
an orderly manner, rather than accept the risks attendant in attempting
to cram such a study into three weeks time?

Special Session on Disarmament
485.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, Secretary of Energy Schlesinger,
the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones),
the Director of Central Intelligence (Turner), and the
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(Press)1
Washington, April 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Study of Initiatives at the SSOD on Cut-Off and Transfer of Fissionable Materials
for Use in Nuclear Weapons
In March of last year, the President pledged a strong and positive
US contribution to the UN Special Session on Disarmament.2 In view of
this commitment and the fact that several participants are likely to raise
the issue of an agreement halting the production of fissionable mate-
rials which can be used for nuclear weapons (cut-off) and transferring
highly enriched uranium from the weapon stockpile to peaceful pur-
poses (transfer), it is important that we fully analyze the possible im-
pacts and implications of such proposals on US national security in-
terests, including our interest in nuclear arms control, and the
desirability of possible US cut-off or transfer initiatives. Therefore, a
study should be undertaken to include a discussion of the following:
—Review of past US cut-off/transfer proposals and the circum-
stances surrounding them;
—Assessment of US and Soviet special nuclear materials stock-
piles and trends;
—The impact on future US nuclear forces (from projections of
likely force levels to various high options);
—The impact on future Soviet nuclear forces;
—The impact on the overall US–USSR military balance;
—Relationship to other arms control activities;
—An assessment of possible verification systems and their
adequacy;
—Possibilities for recovery of nuclear material from the current
stockpile and the pipeline;
—Special problems (e.g., tritium production, naval reactors);
—Allied views and interests;
—Soviet attitudes; and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Views and actions of non-aligned and non-nuclear-weapon
states (particularly in the SSOD context and from the perspective of US
non-proliferation policy).
The study should be prepared by an ad hoc working group of the
Special Coordinating Committee and should be submitted no later than
April 28, 1978.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
486.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Subject
UN Special Session on Disarmament
Participants
State
AID
Gerald Helman
Alexander Shakow
Jerome Kahan
Mary Jane Heyl
David Gompert
Energy
Defense
Donald Kerr
Lynn Davis
Ray E. Chapman
Susan Flood
White House
ACDA
David Aaron
Adam Yarmolinsky
NSC
Lawrence Weiler
Samuel Huntington
Charles Flowerree
Robert Putnam
JCS
Lt. Gen. Arnold Braswell
CIA
Sayre Stevens
George Allen
The question of whether or not the President should speak at
SSOD depends heavily on the content of the US presentation. If he is to
speak, it is highly desirable that the presentation not be limited to
House Situation Room. Draft minutes of the meeting are ibid.

Special Session on Disarmament
the sorts of initiatives currently under study. A Presidential address
should offer an ambitious 10-Year Disarmament Program, outlining
long range goals and objectives for enhancing global security in such
areas as strategic arms control and regional stability. ACDA will pull
together agency suggestions for a 10-Year Disarmament Program into a
draft for NSC review within the next week. No final decision was taken
on the date for the US presentation.
A proposal for extending negative security assurances beyond the
President’s statement of October, 1977,2 is now being put into final
form. Regional bureaus and JCS are particularly concerned about the
impact of such an initiative on relations with our allies. More complete
information is needed about the probable reactions of key allies. Some
of this information may be obtained from the May 2 meeting of NATO
disarmament experts, at which the UK proposal for negative security
assurances may be discussed. When more information on allied atti-
tudes is available and when the options paper has been completed, the
issue will be raised for consideration at the SCC.
The “eyes and ears of peace” proposal for US technical assistance
for regional peace-keeping will be considered in the Backstopping
Committee next week.3 Agencies were urged to make any technical ob-
jections to the proposal as precise as possible.
Further consideration of our treatment of ERW at SSOD will be
postponed until additional policy guidance is available.
Within the next week, interagency agreement within the Backstop-
ping Committee is anticipated on initiatives on regional confidence-
building measures, nuclear accident reporting, and preferences for
NPT parties. (The offer of fuel cycle services has been deleted from the
latter proposal.) Views of State/EA will be solicited on the nuclear acci-
dents initiative. A split paper is anticipated on the Disarmament/De-
velopment proposal for a UN Special Development and Security Fund.
All these proposals, as well as the report of the group studying the
cutoff proposal, will then be submitted to the SCC for decision or
endorsement.
the reliance of nations on nuclear weapons, I hereby solemnly declare on behalf of the
United States that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defense; that is, in cir-
cumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our terri-
tories, or Armed Forces, or such an attack on our allies.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp.
itor compliance with disarmament agreements to nations or regions who requested such
assistance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
487.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Vance-Gromyko Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
Secretary of State Vance
Foreign Minister Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
First Deputy Foreign Minister
Ambassador Paul C. Warnke
Korniyenko
Ambassador Ralph Earle, II
Dep. Foreign Minister Semenov
Mr. Leslie H. Gelb
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Ambassador Marshall D. Shulman
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Col.-Gen. M.M. Kozlov
Lt. Gen. Edward L. Rowny
Mr. V.G. Makarov
DAS of Def. Walter B. Slocomb
Mr. N. Detinov
Mr. Mark Garrison
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Mr. William D. Krimer
Mr. A.A. Obukhov, Note Take
(Interpreter)
Mr. V.F. Isakov, Note Taker
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
SSOD
Gromyko noted that the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament
would be convened shortly. He did not know how the Secretary
viewed it, and what he thought the prospects were for a successful out-
come. If the Secretary had any ideas on this score, he would be pleased
to hear them. The Soviet side regarded the SSOD as a broad worldwide
forum, and would, of course, set forth its views on disarmament in that
forum. It would be very good if the countries of the West as well as the
East approached the SSOD in a serious and businesslike manner and
adopted positive decisions on the questions involved. The important
thing, of course, was not just to adopt decisions but also to implement
them. The U.N. adopts quite a few good decisions, but subsequently,
when the Secretary General circulates them to member governments,
all too often they pile up on desks in various government offices and
nothing much happens. He was not trying to reproach anyone in this
regard, but simply would not like to see this happen in the case of the
SSOD. As he had said, the Soviet side attached great importance to the
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, April 1978. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The meeting took place at
the Kremlin. Drafted by William Krimer. The memorandum of conversation is printed in

Special Session on Disarmament
SSOD and believed that it should in no way be used to belittle a subse-
quent World Disarmament Conference.
The Secretary said that he felt very strongly that the SSOD was of
great importance. We very much hoped that somehow positive and
concrete decisions can come out of the SSOD and that it not simply end
up in general statements that had no flesh and bone. Some other un-
named countries have submitted proposals that could not be under-
stood. However, he believed it possible to make real progress at that
conference. Ambassador Leonard would be coming to Moscow on the
27th of this month in order to talk to Gromyko’s people about the
SSOD. At the United Nations he is working on our preparations for the
Special Session.
Gromyko said that Soviet representatives would be prepared to
discuss the various issues with Ambassador Leonard.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on
Disarmament.]
488.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Subject
United Nations Special Session on Disarmament
Participants
State
USUN
Mr. David Newsome
Ambassador James F. Leonard
Under Secretary for Political
U.S. Deputy Representative
Affairs
to the United Nations
Mr. Jerome Kahan
ACDA
Deputy Director, Bureau of
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny
Politico-Military Affairs
Deputy Director of ACDA
Mr. Gerald Helman
Mr. Adam Yarmolinsky
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Counselor for ACDA
for Political and Multilateral
Ambassador Lawrence Weiler
Affairs
U.S. Coordinator for SSOD
in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Defense
AID
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Governor John Gilligan
Mr. David McGiffert
Mr. Alexander Shakow
Assistant Secretary for
Assistant Administrator for
International Security Affairs
Program and Policy
Coordination
JCS
Lt. General William Smith
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
NSC
[name not declassified]
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Acting Assistant NIO for
Dr. Samuel Huntington
Special Studies
Mr. Robert Putnam
Energy
Dr. Donald Kerr
Acting Assistant Secretary
for Defense Programs
It would be desirable to develop for a possible Presidential address
at SSOD a generalized statement of ten-year disarmament goals, partic-
ularly stressing a gradual scaling down of Soviet and American stra-
tegic forces, with provision for participation by other nuclear powers in
the later phases of this process. However, it is not appropriate at this
point to include specific numerical targets, because there is not time to
complete the necessary staffing and consultations before SSOD. The
SALT Interagency Working Group is asked to develop over the next
several months a series of specific targets as a framework for consid-
ering future steps in strategic arms control.
This Administration has compiled a strong record in the field of
arms control, and some participants thought it possible that a Presiden-
tial address could be crafted that would recount this record and add
some new elements or initiatives, without outlining a full-fledged Ten-
Year Program. It was agreed that any US address at SSOD should refer
to NATO and to the complementarity between arms control and de-
fense policy, both contributing to national security.
The meeting considered six specific possible US initiatives at
SSOD.2 The proposal on stabilizing measures was approved. The pro-
posal on ACIS was disapproved. The proposal on peaceful nuclear co-
operation was approved, subject to consultations with OMB and
Congress. (It will be necessary to resolve a few details involving the
funding of fuel cycle services and the working of Ex-Im preference for
NPT parties.)
2 The six initiatives are summarized in a May 4 memorandum from Huntington
and Putnam to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 118, Special Session on Disarmament:

Special Session on Disarmament
Concern was expressed about the probable adverse Chinese reac-
tion to the proposal on nuclear accident reporting, particularly since it
might appear directed at the PRC. It was agreed to ask the UKUN to
broach with the PRC the relevant proposal in the UK draft Program of
Action. If the PRC’s reaction is not adverse, USUN would then ap-
proach the PRC directly on the proposal. The proposal would be in-
cluded in the US SSOD presentation only if the PRC did not object.
Concern was expressed about the psychological impact of the pro-
posed negative security assurances in NATO, in Korea, and perhaps
elsewhere. It was agreed that the US would consult with South Korea,
with Japan, and with the FRG on this subject, using as the basis of the
consultation the current UK proposal, the language of which is similar
to the language of the proposed US declaration. A later SCC meeting
would, in the light of these consultations, decide whether or not to go
forward with the initiative. If the decision was affirmative, we would
first privately inform Israel and Iran and reassure them that the decla-
ration would not impair our existing commitments to their security.
The question of the exact language of the proposed US declaration—
whether or not to include “or threaten to use”—was deferred.
There was general agreement with the objective of establishing a
link between development aid and disarmament efforts, but it would
be premature to commit ourselves to the proposed fund for this pur-
pose. Instead, the US should express general support for a multilateral
effort to define criteria which would permit the preferential use of de-
velopment aid to reward states that make significant arms control and
disarmament efforts.
The NSC staff will coordinate a revision of the existing PM draft
speech3 to encompass the decisions reached at this meeting, including a
generalized statement of a ten-year disarmament program and refer-
ence to the approved initiatives, with the pending initiatives bracketed.
A meeting of the SCC will be held next week to consider, first of all, the
substance of the redrafted speech, its impact on related Administration
policies (e.g., defense, NATO), and whether or not it would justify a
Presidential appearance at SSOD. In addition, the agenda for the SCC
will include the cutoff/transfer proposal now being studied by the
Marcum committee, the “eyes and ears of peace” proposal, and pos-
sible follow-up action on negative security assurances and nuclear acci-
dent reporting. The SCC may also consider US responses to potential
adverse initiatives from other powers at SSOD.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
489.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Subject
United Nations Special Session on Disarmament
Participants
State
ACDA
Mr. David Newsome
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny
Under Secretary for Political
Mr. Adam Yarmolinsky
Affairs
Counselor for ACDA
Mr. Jerome Kahan
Ambassador Lawrence Weiler
Deputy Director, Bureau of
U.S. Coordinator for SSOD
Politico-Military Affairs
USUN
Mr. Gerald Helman
Ambassador James F. Leonard
Deputy Assistant Secretary
U.S. Deputy Representative
for Political and Multilateral
to the United Nations
Affairs
AID
Defense
Mr. Robert H. Nooter
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Deputy Administrator—
Mr. David McGiffert
Acting Administrator
Assistant Secretary for
OMB
International Security Affairs
Mr. James McIntyre
JCS
White House
Lt. General William Smith
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
CIA
Mr. David Aaron
Dr. Sayre Stevens
NSC
Deputy Director, National
Dr. Samuel Huntington
Foreign Intelligence
Mr. Robert Putnam
Assessment Center
OSTP
Dr. Frank Press
Mr. John Marcum
Senior Staff Analyst
On the basis of the SCC ad hoc Working Group report,2 the meeting
addressed the issue of whether or not the US should offer at SSOD a
proposal for a cutoff of the production of fissionable materials for use
in nuclear weapons. ACDA, supported by USUN, favored such an ini-
tiative. All other agencies opposed such an initiative, several of them
(including DOD) expressing strong opposition. If other countries offer
the White House Situation Room.
2 Not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
cutoff proposals, several agencies (including State) would recommend
that the US agree to noncommittal consultations on the subject. An-
other meeting will be held next week to further consider possible US re-
sponses to cutoff proposals from other countries.
The meeting reviewed a draft speech for SSOD,3 agreeing on a
number of textual changes that will be reflected in the next draft. The
section on defense and NATO should be strengthened, particularly if
the President delivers the speech. Generalized wording on a scale-
down in strategic arms was accepted. The meeting confirmed that the
initiative on nuclear accidents reporting will be offered if and only if
the PRC does not express opposition in our bilateral consultations. De-
tails of the peaceful nuclear cooperation initiative will be omitted from
the speech. Agencies will suggest alternative wording for the section on
disarmament/development.
After receiving a report that key allies had not objected to the idea
of US negative security assurances that would go beyond the Presi-
dent’s October 1977 statement,4 the meeting discussed alternative for-
mulations for the proposed assurances. The tentatively agreed formu-
lation is:
The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapons state, or
associated with a nuclear weapon state in sustaining or carrying out the
attack.
If the President approves this proposed declaration, we will in-
form Israel, Iran, and our allies of the proposed declaration. (JCS op-
posed any change in the statement of October 1977.)
The proposal for US technical assistance for regional confidence-
building and peace-keeping (“eyes and ears”) was approved, provided
that (1) the assistance be offered under UN or regional peace-keeping
be used to the extent possible; and (4) there be a further review of budg-
etary implications.
Some strong support was expressed for a Presidential appearance
at SSOD, as evidence of his continued commitment to arms control and
disarmament. However, some concern was expressed about the impli-
cations of the proximity of an SSOD appearance and the NATO
Summit.5 Both international and domestic considerations will be laid
out as the basis of a Presidential decision on the question.
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
490.
Memorandum from Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, May 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Fissionable Material Cutoff
I believe that to make a US initiative at the SSOD urging fissionable
material cutoff would be a mistake. It would introduce additional un-
certainties into our own planning, particularly those for air-launched
(and other) cruise missiles, Trident II, and M–X. In order to cope with
our military needs, as well as with the (correct) perceptions that the So-
viets are and will remain ahead in throw weight and in capabilities of
their peripheral attack systems, we need to preserve our advantage in
strategic warheads. This will not be easy in any event. But particularly
because we can have more warheads while the Soviets have more
throw weight only if our warheads are smaller than theirs, we will have
to use more fissionable material per warhead.
The absence of a reasonable assurance of verification without in-
trusive control measures would make a successful negotiation difficult,
at the least. Moreover, proposals that rely on dubious verification
measures undermine the whole concept of arms control.
Though the United States position has favored a fissionable mate-
rial cutoff in principle for a long time, the situation, including the bal-
ance between the US and the Soviet Union, has changed very substan-
tially since twenty or even ten years ago. What might then have been an
arrangement freezing us into superiority is by no means any longer the
case; indeed, we may, particularly in the light of verification problems,
be freezing ourselves into a position of inferiority in availability of nec-
essary fissionable material.
My own judgment would be that we should be prepared to listen
sympathetically to proposals that others may make at the SSOD on this
subject in principle, but we should not make any such proposal an im-
portant part of our position. Moreover, we should oppose proposals
that negotiations on this subject should be initiated at this time on the
grounds that there is already a full plate of arms control negotiations in
train. If we did propose a cutoff, I think we will be subjecting ourselves
to a great deal of internal conflict that would probably spill over into
other, more important and more urgent, arms control issues.
Special Session on Disarmament
I attach a memo stating the position of the JCS, which is similar to
but goes beyond my own.2
Harold Brown
2 Not attached.
491.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, May 15, 1978
SUBJECT
SSOD Speech and the Cut-off Proposal
With regard to the proposed speech to the UN Special Session on
Disarmament (SSOD), I strongly endorse Cy Vance’s recommendation
that you deliver the speech yourself. Failure to do so would be widely
interpreted as a downgrading of your commitment to arms control, es-
pecially since the session will be addressed by numerous heads of state
including Callaghan, Giscard, Schmidt, Trudeau, and Desai.
One item that I believe should be included in the speech is a re-
newal of the U.S. proposal for an adequately verified worldwide cut-off
of fissionable material production for nuclear weapons. This proposal
has been an essential element of U.S. disarmament policy for more than
thirty years, and has been advanced in one form or another by five
Presidents. In this context, I am particularly concerned by the sugges-
tion that we not only refrain from advancing this proposal but actively
oppose it when it comes up for discussion at the SSOD. There is no
question but that this will be a major proposal (supported by the non-
aligned and major allies such as Canada and Japan) in the program of
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Paul C. Warnke Files, December 1974–July 1979, Ac-
siles, CTB, NPT, and Indian Ocean Arms Control, January–October 1978. Secret. Copies
were sent to Vance and Christopher. Warnke hand-wrote an undated cover letter to the
memorandum that reads “Dear Mr. President, I have discussed this with Cy Vance who
agrees we should reaffirm—not disavow—our long-standing cut-off proposal. PCW.”
(Ibid.) Warnke also forwarded the memorandum and the hand-written note to Vance on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
action of the SSOD. I believe it would be far better for you to present
this proposal on our own terms, rather than for the U.S. to appear to
have abandoned it—and eventually to have to respond to other na-
tions’ proposals less acceptable to us.
I am confident that such a proposal, particularly in a SALT/CTB
regime, would be fully consistent with our national security interests
and that such an agreement can be adequately verified. The proposal
would be formulated to protect continued tritium production and fuel
for nuclear propulsion.
Our offer to negotiate on the cut-off would contribute significantly
to our non proliferation policy by rectifying the widely resented dis-
criminatory situation where the nuclear powers continue to expand
their nuclear arsenals and are not themselves subject to the inspection
procedures we are pressing on non-nuclear weapon states. Conversely,
a repudiation (explicit or implicit) of the long standing policy on cut-off
would contribute to an international environment clearly counter-
productive to our overall non-proliferation strategy. As you know, this
point has been clearly articulated by Desai and other leaders of the non-
nuclear weapons states. More fundamentally, failure to reaffirm this
policy at some point during the SSOD would undercut the credibility of
your call for worldwide reduction in nuclear forces. Finally, if we stand
silent on this issue, we leave the initiative to the Soviets. They are ex-
pected to advance major proposals, foreshadowed by Brezhnev’s pro-
posed ban on the production of nuclear weapons,2 which, although at-
tractive internationally, would not be acceptable to the U.S.
While I recognize there are differences in the government on the
impact of such a proposal on U.S. and Soviet forces, there is no question
that it would presently constrain the USSR more than the U.S. and I be-
lieve on balance would clearly be in our national security interest, par-
ticularly in the context of SALT and CTB agreements. At present, we
are producing no highly enriched uranium and relatively little pluto-
nium for weapons, [8½ lines not declassified] For the U.S. to expand its
stockpiles would require shifting capacity from low enriched produc-
tion for power to high enriched material for weapons production (of
which there has been none since 1964) and to reactivate, at substantial
cost and high visibility, plutonium production reactors now moth-
balled. These actions, which would have to be launched almost im-
mediately in view of long lead times, would be politically difficult, de-
stabilizing, and would undercut your disarmament objectives in a dra-
matic fashion.

Special Session on Disarmament
The principal weakness of this proposal is that it almost certainly
will not lead to early negotiations in view of long standing Soviet sensi-
tivities about the relatively intrusive verification required. Moreover, if
the proposal should lead to negotiations, they will clearly be protracted
in view of the complex verification problems requiring, in addition to
national technical means, at least IAEA-type safeguards on all per-
mitted nuclear activities. In these circumstances, I find it difficult to un-
derstand arguments against a forthcoming position on this subject
which has a substantial symbolic and tactical significance in the up-
coming special session.
I recommend therefore that you include in your speech an appro-
priately qualified statement in support of a cut-off in the context of
progress on SALT and CTB, along the lines of TAB A.3 The detailed na-
ture and timing of our negotiating position on this subject could then be
developed on the basis of further interagency review.
Paul C. Warnke
3 Tab A is attached but not printed.
492.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 16, 1978
SUBJECT
UN Special Session on Disarmament
The second SCC meeting on SSOD took place Friday, May 12. A
summary of conclusions is attached at Tab A.2 The meeting surfaced
three issues which require your decision.
1. Negative Security Assurances
Many non-aligned countries and several of our allies, including
the UK and Japan, support assurances by nuclear weapons states
upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski hand-wrote “May 16 ’78.”
2 See Document 489.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(NWSs) that they will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear
weapons states (NNWSs) except in very specialized circumstances.
Such negative security assurances might marginally assist our non-
proliferation policy. In addition, in his speech on April 25th Brezhnev3
seemed to take the position that the USSR would use nuclear weapons
only in response to aggression by a NWS. We have developed our own
version of a more limited negative security assurance which reads as
follows:
The United States undertakes not to use nuclear weapons against
any non-nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable in-
ternationally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive de-
vices, except in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories
or armed forces, or its Allies by a state allied with a nuclear weapon
state, or associated with a nuclear weapon state in sustaining or car-
rying out the attack.
In your October speech to the UN4 you said that the US would not
use nuclear weapons except in response to an “attack on the United
States, our territories, or armed forces, or such an attack on our allies.”
The new formulation is more restrictive in that it would not permit us
to use nuclear weapons in response to an attack on the US, its terri-
tories, armed forces, or allies, if the attacking state (1) had signed the
NPT or comparable agreement, and (2) was not allied to a NWS, and
(3) was not associated with a NWS in sustaining or carrying out the at-
tack. For example, under your October statement we could use nuclear
weapons in response to an attack by Cambodia on Thailand, but under
the new language we could not, unless Cambodia were assisted in the
attack by the PRC.
We have consulted the Japanese, Koreans, and Germans on this
language and they have no problems with it. All the relevant USG
agencies also support the language except for the JCS, which prefers
that we stick with your October language at the UN. The issue thus is:
Should the US undertake the negative security assurance stated above?
Yes
No5
Treaty of Tlatelolco, which banned nuclear weapons in Latin America, and his comment
that “we, like other states possessing nuclear weapons, will take upon ourselves the obli-
gation not to help the acquisition of nuclear arms by Latin American states, and also not
to use such weapons against the states that are parties to the treaty.” (“Address by Presi-
5 Carter checked the “No” option and wrote “Stand on my previous statement” in
the right-hand margin.

Special Session on Disarmament
2. Cut-Off of Fissionable Material Production
ACDA has proposed that the US continue its traditional position
of favoring a cut-off by proposing to “seek to achieve the worldwide
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for weapons pur-
poses.” Among other things, they argue that:
(a) [2 lines not declassified]
(b) [2 lines not declassified]
(c) [3 lines not declassified]
(d) [5 lines not declassified]
(e) we have no plans to resume production of fissionable material;
no agency is asking for such authority.
Attached at Tab B is a memorandum from ACDA setting forth
their case at greater length.6 USUN supports the ACDA proposal. All
the other relevant agencies—State, DOD, DOE, JCS, OSTP, NSC—
firmly oppose the ACDA initiative (DOD and JCS with particular vehe-
mence), although some think we should be “positively noncommittal”
if a similar proposal is advanced by other states (as, indeed, several
non-aligned states will do). The opposition to the cut-off argues that:
a. [4 lines not declassified]
b. [4 lines not declassified]
c. It is very dubious whether the Soviets would ever agree to IAEA
inspection and other safeguards necessary to police a cut-off.
d. In the longer term, new HEU production facilities utilizing ad-
vanced technologies (i.e., gas centrifuge and laser isotope separation)
[1½ lines not declassified]
e. Even with a cut-off, production of HEU for marine propulsion
reactors and of tritium would have to continue, and it will be very diffi-
cult to develop verification techniques which would not compromise
sensitive data.
f. The UK and probably France oppose a cut-off.
As you know, this issue is very sensitive politically; a decision to
go ahead with the cut-off proposal could have significant repercussions
on our efforts to get SALT and CTB agreements. A repudiation of our
traditional support for the cut-off could have adverse impact on our
overall non proliferation efforts.7
The issue thus is:
Should the US propose negotiations designed to lead to the worldwide
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for weapons purposes?
Yes
No8
6 See Document 491.
7 Underneath this paragraph, Brzezinski wrote “(I also attach a strong negative
from Harold),” a reference to Document 490.
8 Carter checked the “No” option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
If you decide in the negative, should we be “positive but non-
committal” on such proposals from other states?
Yes
No; oppose9
3. Your Appearance at the SSOD
The opening ceremonies for the SSOD occur on May 23. The US in-
scribed to speak second on May 24th, immediately following Yugo-
slavia (whose representative chairs the General Assembly). The spec-
trum of opinion among your principal advisors as to whether you
should deliver the US address runs from mildly skeptical to enthusi-
astically positive. State, ACDA, and USUN all strongly believe you
should speak. Defense does not object provided you emphasize the
need for strong defenses in the absence of arms control agreements and
the importance of NATO, and provided your remarks do not detract
from our commitment to the NATO Long-Term Defense Program
which will be endorsed at the NATO Summit a week later. If you do
not speak, either the Vice President or Secretary Vance will make the
major US presentation. A preliminary draft text for a speech, developed
by an interagency committee and discussed at the SCC, is at Tab C.10
In general, the arguments in favor of your speaking are:
a. You have made a strong point of your commitment to disarma-
ment, and your record in the field is quite positive. Failure to address
the SSOD would be seen as a serious weakening of that commitment
and would mean foregoing an opportunity to underline your favorable
record.
b. Ten NATO heads-of-government (including Schmidt, Giscard,
Callaghan, Trudeau) plus several others including Desai and Perez will
speak, and this would make your absence all the more noticeable.
c. By speaking you would indicate your appreciation of the efforts
by Yugoslavia, India, Venezuela and other non-aligned countries who
took the initiative in organizing the SSOD, and who are of key impor-
tance to our non-proliferation efforts.
d. By setting forth at the beginning of the SSOD a set of important,
long-term and yet realistic disarmament goals, you can contribute to a
successful conclusion of the Special Session.
The principal arguments against your speaking are:
a. The new proposals which the US has to offer, because they are
realistic, are also rather limited; later speakers, including the USSR, will
undoubtedly “outbid” us with much more sweeping initiatives.
9 Carter did not check either option and wrote “Check with me later—Do not dis-
avow our past statements” in the right-hand margin.
10 Not attached.

Special Session on Disarmament
b. There is not a logical problem, but there is a political problem in
reconciling what you say at the UN on May 24th with what you will be
endorsing at the NATO Summit on May 30–31. Critics may again have
the opportunity to talk about the “inconsistency” of your policies.
(Many think this problem might be handled by carefully chosen words
on the role of self-defense and collective security in your UN speech.)
c. The mood at the UN when you speak on the second day will
probably be benign and hopeful. By the end of the session, however,
there will probably be many sharp clashes and few concrete accom-
plishments. This could lead people to see the SSOD as another project
of your Administration which has gone sour.
Apart from these considerations, there is also the domestic polit-
ical impact. Domestically, you have been seeking to emphasize your
defense orientation so as to be on the strongest ground to fight for a
SALT agreement. This appearance could go in the opposite direction or
be neutral—and the latter case would obviously do little to advance in-
ternational disarmament prospects.
The issue thus is:
Do you wish to deliver the US presentation to the SSOD on May 24th?
Yes
No11
11 Carter checked the “No” option.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
493.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, Secretary of Energy Schlesinger,
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget
(McIntyre), the Representative to the United Nations
(Young), the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency (Warnke), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones), the Director of Central Intelligence (Turner), and the
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(Press)1
Washington, May 17, 1978
SUBJECT
UN Special Session on Disarmament
Having reviewed the Summary of Conclusions for the May 12 SCC
meeting on the UN Special Session on Disarmament,2 the President has
decided:
1. The U.S. should not undertake the negative security assurance.
(The President noted that we should stand on his previous statement.)
2. The U.S. should not propose negotiations designed to lead to the
worldwide cessation of the production of fissionable materials for nu-
clear weapons. (The President noted that we should not disavow our
past statements.)
3. The President will not deliver the U.S. presentation to the SSOD
on May 24.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 See Document 489.

Special Session on Disarmament
494.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the
United Nations1
132087. Subject: Guidance for US Delegation to the UN Special Ses-
sion Devoted to Disarmament, May–June 1978.
1. Summary. This message outlines the US objectives with respect
to the UN Special Session devoted to disarmament (SSOD) and pro-
vides the US Delegation with general guidance. In addition, more de-
tailed guidance is provided on major disarmament issues and on the
final document which the SSOD is expected to produce (including sec-
tions on declaration on disarmament, program of action, and disarma-
ment machinery). End summary.
2. US Objectives.
This administration is actively pursuing a number of specific arms
control and disarmament negotiations with a view to enhancing US se-
curity interests and promoting international stability. The arms control
and disarmament efforts of this administration are both a high-priority
and a high-visibility element of its foreign and national security policy.
During the course of the SSOD, the US will have an opportunity to
present its position on all major disarmament issues currently under
consideration and to outline what we see as appropriate tasks for the
future. In general, what we are seeking as the main outcome of the
SSOD is to sustain or accelerate the momentum of current disarmament
negotiations and to lay the basis for realistic new programs in years
ahead. With the foregoing in mind, the US objectives for the SSOD in-
clude the following:
—Enhance understanding of and support for our overall arms con-
trol objectives by other countries, and extend and improve our dia-
logue with important Non-Aligned and other countries which have not
shared these objectives;
—Create a receptive environment and broaden support for the
arms control agreements currently under negotiation with the USSR on
high priority arms control issues (e.g. SALT, CTB, and CW);
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Belgrade, Bonn, London, Rome, The
Hague, Ottawa, Tokyo, Paris, Moscow, Stockholm, New Delhi, Mexico, USNATO,
USUN, the Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the National Se-
curity Council. Drafted by Arch Turrentine (ACDA/MA/IR); cleared by Lyall Breckon
(EUR/RPM), Williams (DOE), Thomas Miller (P), Adam Yarmolinsky (ACDA), Robert
Putnam (NSC), Allen (CIA), John Marcum (NSC), Roger Fritzel (JCS), Steven Steiner
(PM/DCA), Susan Flood (DOD/ISA), Alexander Shakow (AID), Robert Reis (EB), John
Joyce (S/MS), David Macuk (IO/UNP), and Cameron Hume (S/P); and approved by
Gerald Helman (IO).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Make the North-South dialogue on disarmament more construc-
tive, winning greater Third World support and understanding for our
goals—particularly in the areas of conventional arms transfer restraints
and non-proliferation, endeavoring, in turn, to be responsive to Third
World concerns about self-restraint by the nuclear powers and access to
peaceful nuclear technology;
—Preserve the integrity of existing multilateral negotiating forums
such as the CCD while maintaining flexibility with regard to proposals
for procedural changes which may be proposed to meet Non-Aligned
desires for a more substantive role;
—Establish, through the program of action to be adopted by the
SSOD, a positive but realistic arms control and disarmament agenda
for the next few years;
—Maintain a common position to the extent possible with our
allies on arms control matters and if the opportunity arises, encourage a
more forthcoming French and Chinese attitude to arms control initia-
tives of particular importance to US;
—To the extent possible, utilize the SSOD to give new impetus to
arms control negotiations;
—Gain greater public support—in the US and abroad—for arms
control and disarmament and better explain our various efforts and re-
late them to one another.
—To resist the initiatives of others that might be inimical to basic
US security interests or to effective, practical, and verifiable arms con-
trol agreements.
—Counter Soviet efforts to use SSOD as a propaganda vehicle.
—Discourage and when necessary oppose impractical or mis-
guided arms control initiatives which would not be in the interest of the
United States, our allies or the international community.
3. General Guidance.
The US Del should promote the objectives set forth in para. 2 above
seeking appropriate opportunities to do so in major policy statements,
in negotiations on SSOD final document, and in informal meetings
among Delegations. Del should continue to consult closely with the key
players, and in particular with our allies. While the principal allied con-
sultative mechanism will continue to be the Barton Group,2 the
Western Group of CCD members (US, UK, FRG, Italy, Netherlands,
Canada, Japan) will meet as required but has agreed to limit its agenda
to machinery issues related to the CCD. The US should not object to
discussing other issues in the Western Group if there is agreement to do
so. In addition, Del should maintain close bilateral contact with UK,
FRG and French. Consultations with the Soviets will also be important,
particularly with respect to nuclear issues and other issues currently
under negotiation bilaterally. While we should stay in close touch with
the Soviets on issues related to CCD organization in general and the
2 The Barton Group was a group of Western nations who met to consider arms con-
trol and disarmament policy in anticipation of the SSOD.

Special Session on Disarmament
co-chairmanship in particular, we should not take positions which are
less flexible than we otherwise might be prepared to take just to main-
tain a common front with the Soviets. With respect to consideration of
the SSOD final document, the US Del should make every effort consis-
tent with basic US policy on arms control issues to ensure that con-
sensus procedures are used and that voting is avoided.
4. Declaration on Disarmament.
The declaration is essentially a political statement by governments
which outlines the problem of the growth of armaments and serves as a
“call for action.” The US can support the concept of such a statement.
At the same time, the US Del should seek to moderate any language
which may be advanced which does not recognize that achievements
have occurred in past negotiations, which questions our will for prog-
ress, which carries overtones of criticism of our alliances and overseas
deployments or which is contrary to US policy in such areas as non-
proliferation. US Del should work for a balanced declaration which can
be adopted, preferably as a part of the final document, or separately, by
consensus. Del may agree to language in the draft declaration on an ad
referendum basis but should submit language to Washington for USG
approval of substance. Del is authorized to accept minor editorial
changes in final text which in Del’s judgement do not involve questions
of substance and should report such changes for information purposes.
5. Program of Action.
Previous work on the draft program of action indicated a consider-
able divergence of views. The US Del should work for a realistic pro-
gram which is applicable to the years ahead. We wish to avoid raising
expectations on issues which are clearly not ready for active negotia-
tions. The CCD has been given the task of preparing a longer-range
comprehensive program of disarmament. The USG believes that the
CCD is the most appropriate body to carry out this talk and is prepared
to participate actively in such work. US Del should resist efforts to set
fixed timetables in a program of action for future negotiations. US Del
may accept giving primacy to nuclear issues and setting as our ultimate
goal the complete elimination of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of
states. However, it should also be recognized that this process must be
carried out in a way that increases stability and makes the likelihood of
conflict less. US Del should seek to ensure that it is recognized that the
reduction of nuclear arms by nuclear weapon states is not an isolated
process but there must also be conventional arms reductions by both
nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states. However, Del
should not concede the necessity of a specific link between nuclear and
conventional arms reductions. Del should encourage support for recog-
nition of conventional arms restraints, especially with respect to arms
transfers, in the program of action. The general US objective with re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
spect to the program of action is to reach consensus agreement on a
document that will be realistic, supportive of our arms control policies,
and at a minimum, will not disrupt a reasonable negotiating agenda for
the next three to five years. US Del may agree to inclusion in program’s
various sections, in addition to more immediate tasks, reference to
longer term goals as long as they are consistent with US policy. US Del
may agree to language in the draft program of action on an ad refer-
endum basis but should submit all language to Washington for USG
approval.
6. Disarmament Machinery.
One section of the final document to be adopted by the Special Ses-
sion will be recommendations for changes to the international ma-
chinery dealing with arms control issues. At present, this machinery
consists of the following elements:
—The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD),
—The UNGA First Committee,
—The UN Center for Disarmament, and
—The UN Disarmament Commission (dormant since 1965).
At the PrepCom meetings, several proposals have been made for
modifying disarmament machinery:
A. Restructure the CCD to accomplish the following objectives:
(1) Abolish the US–USSR co-chairmanship, removing the primary
symbol of super-power condominium in the CCD, and replace with an-
other system to be agreed;
(2) Enlarge the membership;
(3) Provide for increased participation in the CCD by non-member
states;
(4) Strengthen the relationship of the CCD to the UN.
B. Consider only disarmament and security issues in the UNGA
First Committee, and pass other First Committee items (e.g., outer
space) to the Special Political Committee.
C. Reconvene the UN Disarmament Commission to follow-up on
SSOD and UNGA decisions and recommendations.
There have also been other, primarily cosmetic, proposals for
changes in the disarmament machinery, including enhancing the role
of the UNSYG and the UN Center for Disarmament; establishment of
an international institute for research on disarmament; and creation of
an international verification agency. Separate guidance will follow on
French and Dutch proposals for the creation of an international satellite
observation/verification agency.
In addition to these specific proposals, some fundamental changes
have been suggested by the French, including the dissolution of the
CCD and its replacement by a new body directly subordinated to the

Special Session on Disarmament
UNGA, which would have a slightly larger membership and a Chair-
man appointed by the UN Secretary-General. However, most members
of the CCD are of the view that the French will not actively participate
in any multilateral negotiating body, regardless of its structure of pro-
cedures, until after work on a comprehensive test ban treaty has been
completed.
The most significant and contentious proposals are those dealing
with the CCD. The impetus for the proposed changes comes from sev-
eral states, including both the Non-Aligned and our allies, who are in-
terested in providing for wider participation in the work of the CCD
and increasing the role of individual members in the negotiating
process vis-a-vis the co-chairmen. Also, there is a general desire to facil-
itate participation by France and the PRC in the future work of the
Committee. (France is a member of the CCD, but has never participated
in the work of the Committee.) There is widespread support for the
abolition of the co-chairmanship which most countries regard as anach-
ronism. The co-chairmanship is one of the stated obstacles to French
participation. The US position is that we should be flexible but should
preserve the CCD’s ability to function as an effective negotiating body.
We attach importance to gaining French participation in the CCD and
facilitating the PRC’s joining at some future time. We could accept rec-
ommendations for a limited enlargement of the Committee’s member-
ship and constructive recommendations for changes in CCD proce-
dures, so long as the Committee retains control over its work and
continues to operate by consensus. We would also be willing to con-
sider ways in which non-member states might participate, in a limited
way, in the work of the Committee. We would oppose any attempt to
alter CCD procedures to conform with UNGA rules of procedure. We
would not be opposed to proposals designed to acknowledge the rela-
tionship between the UN and the CCD such as giving the SYG’s repre-
sentative a more active role. In the context of achieving a satisfactory
package of recommendations regarding changes to the CCD, we would
be prepared to give up the co-chairmanship, if a generally acceptable
alternative can be found.
The Soviets are more attached to the co-chairmanship than we and
are likely to hold out until late in the Session before giving way on this
point. Both the US and the USSR will use it as bargaining leverage to
insure that any recommended reforms to the CCD emerging from the
SSOD are satisfactory.
On the aspects of the machinery question not directly related to the
CCD, we have fewer problems. We have no objection to having the
First Committee deal solely with disarmament and related interna-
tional security issues, nor do we object to some strengthening in the
staff of the UN Disarmament Center so it might carry out technical

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
studies and research on disarmament issues. While we are not enthusi-
astic about proposals to revitalize the UN Disarmament Commission,
should momentum build behind such proposals we would not oppose
it provided its mandate were clear and limited.
The Soviets will continue to press for a world disarmament confer-
ence as a follow-up to the SSOD. The US continues to believe that the
conditions which exist now or in the foreseeable future do not justify
setting a date for a world disarmament conference. However, the US
will announce support for a second SSOD to be held in several years.
US Del may agree to draft language on disarmament machinery ad
referendum and should report such language to Washington for ap-
proval in substance. Del may accept minor editorial changes on final
text, but should inform Washington of all changes.
7. Possible Soviet initiatives.
We anticipate that USSR will offer a number of initiatives when
Foreign Minister Gromyko addresses the SSOD. Such Soviet initiatives
are likely to include the following:
A. Negotiations on an agreement to halt production of nuclear
weapons;
B. A treaty banning all new types of mass destruction weapons
C. Assurance of non-use of nuclear weapons except in case of ag-
gression against USSR or its allies by another nuclear power;
D. Negotiations on renunciation of “nuclear neutron weapons”;
E. A halt to development and production of new and highly de-
structive conventional arms;
F. A freeze by permanent members of the Security Council and
their allies on their armed forces and conventional arms.
US Del should report all Soviet initiatives in detail and may indi-
cate that the USG is giving them appropriately careful study. Guidance
will be provided subsequently on how US Del should respond to each
Soviet initiative.
8. Specific Issues.
A. SALT. US Del should seek to work out language with the So-
viets on SALT to propose for the final document; along lines of the lan-
guage discussed at last PrepCom. While others, in particular the Mex-
icans, may wish to leave their mark on such language, it is particularly
important that we not permit others to force a split between the US and
USSR on this issue. Language on SALT issue should be consistent with
and the Soviet Union to limit and then reduce the number of nuclear weapons in their re-
spective stockpiles.

Special Session on Disarmament
language on SALT issue but should report all such language to Wash-
ington for approval.
B. CTB. Since negotiations on a CTBT initiative are at a sensitive
stage, US Del should carefully coordinate any language on this issue
with USSR and UK Dels. Del may accept language which stresses im-
portance of completing negotiations as a matter of urgency, but should
not accept setting any specific deadlines or target dates. If joint lan-
guage proves possible, US Del should seek to retain language along
lines discussed at last PrepCom, otherwise we would prefer language
explicitly stating US view that CTB should ban all tests of nuclear ex-
plosive devices whether for peaceful or military purposes. US Del
should discourage any proposals for a moratorium on nuclear testing.
C. Cut-Off. US Del should report any proposals regarding a cut-
off of the production of fissionable materials for nuclear weapons
use. Guidance on US response to such proposals will be provided
subsequently.
D. Non-Proliferation. As background to nonproliferation discus-
sions US Del should acknowledge responsibility of nuclear weapons
states to reduce their own arsenals—pointing to SALT, CTB, and Presi-
dent Carter’s pledges to work towards nuclear disarmament. The US
should emphasize those aspects of our non-proliferation policy that
have generated considerable international support (e.g., NPT, INFCE,
Treaty of Tlatelolco, IAEA, NUF) and should seek to avoid being
drawn into contentious issues like the nuclear suppliers group. Del
should use suitable opportunities to welcome or encourage action by
particular states on the NPT or Treaty of Tlatelolco. Relevant sections
in the non-proliferation background paper4 identify appropriate
countries.
Regarding the dispute over access to nuclear technology our objec-
tive should be to develop among the Non-Aligned a better understand-
ing of the US position and to work for language consistent with US nu-
clear export policy. It is US policy to continue a substantial program of
international nuclear cooperation and the initiative to be announced at
the SSOD will give further evidence of that commitment. US should not
be defensive about its past record in this area—both bilaterally and
through the IAEA. Any language worked out should strike a balance
between our willingness to provide the benefits of nuclear technology
to the developing world and our responsibility to ensure that any such
exports are not misused. Such goals should not be viewed as contradic-
tory. Specifically, the US can support language that argues for “the
right of access” as long as appropriate non-proliferation concerns are
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
also recognized. “Unhindered access” to technology is unacceptable
because it is US policy not to export certain sensitive technologies (e.g.,
reprocessing). Any implication that IAEA safeguards alone is a suffi-
cient control measure should be avoided because US must legally re-
quire other assurances (e.g., physical security, vetos on retransfer/re-
processing) and because the US has raised serious questions about the
safeguardability of reprocessing plants. Our negotiating strategy
should focus on developing supplier state consensus and working
principally with Yugoslavia and other NPT parties (e.g., Iran, Mexico,
Nigeria) to encourage Non-Aligned compromise—emphasizing that
only through close supplier-recipient cooperation (e.g., INFCE) can
such issues be resolved.
E. Disarmament/Development Link. The US cannot accept an au-
tomatic link that would commit savings which may accrue from disar-
mament to increases in development assistance. However, the US is
prepared to acknowledge that development assistance is a high pri-
ority objective which deserves serious consideration in the reprogram-
ming of savings which may accrue from disarmament. The US Del
should express general support for a multilateral effort to define cri-
teria which would permit the preferential use of development aid to
favor states that make significant arms control and disarmament ef-
forts. Such use would, of course, have to be weighed against the other
US criteria for the allocation of development aid.
F. Military Expenditure Reporting and Limitations. The US sup-
ports Swedish proposal for a field test by small but representative
group of states of Military Expenditure Reporting (MER) matrix. We
believe that development and general use of such a standardized re-
porting instrument is a prerequisite of Military Expenditure Limita-
tions (MEL) agreements. Along with several other Western States, we
have announced that we will submit US military expenditures data for
field test in the interest of greater openness of information about mili-
tary spending. However, we have largely deferred to Swedish (and to a
degree Mexican, leadership in carrying case for Non-Aligned support
and participation in test. In view of failure to date of any announced
LDC participation, Del should approach Swedish Del early in the ses-
sion to suggest coordinated efforts to persuade group of fence-sitting
states (possibly India, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Ghana, Nigeria, and
Liberia) if possible simultaneously, to announce their participation.
G. Reduced Blast/Enhanced Radiation Weapons. The Soviets are
likely to continue their propaganda campaign against RB/ER weapons.
In responding, US Del should rely on points contained in State 110723.5
5 Not found.

Special Session on Disarmament
9. Issues Papers supplementing these instructions have been pre-
pared on the following topics:
A) Conventional Arms Transfers
B) Stabilizing and Confidence-Building Measures
C) Eyes and Ears of Peace
D) Nuclear Weapons Free Zone
E) Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation
F) Non-Proliferation
Christopher
6 None of the Issues Papers were found.
495.
Editorial Note
On May 25, 1978, Vice President Walter F. Mondale addressed the
Special Session on Disarmament. The United States, he said, wanted
to achieve eight “bold” objectives over the next years. It wanted to
1) “substantially cut” strategic arms stockpiles and “place increasingly
stringent qualitative limitations on their further development;” 2) end
the practice of nuclear explosions by achieving a Comprehensive Test
Ban treaty; 3) prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons; 4) ban
“other weapons of mass destruction” such as chemical and radiological
weapons; 5) “slow down and then reverse the sharp growth in conven-
tional arms” transfers; 6) strengthen regional arms control agreements;
and 7) “fully develop the institutions and expertise required for arms
control; all of which would allow nations to 8) “release additional re-
sources for economic and social development.” Arms control, he con-
cluded, “must be the moral agenda of our time.” (“Excerpts From Vice
President Mondale’s Address to the U.N. Disarmament Session,” New

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
496.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Cut-Off of Fissionable Materials and the SSOD
You have decided that we should not propose negotiations on a
cut-off of production of fissionable materials for nuclear weapons
while not disavowing our past statements on this issue. This leaves
open the question of whether we are prepared to enter negotiations on
a cut-off if proposed by other states at the SSOD. You asked that we
consult you on any such clarification of policy.
Harold Brown, joined by Warren Christopher for Cy Vance, be-
lieves that we should not agree at this time to enter negotiations on a
cut-off should such negotiations be proposed by other states at the
SSOD.2 However, ACDA wishes to leave open the option of launching
negotiations in response to other initiatives. In any event, we will want
to join, if possible, the final document of the SSOD which is likely to in-
clude a general call for cut-off negotiations.
Do you agree with the following clarification of our policy?
The U.S. Government is not prepared, at this time, to agree to enter
into specific negotiations on a cut-off, should such negotiations be pro-
posed by other states. However, we should be prepared to go along
with a final document of the SSOD which includes a general call for ne-
gotiations on a cut-off.
Yes
No
initialed the memorandum on Brzezinski’s behalf.
2 Brown offered his views in a May 25 memorandum to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
3 Carter checked the “Yes” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.

Special Session on Disarmament
497.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), the Director of the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke), and the
Director of the International Communication Agency
(Reinhardt)1
Washington, June 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Interagency Committee on Public Diplomacy and Disarmament
Whatever the specific accomplishments of the UN Special Session
on Disarmament (SSOD), it has focused the attention of important
publics throughout the world on disarmament issues. As we move be-
yond SSOD, it is desirable to foster a more informed and rational cli-
mate of opinion in other countries within which future official delibera-
tions can take place. I am, therefore, establishing under the Special
Coordination Committee an interagency committee to develop a year-
long program in public diplomacy addressing the several issues of
arms control and disarmament.
Our goals are:
—to stimulate serious and constructive international discussion of
important arms control and disarmament issues;
—to involve a wider spectrum of thoughtful and interested foreign
individuals and institutions in a discussion involving clear statements
of the U.S. positions and policies;
—to help develop a broader based consensus in other countries in
support of U.S. positions; but at a minimum, to bring more serious and
realistic public deliberations to bear on the several issues;
—to diminish the ability of the Soviet Union and others to com-
mand public attention in foreign countries on the basis of emotional
rhetoric.
Among other means for achieving these goals, the committee
should consider:
—regional seminars and conferences bringing together leading in-
tellectuals for realistic discussions of arms control and disarmament
issues;
—visits to the U.S. by foreign journalists and scholars to discuss
arms control and disarmament issues with American counterparts;
tion marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—programs aimed at diffusing the results of these discussions to
wider audiences abroad;
—intensified research designed to provide U.S. policy-makers
with a clearer understanding of the views of important foreign publics.
You should designate an appropriate member of this interagency
committee with a rank equivalent to and not lower than that of Deputy
Assistant Secretary. The committee will be chaired by the International
Communication Agency. Final recommendations of the committee
should be completed as soon as practicable and in any event no later
Director of the ICA the name of your representative to the interagency
committee at your earliest convenience. The NSC staff representative
will be Dr. Robert Putnam.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Not found.
498.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 10, 1978
SUBJECT
SSOD and Negative Security Assurances
On behalf of the US delegation to the UN Special Session on Disar-
mament, Averell Harriman and Andy Young have expressed serious
concern to Cy Vance that the guidance under which they are now oper-
ating is in several respects not sufficiently forthcoming to ensure a
positive outcome of the Special Session.2 Their concerns focus on:
wrote a “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum indi-
cating that he saw the document.
Non-Aligned countries view our lack of positive response at the Special Session to their
request for (A) firm negative security assurances and (B) a commitment in principle to ex-
plore more steps toward nuclear disarmament as being a failure of the US to take an af-
firmative position as required by our obligations under the NPT.” This failure, they ar-
gued, “precludes us from advancing important objectives in non-proliferation, and
seriously risks our being isolated from almost all our friends.” (Ibid.)

Special Session on Disarmament
(1) negative security assurances; and (2) the cutoff of the production of
fissionable materials for weapons purposes. Andy and three other
members of the delegation will meet with you on this subject on
Attached at Tab I is a memorandum from Cy Vance, recom-
mending that, in light of the delegation’s comments, you reconsider
your earlier decision on negative security assurances. Harold Brown
and I join in this recommendation.
Although the language of the proposed negative security assur-
ance that we worked out last month would have been cumbersome for
a major public address, its practical significance will be understood and
welcomed now by other states at SSOD. The Vice President told the
Special Session that “we are here to listen to the voices of other nations,
as well as to raise our own on behalf of arms control and disarma-
ment.” US flexibility on this issue could be offered gracefully as the
fruit of thoughtful listening and could enhance our leverage on other
issues, especially non-proliferation.
The proposed language of the assurance has been approved by all
the concerned US Government agencies, except for the JCS. The Chiefs’
principal concern is that this is a “slippery slope” and that there will be
further erosion in this position. The last eight words of the proposed
negative security assurance could give rise to varying interpretations.
The proposed assurance is consonant with the independent initia-
tives on this subject by the UK, Japan, and other countries, and has been
cleared with both the Koreans and the Germans. The language reads as
follows:
“The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapon state, or as-
sociated with a nuclear weapon state in carrying out or sustaining the
attack.”
In light of these considerations, do you wish to authorize our dele-
gation to state agreement with the language of the proposed negative
security assurances?
Yes4
No
Depending on your decision, we will supply appropriate talking
points for your meeting with the delegation on Monday.
3 June 12.
4 Carter checked the “Yes” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
When Harriman and Young drafted their cable to Vance on behalf
of the delegation, they were not aware of your recent action clarifying
your earlier decision on cutoff. As Secretary Vance points out, that clar-
ification should be sufficient to reassure the delegation that they will
have sufficient flexibility on this issue at the Special Session.
Tab 1
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter5
Washington, June 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Special Session on Disarmament
Ambassadors Young and Harriman have reported to me that the
success of our efforts to ensure a positive UN Special Session on Disar-
mament, as well as to protect our non-proliferation interests, may
hinge on our response to the desire of non-nuclear weapons states for
firm negative security assurances and a commitment in principle to
explore more steps to achieve nuclear disarmament. Both of these
demands reflect general commitments we made under the Non-
Proliferation Treaty in return for the promise of other states not to ac-
quire or develop nuclear weapons. I support the suggestion of Ambas-
sadors Young and Harriman that you review our position on these two
issues.
All of the other nuclear weapon states have stated their readiness
to offer additional assurances to non-nuclear weapon states or have al-
ready done so, and the non-nuclear weapon states have strongly urged
that we do so. We risk being isolated on this issue, even from some
close allies. Prime Minister Callaghan told the Session that the UK
wants to agree with other nuclear weapon states to give such assur-
ances. I urge you to reconsider your decision on this matter.
Ambassadors Young and Harriman and I suggest that the United
States be prepared to state agreement with the language of our pro-
posed negative security assurance that had received general inter-
agency (JCS however remained hesitant) and Allied approval last
month. It would clearly strengthen the delegation’s hand on a major
SSOD issue. How it is implemented will be important, particularly with
the Federal Republic of Germany and Republic of Korea. I believe it
5 Secret.

Special Session on Disarmament
would be best that the United Kingdom continue to take the lead in
suggesting this specific language.
The negative security formulation we had been considering is:
“The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapon state, or as-
sociated with a nuclear weapon state in carrying out or sustaining the
attack.”
Second, Ambassadors Young and Harriman have provided sug-
gested language for a US statement of policy concerning the conditions
under which we might eventually explore the possibility of a cutoff of
the production of fissionable material. They did this before your recent
decision providing guidance on how to handle cutoff at the SSOD.
Their language goes too far in implying that we could move automat-
ically after SALT II and CTB “to explore the possibilities for negotia-
tions” of additional measures, including a cutoff. But I believe your
guidance solves the problem.
499.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Representatives of the U.S. Delegation
to the United Nations Special Session on Disarmament
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State
Ambassador Andrew Young, U.S. Representative to the UN
Ambassador James Leonard, Jr., U.S. Deputy Representative to the UN
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Marjorie Benton, U.S. Delegation to the UN Special Session on Disarmament
Paul Newman, U.S. Delegation to the UN Special Session on Disarmament
Robert D. Putnam, National Security Council Staff Member
meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The President opened the meeting by thanking the delegation for
their service at the Special Session. He pointed out that a number of
new U.S. arms control policies had been undertaken in the last sixteen
months, in such areas as non-proliferation, SALT, CTB, ASAT, Indian
Ocean, and conventional arms transfers. In this latter field, we have
unilaterally imposed a series of annual reductions, while honoring pre-
vious commitments in a minimal way. We are in close consultation
with our key allies and other powers on this topic. At the Special Ses-
sion the delegation can stand on this solid record. The President re-
called his discussions with Callaghan, Schmidt, and Giscard about
their proposals to the Special Session. We are in the midst of reinvigo-
rating the MBFR talks and have recently had a fairly favorable response
in those talks. In short, progress is being made on a number of fronts.
How can we now help constructively to make a success of SSOD and to
lay the ground work for future arms control efforts?
Ambassador Young reported that the Vice President’s speech2 had
set a realistic tone for a serious discussion of complex issues at the Spe-
cial Session. Other countries recognized that the U.S. is taking the Spe-
cial Session seriously. To the extent that there was any disappointment,
it was because there had been high hopes for U.S. moral leadership,
embodied perhaps in one or two creative initiatives. The Vice President
had said that we were there to listen, however, leaving open the possi-
bility that our policies would evolve. The U.S. Delegation wanted to re-
port to the President mid-way through the Special Session on possible
U.S. contributions to building a consensus document.
The President asked what we could do now to be more constructive.
Ambassador Young reported that he and Governor Harriman had
worked out some language that might be helpful. Under the non-
proliferation treaty, all nuclear powers are committed to moving to
eliminate our nuclear arsenals and to offering security assurances to
non-nuclear weapons states. On the latter, the President came close in
his speech at the United Nations,3 and the language that Cy Vance has
recommended would go the rest of the way. The delegation’s original
instructions to oppose cutoff proposals were insufficiently forth-
coming. The new language that the President has approved would give
the delegation latitude on cutoff. We are far ahead of the Soviets on this
issue.
The President interjected that on negative security assurances he is
prepared to let Cy Vance issue a statement along the lines of the lan-
guage that had been worked out previously.
2 See Document 495.

Special Session on Disarmament
Ambassador Leonard said that this assurance should be offered in a
most solemn way. He proposed that Secretary Vance issue the state-
ment in the name of the President, possibly at New York next week.
The President said it should be done without delay. Otherwise, the
decision would ooze out and be subject to misinterpretation. Are there
things at SSOD, beyond these two, that are important?
Ambassador Young replied that as the Vice President had an-
nounced, the United States favors a follow-up conference. We are
pushing for greater openness about military budgets. We are in a good
position at the Special Session. He said he had underestimated the sig-
nificance of SSOD.
The President asked if there was more substance to it than Ambas-
sador Young had expected.
Ambassador Young replied that SSOD will start a process. Other na-
tions are looking to us for leadership. As in the case of the Seventh Spe-
cial Session on North/South economic relations,4 this Special Session is
the beginning of a longer process, and between now and 1981, SSOD
will continue to have echoes.
The President noted that it is important that the U.S. Delegation em-
phasize at SSOD what we have already done, including our efforts to
get full adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and to control conven-
tional weapons in Latin America. He noted that we could make still
more progress if others would adopt the policies that the United States
had unilaterally imposed upon itself on conventional arms transfers.
Third, the delegation can emphasize the important steps that we have
taken in the area of non-proliferation and should make every effort to
get other countries to join in these initiatives.
The Secretary of State remarked that there is only one country which
has not joined us on Tlatelolco,5 and that country is beginning to feel
the pressure.
Ambassador Leonard noted that it is important that the U.S. is con-
tinuing to make progress on SALT and on CTB, but even so, other na-
tions fear that there are no ceilings yet on the arms race.
The President interjected that they’re right.
Ambassador Leonard continued that a cutoff is needed in order to
impose a ceiling on the arms race. The new guidance will give the dele-
gation a good posture for achieving a consensus document at the Spe-
4 The UN’s Seventh Special Session devoted to improving the economic prospects
of the developing countries took place in September 1975. See Foreign Relations,
5 France.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
cial Session, although we will be pressed to commit ourselves to spe-
cific negotiations. He hoped that the President would continue to
follow up on the cutoff study.6 He and others believe that cutoff would
be in our national security interest. However, he recognized that the
study has not progressed to a point which would allow us to make that
case and, therefore, the guidance does not extend that far.
Mr. Newman noted that these decisions will help immensely the
morale of the U.S. Delegation in New York and it will help significantly
in achieving consensus at the Special Session. It will help, for example,
in heading off the Iraqi resolution condemning the United States and
Israel for armaments in the Middle East.
The President asked that Secretary Vance, Ambassador Young,
and Mr. Aaron work on the announcement of the negative security
assurance.
Ambassador Young noted that over the last five years opinion polls
have shown, without much variation, 75% approval of both SALT and
de´tente. The only exception was the period in 1976 when President
Ford rejected the word “de´tente,” but thereafter, the proportion went
back up from 50% to 75%. He hoped that we could use SSOD to rally
American public opinion in support of SALT.
Ms. Benton suggested to the President in this context that he do a
fireside chat on SALT and de´tente, to clarify Administration policy.
The President termed this an excellent idea that we would work on.
We are evolving a public relations campaign to sell SALT to the Amer-
ican people and to the Senate. In the absence of an agreed treaty, it
would be premature to work in that direction. We have agreed with the
Soviets not to reveal details of the negotiations at this time. But at this
point we are in good shape in terms of U.S. public opinion, with a ratio
of 78 to 12 in favor of SALT, almost the reverse of the split on the
Panama Canal at the outset.7 The Republicans have decided to cam-
paign against SALT, although that will be a serious mistake on their
part. Some Republicans, like Matthias, Kissinger, and Ford may sup-
port SALT, but most will campaign against it. In this case, however, we
will have public opinion on our side. He repeated his thanks to the del-
egation for their contribution to the work of the Special Session. He
noted his appreciation for Harold Willens’ article in the New York Times
on the importance of press coverage of SSOD.8
7 Public opinion polls taken in 1977 as the Carter administration resumed the final
negotiations of the Panama Canal treaty revealed that over 70% of the American public
opposed the treaty, which would have given control over the canal zone to Panama.

Special Session on Disarmament
500.
Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Secretary of State Vance,
Secretary of Defense Brown, Secretary of Energy Schlesinger,
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget
(McIntyre), the Representative to the United Nations
(Young), the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency (Warnke), the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones), the Director of Central Intelligence (Turner), and the
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(Press)1
Washington, June 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Cutoff of Fissionable Materials and the SSOD
The President has clarified, as follows, our position at the UN Spe-
cial Session on Disarmament on the issue of the cutoff of production of
fissionable materials for nuclear weapons:
The U.S. Government is not prepared, at this time, to agree to enter
into specific negotiations on a cut-off, should such negotiations be pro-
posed by other states. However, we should be prepared to go along
with a final document of the SSOD which includes a general call for ne-
gotiations on a cut-off.
David Aaron
501.
Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State1
2774. Dept. Please pass to all diplomatic posts. Subject: Special Ses-
sion on Disarmament—Wrap-up.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent to all diplomatic posts as telegram 168947, July 4, (Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Summary: The plenary of the Special Session on Disarmament
concluded in early hours July 1 with the adoption by consensus of the
(NOTAL). Forty-five countries expressed views and/or reservations at
the closing meeting. This message provides our assessment of the sig-
nificance of the Session. End summary.
2. As the first global conference on disarmament since 1932, the
Special Session inevitably raised high expectations. Many hoped for
major breakthroughs or fresh departures in the field of arms control
and disarmament. Given the sharply differing views on the approach
to and objectives of the Special Session among the major groups and
key players, and the importance of these issues to security interests of
all nations, the prospects for consensus seemed remote. The consensus
outcome can be attributed to the determination of a number of key Del-
egations and individuals, and readiness finally to compromise on a
number of difficult issues. Recognition of the importance of ongoing ef-
forts in disarmament negotiations was also an important factor.
3. The result is a final document which constitutes an agreement
by the international community, including the nuclear weapons states
and our Western allies, to a broad agenda of goals and priorities for dis-
armament negotiations in the years ahead. The text, while not fully
meeting the desires of any single country or group of nations, has gen-
erally been well received by Delegations. Our allies have told us that
they are satisfied with the result and believe it will get a good reception
in their countries.
4. Our acceptance of the final document except for a few reserva-
tions is seen by the Non-Aligned and others as evidence that we are at-
taching more importance to multilateral disarmament efforts. At the
same time, we believe that our political and security interests have been
fully preserved. Our reservations on some nuclear questions have clari-
fied to others our specific concerns without undercutting the basic con-
sensus which has been attained.
5. The outcome of the Special Session is seen here as the beginning
of a new phase in which the UN and its associated bodies will hence-
final declaration on disarmament. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
countries objected to the reference in the ad referendum text of the SSOD’s final declaration
on disarmament “to ‘principle’ of ‘creating new forums’ relating to disarmament and one
section which is an Italian proposal supported by no other Delegations. It is expected that
Italian language and EE block brackets will dropped during debate in ad hoc committee

Special Session on Disarmament
forth play a larger role in disarmament issues. Among the significant
achievements we would highlight the participation of France in the re-
structured Disarmament Committee and the higher profile China has
shown in the arms control arena. The decisions to enlarge the Disarma-
ment Committee (DC) and to revive the UN Disarmament Commission
reflect the greater interest by more states in participation in interna-
tional disarmament deliberations. An immediate follow-up problem
will be the selection of the 5 to 8 new members of the DC. An intensive
lobbying campaign by interested states has already begun.
6. Another significant result is the recognition by the international
community of the importance of conventional arms issues, particularly
international transfers. The Japanese deserve considerable credit for
perservering on this issue. We were also able to avoid reference to the
controversial issue of production.
7. In the final text, the urgency of undertaking negotiations in the
area of nuclear disarmament is acknowledged but in such a manner as
to make clear that these negotiations must proceed in a measured and
ordered fashion. Our commitment to the earliest possible completion of
SALT II and CTB as well as our new policy statement on security assur-
ances helped our position at the SSOD. In the end the Indians did not
press for a vote on their draft resolution for a nuclear test moratorium.
8. The Indians also sought to include a call for a binding interna-
tional commitment on the non-use of nuclear weapons. The final text
on non-use was a delicate compromise on this highly sensitive prob-
lem. Indian PermRep Jaipal expressed his appreciation of our readiness
to be forthcoming on this issue in his statement to the ad-hoc committee
on June 30.
9. The non-proliferation section, while clearly not all we wanted,
give clear expression to the importance of international action to pre-
vent further proliferation of nuclear weapons. The underlying differ-
ences of view between US and key non-nuclear states (Brazil, Pakistan,
India) inevitably remain.
10. By working out the final consensus we headed off a number of
unacceptable proposals including: the Indian characterization of nu-
clear weapons use as a crime against humanity, the Non-Aligned de-
mand for withdrawal of foreign bases, and the Soviet texts on the neu-
tron bomb and the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on territories of
states where they are not now present. The two Indian resolutions and
the Iraqi-inspired resolution against Israel were withdrawn, enabling
US to avoid confrontations on several highly contentious issues. There
was also a plethora of other issues and proposals on which consensus
was not possible and which were handled by a decision to refer them
to the appropriate deliberative body (Disarmament Commission or the
33rd UNGA).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
11. Assessment of performance. Ironically France emerges as
perhaps the least satisfied Delegation. While on the one hand they did
work out the terms of an agreement enabling them to join the reconsti-
tuted Disarmament Committee, all of their initiatives were blocked by
Soviet objections. Thus, their proposals for an international satellite
verification agency, an international disarmament fund for develop-
ment and an International Research Institute have simply been in-
cluded in a follow-up section for possible consideration by the 33rd
UNGA, where they are likely to receive approval in a voting situation.
12. Of the other allies, the British were by far the most active, par-
ticularly on nuclear and machinery questions. Although at times they
were in our view a bit over-zealous, they provided help on crucial
issues, especially in the nuclear field, with deft drafting that broke sev-
eral stalemates. The British also acted as spokesmen for the EC–9, most
of the rest of whose members were comparatively passive except on
issues of particular concern to their narrow national interests (e.g.
membership in the new negotiating body). The Netherlands, Canada,
Australia and New Zealand, who have been firm supporters of non-
proliferation efforts, vigorously participated in the extremely difficult
negotiations on this issue. Canada initially lobbied hard for the pro-
posals put forward by Prime Minister Trudeau in his plenary speech on
nuclear disarmament, including the cessation of flight testing, but re-
treated when they got a cold shoulder from most allies and no support
from the Non-Aligned who wanted to maintain their own proposals in-
tact. The Danes and Norwegians who talk a good game on general dis-
armament issues, contributed little except to warn us off from a cor-
ridor effort to find satisfactorily weak language in which to take note of
the Soviet proposal on non-stationing of nuclear weapons in areas
where they are not now present. Australia and New Zealand, in a
somewhat quixotic and poorly coordinated move, associated them-
selves the the Indian draft resolution calling for a moratorium on nu-
clear testing at a time when we and the Indians were working behind
the scenes to reach the compromise on language in the program of ac-
tion which eventually killed the resolution.
13. The Western European neutrals played no significant role. The
Swedes were surprisingly ineffective. Their leader, Mrs. Thorsson, a
lion in past disarmament debates, remained in the background expres-
sing her general displeasure in private but taking no active part in the
drafting of the final document. This posture probably reflects her loss
of standing with the Non-Aligned as a result of her tough tactics at the
NPT review conference. Swedish CCD Ambassador Hamilton was co-
ordinator of the drafting group that produced the non-nuclear portions
of the program of action but did not provide strong leadership. The
Finns were completely out of the action except for a weak effort in pri-

Special Session on Disarmament
vate to try to draft a bland compromise final document. This document
never surfaced in committee. The Austrians were moderately active in
an attempt to give credibility to their bid for membership in the new
CD.
14. The Soviets seem to have come prepared to obtain as great an
advantage as they could but finally agreed to join a reasonable con-
sensus. In our judgement they obtained very little i.e. some reflection of
the Brezhnev proposal on a halt in the production of nuclear weapons
and a very lukewarm endorsement of an eventual world disarmament
conference but no mention of the neutron bomb to which they had at-
tached considerable importance. On machinery they negotiated hard to
keep changes to a minimum but showed sufficient flexibility to enable
a deal to be struck on the negotiating body.
15. The Non-Aligned by no means achieved all they wanted but
did not go away angry. They now have a greater stake and a larger role
in international disarmament efforts. Despite the early establishment of
a coordinating group, they had no cohesive leadership and in the end
they fragmented. On some issues such as non-proliferation they were
divided among themselves. Our impression is that there was a behind-
the-scenes struggle between the radicals and the more moderate states.
An example of the radical pressures was the Cuban effort to retain lan-
guage on the dismantling of foreign military bases which was sup-
ported by the more moderate Non-Aligned until it become clear that
the West would not yield. We also found ourselves in protracted bilat-
eral discussions with the Ghanaian and Egyptian delegations on issues
which preoccupied them, (“racist regimes” and Middle East NWFZ), a
further reflection of lack of focus and coordination in the Non-Aligned
group. Pakistan stood alone on many issues and created enormous dif-
ficulties up until the closing moments.
16. The real leadership in the session came from Committee
Chairman Ortiz De Rozas of Argentina with the strong Assistance of
Ambassador Garcia Robles of Mexico who was named “super-
coordinator” in the closing days, and Nigeria’s CCD Ambassador Ade-
niji who was the coordinator for the nuclear section of the program of
action. Their combination of firmness and sensitivity to the real con-
cerns of the key countries in the various groups made consensus
possible.
Leonard

References are to document numbers
Aaron, David L.:
Aaron, David L.—Continued
ASAT talks:
Special Coordination Committee
At Vienna Summit, 56
meetings—Continued
Hostile acts agreement, 52
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Priorities in, 36
Protection of satellites, 43
Nuclear testing, 253, 254
Special Coordination Committee
Special Session on Disarmament,
Third round, 46
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Special Session on Disarmament, 479,
Chemical weapons:
CD Working Group, 104, 105
Funding for binary weapons, 139
Policy Review Committee meetings
U.S.-Argentine relations, 468
on policy for, 68
Special Coordination Committee
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
Acland, Sir Antony, 137
Comprehensive test ban:
Acosta Hernandez, Valentin, 288, 432
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Ad Hoc Interagency Group on Arms
Transfer, 269
Carter meeting with nuclear
Ad Hoc Interagency Group on Nuclear
laboratory officials on, 206
Carter-Thatcher talks on, 242
Adams, Michael, 453
Aden, Alberto, 439
Adeniji, Oluyemi, 501
SCC work program for discussions
Adsens, John, 324
of, 164
Afghanistan (see also Soviet invasion of
Conventional arms transfers:
Afghanistan):
Dollar volume ceilings, 268
Non-ratification of Geneva Protocol
Policy Review Committee meetings
by, 62
Policy Review Committee meeting
on, 253
Refugees in Pakistan from, 110
Vienna Summit discussion of, 309
Use of chemical weapons in:
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318, 388
International investigation into, 122
Quadrilateral discussions of, 106,
Reports of, 104, 132
Policy Review Committee meetings,
U.S. statements at CW talks, 108,
Special Coordination Committee
U.S. strategy for, 110
meetings:
Vance-Dobrynin talks on, 117
Africa (see also Conventional arms
transfers to Africa; Ethiopia;
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Nigeria; South Africa, Republic of):
High-tension areas in, 304

Africa (see also Conventional arms
Airborne warning and control system
transfers to Africa; Ethiopia;
Aircraft:
Nigeria; South Africa, Republic
AH–1 Cobra helicopter, 263
of)—Continued
Nuclear free zone in, 386
CH–47 cargo helicopters, 263
Agreements, international (see also
Biological Weapons Convention
(1972); Comprehensive test ban
(CTB); Limited Test Ban Treaty
Heavy bombers, definition of, 177
(1963); Tlatelolco Treaty):
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty
Argentine-Brazilian agreement on
nuclear cooperation, 461, 466
Alarco´n de Quesada, Ricardo, 422
Alaska, 241, 245
Ban on new weapons systems
Alcohol as energy source, 427, 433
(proposed), 153
Aleksandrov-Argentov, Andrei M., 56,
Basic Principles of Relations between
the U.S. and the U.S.S.R (1972),
Alexander, Michael, 242
Brussels Treaty (1948), 342
Canada-EURATOM Agreement for
Cooperation (1959), 355
Allen, Lew, Jr., 57
Convention on International Liability
Alternative energy, 427
for Damage Caused by Space
Ammunition, 263, 265
Objects (1972), 39
Convention on Registration of
Andreani, Jacques, 157, 476
Objects Launched into Outer
Andriotti, Giulio, 342
Space (1975), 39
Angola, 304
Angra I reactor (Brazil), 424, 461
International Telecommunications
Anthrax:
Convention, 6
Japan-U.S. Nuclear Cooperation
Agreement (1968), 341
“Measures Agreement to Reduce the
Anti-ballistic Missile Treaty (1972), 6,
Outbreak of Nuclear War,” 6
Nuclear Test Moratorium (1958), 206,
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons:
Arms competition in, 6
Panama Canal Treaty, 434, 499
Comprehensive agreement on, 51
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE)
Congressional funding for, 35
De´marche to Dobrynin on, 49, 50
Rush-Bagot Amendment, 413
DOD position, 7, 9
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (1974),
High-energy laser weapons’ role as,
Vienna Convention on the Law of
No-first-use pledge for, 31
Office of Science and Technology
Ahearne, John, 364
Policy’s Space Advisory Group
Ahlberg, David, 63
report on, 8
Air defense systems, 263
References are to document numbers

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons—
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons—
Continued
Continued
Talks on—Continued
U.S. framework for, 16
Special Coordination Committee
U.S. initiatives for, 12, 13
meetings on:
U.S. support for, 138
Dismantling of Soviet systems, 34,
Vance-Dobrynin discussions, 12,
Vance-Gromyko discussions, 3, 6,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 42,
Text of agreement at, 34
Treaty on, 16, 17
Testing of:
U.S.-Soviet talks, 281
Altitude distinctions in, 35, 40
Survivability of, 6, 8
Ban on:
Talks on:
Agency disagreements on, 29, 31,
First round review, 33
As protocol to treaty, 51
Broadening of, 53
Comprehensive test ban as
affected by, 40
Agenda for possible future rounds,
JCS position, 34, 35
Soviet questions around, 41, 47
Approval of goals for, 11, 18
Special Coordination Committee
Brezhnev-Carter message
U.S. proposals for, 37
Carter’s desire for, 5, 6
By Soviets, 33, 58
Definitions as discussed in, 54
Flight test demonstrations, 19
Hostile acts agreement, 52
Initiation of process for, 1
Treaty on:
Interagency Working Group on, 17,
Agreement in Vienna, possible, 42
Consultations as part of, 49
Relative impact of, 17
JCS position, 4
SALT agreement ratification as
Joint communique´ on, 55
Options for, 31
Soviet position, 60
Presidential Directives for, 32, 38,
Special Coordination Committee
meetings on, 16, 17
Priorities in, 36
Testing ban as protocol to, 51
U.S. capabilities:
Satellites shared with third
Alternative possibilities for
development of, 6, 8
Scheduling of, 29, 31
Flight test demonstrations, 19
Soviet interest and objectives in, 60
JCS position, 4
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
Office of Science and Technology
effect on, 57, 60
Policy report on, 8
Special Coordination Committee
Operational testing for
discussion of options for, 11,
improvement of:
Presidential Directives on, 23, 24,
Stalling of, 316
Status of, 60
Removal of restrictions on, 18,
Suspension of testing during talks
Policy review on, 2
References are to document numbers

Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons—
Argentina (see also Argentine Tlatelolco
Continued
Treaty accession)—Continued
U.S. capabilities—Continued
Nuclear materials and equipment—
Research and development
Continued
program for, 46
Heavy water production
Verification of capabilities for, 4, 6,
technology assistance—
Continued
York-Shchukin discussion of, 30
By the United States, 364, 401,
Anti-submarine warfare, 6, 406
Apartheid, 144
U.S. dilemma from, 458
Arafat, Yasser, 269
Plutonium production by, 381, 443
Argentina (see also Argentine Tlatelolco
Research reactor exports to Peru,
Treaty accession):
Ayacucho Declaration, 288
U.S. highly enriched uranium
Biological Weapons Convention
exports, 463
adherence by, 453
U.S. reactor part exports, 470
Brazilian agreement for nuclear
Nuclear proliferation:
cooperation, 461, 466
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 466,
Brazilian nuclear competition with,
Motives for, 327
Brazilian-U.S. relations, 439
U.S.-Argentine talks on, 357, 381,
Comprehensive test ban, 145, 146,
U.S. meeting with UN Delegates
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
on, 359
U.S. position, 395
Full-scope safeguards for:
Argentine discussion with IAEA
Nuclear weapons development by,
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 211, 224,
FRG position, 462
OPANAL views on, 411
U.S.-Argentine agreement on, 426
RA–6 reactor, 459
U.S. dilemma with, 458
Regional equilibrium as need for,
U.S-Soviet discussion of, 348
U.S. strategy for, 419, 459
Regional nuclear cooperation, 419
INFCE conference, 420, 422
Seismic stations in the Falklands, 251
Non-proliferation Treaty, 327, 439,
Soviet Union, relations with, 468
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Non-ratification of Biological
Weapons Convention by, 62
U.S. nuclear cooperation with, 419,
Nuclear materials and equipment:
European nuclear fuel transfers,
Argentine Commission on Atomic
Heavy water exports to, 420, 429,
Argentine Tlatelolco Treaty accession:
Heavy water production
ACDA position, 407
technology assistance:
Agreement to, 437
Announcement of ratification, 439
Argentine backpedaling on, 365, 453,
Argentine commitment for
By the Soviet Union, 448, 468
ratification, 426, 439
References are to document numbers

Argentine Tlatelolco Treaty accession—
Arms Control and Disarmament
Continued
Agency (ACDA)—Continued
Argentine conditions for, 431
NPT Review Conference, 388
As requirement for entry into force of
treaty, 406, 419
Delaying in signing, 422, 453
Possibility of, 469
Nuclear reprocessing, 344, 354
Soviet position, 449
U.S.-Argentine discussions of, 425,
Seismic stations, 248, 255
U.S.-French discussion of, 361
Special Session on Disarmament, 479,
U.S.-Mexican discussion of, 411
U.S. nuclear cooperation and, 419,
Sverdlovsk incident, 133, 135
Tlatelolco Treaty, 407, 425
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 428
U.S. reactor part exports to
U.S. support for, 419
Argentina, 470
U.S.-Venezuelan discussion of, 416
Arms Export Control Board, 268
Warnke’s presentation on, 428
Armstrong, Robert, 242
Arita, Keisuke, 239
Army Chemical Corps, 95
Arria, Diego, 416
Armitage, John, 346
Ashworth, George, 139
Armored personnel carriers (APCs), 263
Aspin Committee, 131
Arms Control and Disarmament
Assad, Hafez al-, 20
Agency (ACDA):
Atherton, Alfred, 321
Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons, 7, 9,
Atomic Energy Detection System, 210
Atucha II reactor (Argentina), 448, 466,
Aubert, Pierre, 457, 467
Chemical weapons:
Australia:
CD working group on, 104, 105
Biological Weapons Convention
Funding for binary weapons
Review Conference, 119
production, 95, 97
Chemical weapons, 76, 106
PRM/NSC 27, 66
Comprehensive test ban, 144
Retention of current U.S. stockpile
Conventional arms transfers, 268,
of, 68
U.S. policy toward, 61
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
Use in Asia of, 110, 122
Nuclear cooperation with the United
Clinch River reactor funding, 322
States, 372
Comprehensive test ban:
Nuclear fuel exports by, 383
CD working group on, 386
Criteria for renewal of, 203
Five-year review, 194
Nuclear reprocessing by, 369
Fixed duration treaty, 197
Seismic stations in, possible, 226, 232
Non-proliferation value of, 210, 211
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
On-site inspections, 180, 196
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
accommodated under, 145
Conventional arms transfers, 261,
B–77 bombs, 146
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 489,
BACKSTAY nuclear test, 173
Bacteriology, 119
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 401
Bahamas, 359, 471
Hostile acts in space, 29, 31
Baker, Howard, 115, 269
References are to document numbers

Belgium:
Barneby, Malcolm, 429
Chemical weapons, 76
Barnwell reprocessing plant, 323, 329,
Comprehensive test ban, 144
Nuclear proliferation, 375, 377
Barre, Raymond, 355, 419
Bartholomew, Reginald:
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
ASAT talks, 43, 59
Bessmertnykh talks with, 387
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Cooperation (1958), 347
Chemical weapons, 68, 139
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
Comprehensive test ban:
to, 463
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Belize, 242, 288
Benavides, Raul, 436
Benglesdorf, Harold, 345, 448
Benin, 471
Three year approach, 210
Bennett, Frank, 369
Conventional arms transfers:
Mendelevich discussions, 311, 314,
Benton, Marjorie, 499
Policy Review Committee meetings
Bergsten, C. Fred, 320
on, 290
Berta, Michael, 59
Bessmertnykh, Alexander A.:
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318
Bartholomew talks with, 387
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Chemical weapons, 88
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Conventional arms transfers, 278
EURATOM and IAEA safeguards,
Special Coordination Committee
meetings:
Soviet nuclear testing, 239
ASAT talks, 43, 59
Binary weapons, 139
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Bindschedler, Rudolf, 460
Bingham, Jonathan B., 375, 381
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Bioconversion, 427
Biological weapons (BW) (see also
Sverdlovsk incident, 129, 135
Biological Weapons Convention;
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Biological Weapons Convention (1972)
Barton Group, 494
(see also Biological weapons):
Basic Principles of Relations between
Amounts of biological agents allowed
the U.S. and the U.S.S.R (1972), 285,
under, 111
Argentine adherence to, 453
Bateman, Worth, 252, 381
Battlefield surveillance, 6
Article V:
Provision for consultation in, 109,
BEAFORT nuclear test, 154, 161
References are to document numbers

Biological Weapons Convention (1972)
Bray, Charles W., III, 398, 400
(see also Biological weapons)—
Brayshaw, Charles, 448
Continued
Brazil (see also Brazilian Tlatelolco
Article V—Continued
Treaty accession; Germany, Federal
Soviet failure to comply with, 129,
Republic of, nuclear sales to
Brazil):
Swedish amendment to, 119
Acceptance of full-scope safeguards
Article VI, 109
Article IX, 119
Angra I reactor, 424, 461
Article X, 119
Argentine agreement for nuclear
Encouragement of adherence to, 62
cooperation, 461, 466
Lack of verification provisions in, 68
Argentine nuclear competition with,
Peaceful biological research, 119
Review Conference (Geneva, 1980),
Comprehensive test ban, 145, 146,
Soviet non-compliance with, 121, 129
Conventional arms transfers, 296, 297
Soviet position, 114
European nuclear fuel transfers to,
Swedish initiative for amendment of,
London Suppliers Group
U.S. commitment to, 61, 81
membership for, 335
Bittner, Edward, 266
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318, 319,
Black boxes, 163, 180
Blackwill, Robert D., 242
Nuclear agreements with, 325, 461
Blechman, Barry:
Nuclear proliferation:
Conventional arms transfers, 284,
Comprehensive test ban’s value
against, 211, 224
In the post-INFCE era, 375
Bligh, John, 445
Nuclear power seen as status
Bloomfield, Lincoln, 381
symbol, 342
Bloomfield, William, 115
U.S.-Brazilian talks on, 329
Blumenthal, W. Michael, 259, 271
U.S. meeting with UN Delegates
Boelling, Klaus, 417
on, 359
Nuclear reprocessing by, 324, 361,
Bombs (see also Enhanced radiation (ER)
weapons; Nuclear weapons):
Peaceful biological research, 119
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 211, 224,
CBU–72 concussion, 263
Minimum Residual Radiation (MRR),
Regional nuclear cooperation, 419
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Bond, Stephen, 47, 59
U.S. nuclear aid to, 419
Bonight, James, 345
Boosting, 256
Venezuelan nuclear agreement with,
Boright, John P., 360
Botha, P.K., 211
Brazilian Tlatelolco Treaty accession:
Bottaro Consalvi, Simon, 288
Bouillet, Jacques, 438
Bowdler, William G., 211
FRG position, 397
Reservations made in, 406, 455
Soviet position, 449
Braswell, Arnold, 486
Bratton, Joseph K., 150
References are to document numbers

Brezhnev, Leonid I.—Continued
Breeder reactors:
Special Session on Disarmament, 491
Speeches:
Economy of, 396
CPSU Central Committee (Nov.
French export of, 324
French position, 342
Funding for, 322
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (1974), 153
Gas-cooled, 346
Kalkar (FRG), 371
Toon meetings with, 177
Liquid metal fast (LMFBRs), 334, 337
Vance’s discussions with, 153, 332
Proposal for research on, 346
Sodium, 346
Steering committee report on, 337
Bridges, Peter, 324
British Nuclear Fuels (BNF), 89
U.S. push for agreement on use of,
Brown, George S.:
ASAT capabilities, 4, 24
Brement, Marshall:
Chemical weapons, 104, 122
Comprehensive test ban, 147, 148,
Conventional arms transfers, 314
Conventional arms transfers, 266,
Special Coordination Committee
meetings, Nuclear testing, 253,
Nuclear fuel supply, 392
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
PD/NSC–28, 81
PD/NSC–36, 292
Brezhnev, Leonid I.:
PD/NSC–39, 32
PRM/NSC 12, 259
Chemical weapons, 101
PRM/NSC 16, 141
Comprehensive test ban:
PRM/NSC 27, 67
British withdrawal from
PRM/NSC 37, 86
negotiations, 242
Special Session on Disarmament, 478,
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
on peaceful nuclear
Brown, Harold:
ASAT:
Soviet interest in, 142
Arms control approaches to, 9
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 153
Arms control decision paper, 7
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
Withdrawal provisions in, 206
Report from Office of Science and
Conventional arms transfers, 283,
Technology Policy, 8
Vienna Summit discussion of, 56
ASAT talks:
Approval of goals for, 11
Message exchanges with Carter, 5, 14,
Lasers, 26, 40
Options for, 31
Negative security assurances, 492,
PD–45, instructions for, 40
Special Coordination Committee
Neutron bomb, 20
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Suspension of testing during, 28, 40
Nuclear weapons production halt,
Third round, 46
U.S. framework for, 16
References are to document numbers

Brown, Harold—Continued
Brown, Harold—Continued
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Interagency Committee on Public
Chemical weapons:
Diplomacy and Disarmament,
Binary weapons funding requests,
Mutual and balanced force
Congressional budgeting for
reductions, 236
facilities for stockpiling of, 75
Negative security assurances, 498
JCS views on negotiations on, 100
U.S. policy and retaliatory
Nuclear testing:
capability, 132
Augmented program for, 230, 249,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
ERDA review of ACDA
Comprehensive test ban:
recommendations on, 156
Carter discussions with DOD
For FY 1977’s second half, 154
officials, proposed, 149
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Meaning of “yield” in TTBT, 158
Soviet high-yield, 255
Carter meeting with nuclear
Testing for SM–2, missile
laboratory officials on, 206
warheads, 161
Consultations with Allied and
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Non-Aligned states, 216
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
Non-proliferation value of, 211, 224
PD/NSC–8, 330
Nuclear testing during, 191
PD/NSC–13, 271
On-site inspection quotas, 180
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
PD/NSC–28, 81
accommodated in, 145, 147
Review conference proposals, 227,
PD/NSC–39, 32
PD/NSC–45, 38
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 166, 169
SCC work program for discussions
PRM/NSC 12, 259
of, 164
PRM/NSC 15, 317
Three year approach, 210, 217
Trilateral negotiations, 160, 163,
PRM/NSC 23, 5
PRM/NSC 27, 67
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
PRM/NSC 37, 86
Conventional arms transfers:
Special Coordination Committee
Coproduction limits, 268, 312
meetings:
Dollar volume ceilings, 268
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Management of restraints on, 279,
Conventional arms transfers, 303
New technology developed for
Special Session on Disarmament, 478,
export, 268
Of sensitive weapons, 268
Carter’s decisions for, 493
PD/NSC–36, 292
Cutoff and transfer agreements,
Review of policies for promotion
of, 274
Sverdlovsk incident, 112
SCC meetings on, 303
U.S. policy assessment on, 312, 313
Vienna Summit discussion of, 309
High-energy lasers (HELs), 26
Brown, Kent, 446, 448
References are to document numbers

Brzezinski, Zbigniew—Continued
Brzezinski, Zbigniew:
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
ASAT:
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
Arms control approaches, 9
accommodated by, 145, 147
Arms control policy discussions, 10
Permitted experiments under, 202
Quadripartite discussions of, 157
PRC meetings on, 2, 5
SALT agreement ratification before
Vienna Summit discussion of, 56
CTB, 218
ASAT talks:
Approval of goals for, 11, 18
Hostile acts agreement, 52
Three year approach, 210, 217
Initiation of process for, 1
Trilateral negotiations:
Instructions for second round of,
Special Coordination Committee
Proposed strategy for, 166, 167
meetings on, 17, 31
Review of U.S. strategy for, 216
Barnwell reprocessing plant, 323
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
Carter-Geisel talks, 433
on peaceful nuclear
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
explosions, 175, 183
Carter-Pe´rez talks, 432
U.S. preparation for, 160
CBW study proposal, 61
U.S.-British discussions of, 159
Chemical weapons:
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 153
Approval of U.S. posture for
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
limitation of, 69
Conventional arms transfers:
Binary weapons funding requests,
Congressional notification of, 263,
CD Working Group on, 105
JCS views on negotiations on, 100
Controls over promotion of,
Negotiations on, 70, 74
Regulations for, 261, 262
Coproduction limits, 268
Special Coordination Committee
Dobrynin-Brzezinski discussions
meetings on, 95, 97
of, 310
Use in Asia of, 110
Dollar volume ceilings, 268
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
For new systems, 268
Clinch River reactor funding, 322, 323
FY 1978 program, 286
Comprehensive test ban:
FY 1979 ceiling, 302
Callaghan message to Carter on,
Management of restraints on, 279,
Carter discussions with DOD
New technology developed for
officials, proposed, 149
export, 268
Carter-Dobrynin discussions of,
Of sensitive weapons, 268
PD/NSC–13, 270
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Policy Review Committee meetings
Carter-Thatcher talks on, 242
Sales of C–130s, 276
CD working group on, 390
U.S. policy assessment on, 313
Consultations with Allied and
U.S.-Soviet talks on:
Non-Aligned states, 216, 219
Bartholomew-Mendelovich
DOE position, 196
discussions, 311, 314
Fixed duration treaty, 197, 198
Dobrynin-Brzezinski discussions,
JCS position, 220
Non-proliferation value of, 211, 224
Guidance for, 304
On-site inspections, 179
References are to document numbers

Brzezinski, Zbigniew—Continued
Brzezinski, Zbigniew—Continued
Conventional arms transfers—
Nuclear proliferation—Continued
Continued
Smith’s final report on U.S. policy
U.S.-Soviet talks on—Continued
on, 395
Policy Review Committee
Storage for foreign spent nuclear
fuel, 343
Reports on, 293
U.S. policy toward, 371, 396
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 416
U.S. Non-Paper on, 285
Vance’s trip to Brazil, 427
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
Vienna Summit discussion of, 309,
Nuclear testing:
Dobrynin’s discussions with, 310
Augmented program for, 230, 235,
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 347,
ERDA review of ACDA
Heavy water production technology
recommendations on, 156
exports to Argentina, 452, 454,
High-energy lasers (HELs), 15, 26
Meaning of “yield” in TTBT, 158
Interagency Committee on Public
Diplomacy and Disarmament,
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Latin American regional nuclear
Operation FULCRUM II, 155, 161
cooperation, 419
Meeting with Jay, 194
PD/NSC–13, 270
Negative security assurances, 492,
PD/NSC–28, 81
PD/NSC–37, 27
PD/NSC–39, 32
Nuclear proliferation:
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 145, 147,
Additional conditions for new
nuclear cooperation
Policy Review Committee:
agreements, 339
ASAT, 2, 5
Carter-Fukuda talks on, 329
Conventional arms transfers, 259,
Carter-Giscard talks on, 361
Carter’s policy statement on, 331
Nuclear proliferation, 317, 328
Congressional concern over, 366
Nuclear reprocessing, 338
European-U.S. differences on, 365
PRM/NSC 12, 259
French nuclear sales to Pakistan,
PRM/NSC 15, 317
PRM/NSC 16, 141
French policy on, 356
PRM/NSC 23, 5
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 399,
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 382,
Protected vs. illegal satellites, 44
Seismic stations, 222, 246
International restraints for slowing
Special Coordination Committee
of, 323
meetings:
London Suppliers Group
ASAT talks, 17, 31
expansion, 335
Chemical weapons, 95, 97
Comprehensive test ban, 207, 210,
Policy Review Committee meetings
Conventional arms transfers, 295,
Presidential decision on controls
over reprocessing, 340
References are to document numbers

Brzezinski, Zbigniew—Continued
Callaghan, Audrey, 191
Special Coordination Committee
Callaghan, James:
meetings—Continued
Special Session on Disarmament,
Comprehensive test ban:
Special Session on Disarmament:
Message exchange with Carter on,
Carter’s decisions for, 492, 493
Conventional arms transfers, 480
SALT agreement ratification before
Cutoff and transfer agreements,
CTB, 218
Four-power discussion of, 476
U.S.-British discussions of, 159
Special Coordination Committee
Conventional arms transfers, 299
meetings on, 488, 489
Election loss to Conservatives, 229
Message exchange with Carter, 215,
Tlatelolco Treaty:
Carter-Schmidt discussions of, 417
Negative security assurances, 498
Cuban refusal for signing of, 441
Nuclear proliferation, 342
DOD position, 440
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
JCS position, 440
Reservations made upon
Special Session on Disarmament, 491,
ratification of, 413
Soviet signing of, 435
Callen, Ivor, 244
Cambodia, use of chemical weapons in,
U.S.-Japanese agreement for Tokai,
Canada:
proposed, 351
As London Suppliers Group member,
U.S. nuclear reactor part exports to
Argentina, 470
Biological Weapons Convention
Review Conference, 119
Buchheim, Robert:
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 491
ASAT talks:
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
Agenda for possible future rounds,
Dismantling of Soviet systems, 40
Heavy water:
Second round, 39, 41
Exports by, 426, 447
Special Coordination Committee
Full-scope safeguards on, 457
Production technology assistance
Non-proliferation Treaty, 372
Buchsbaum, Solomon J., 8
Nuclear assistance to India by, 357
Nuclear processing plants, 372
Buckley Airfield, 124
Nuclear proliferation:
Bujon de L’Estaing, Franc¸ois, 369
Argentine-IAEA negotiations, 443
Bulgaria, 471
Bundestag, 371
Full-scope safeguards for
Burman, Allan V., 43, 59
prevention of, 339, 347
Burns, David Allan, 89, 94
In the post-INFCE era, 375
Burt, Richard, 57
Burundi, 471
Bushnell, John, 305, 468
Nuclear reprocessing by France, 349
Butcher, Suzanne, 58
Seismic stations in, possible, 226
Butcher, William, 251
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Byrd, Robert, 115
References are to document numbers

Canada-EURATOM Agreement for
Carter, James Earl—Continued
Cooperation (1959), 355
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Callaghan-Carter talks on, 191, 192,
Carasales, Julio Cesar, 420
Carcinogens, 76
Carter-Dobrynin discussions of,
Carnesale, Albert, 375, 384
CD working group on, 390, 391
Carrea, Antonio, 459, 466
Consultations with Allied and
Carrington, Lord Peter:
Non-Aligned states, 214, 219
Belize, 242
Discussion, proposed, with DOD
Comprehensive test ban, 242
officials on, 149
Fixed duration treaty:
Sverdlovsk incident, 137
Approval of, 199, 200
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Vance-Thatcher meetings, 233
Three vs. five year options, 197,
Visit to Washington (May 1980), 250
Three year approach, 218
Carter, James Earl:
Gromyko’s discussions of, 153, 168,
ASAT:
Arms control decision paper, 7
Meeting with nuclear laboratories
Arms control policy discussions, 10
officials on, 206, 209
Operational testing for
Non-proliferation value of, 224
improvement of capabilities,
Permitted experiments under, 198,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 55,
Press statements on, 140, 144
ASAT talks:
SALT agreement ratification before
Approval of goals for, 11, 18
Desire for, 5, 6
SCC work program for discussions
Instructions for second round of,
of, 164
Thatcher’s discussions of, 242, 244,
Priorities in, 36
Protected vs. illegal satellites, 42, 44
Trilateral negotiations:
Space shuttle, 56
British withdrawal from
Third round, 50, 53
negotiations, 242
Barnwell reprocessing plant, 323, 364
Changing approaches to issues
Chemical weapons:
in, 252
Approval of U.S. posture for
limitation of, 69
CD Working Group on, 105
On-site inspections, 184
Funding of binary weapons
Proposed strategy for, 166
production, 95, 100
Review of U.S. strategy for, 214
Negotiations on, 70
Special Coordination Committee
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
on peaceful nuclear
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
explosions, 175
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
Speeding up of, 199
Chinese People’s Republic, 242
U.S.-British discussions of, 159
Clinch River reactor funding, 322,
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Comprehensive test ban:
As campaign promise of, 140
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
References are to document numbers

Carter, James Earl—Continued
Carter, James Earl—Continued
Meetings—Continued
Conference of the Committee on
With Gromyko—Continued
Disarmament, 204
On conventional arms transfers,
Conventional arms transfers:
Ceiling management in, 287
On peaceful nuclear explosions,
Concussion bomb sale ban, 263
Congressional notification of, 263,
With Huang Chen, 151
With Lopez Portillo, 402
Controls over promotion of,
With nuclear laboratories officials,
Regulations for, 261, 262
France as obstacle to limits on, 298,
With Roel Garcı´a, 414
Gromyko’s discussions of, 278
With SSOD Delegates, 499
Legislation on, 264
Policy Review Committee meetings
Messages:
Presidential directive on, 270, 271,
Callaghan exchange of, 215, 218,
SCC meetings on, 295
Submission for approval through,
From Lo´pez Portillo, 411
U.S. policy assessment on, 312, 313
From Vorster, 211
Schmidt exchange of, 299, 405
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
To Giscard, 299, 347
Vienna Summit discussion of, 309,
To Thatcher, 229
Videla exchange of, 437
Dobrynin’s talks with, CTB, 142
Namibia, 242
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 397, 399,
Negative security assurances, 492,
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 347,
Neutron bomb, 20
NPT Review Conference, 390, 391,
Heavy water production technology
exports to Argentina, 457
High-energy lasers (HELs), 15, 26
Nuclear Non-proliferation Act signed
Latin American regional nuclear
by, 366
cooperation, 419
Nuclear proliferation:
Meetings:
Additional conditions for new
With Barre, 355
nuclear cooperation
With Begin, 191
agreements, 339
Carter-Fukuda talks on, 329
French policy on, 356
Full-scope safeguards, 430
With Desai, 361
With Fukuda, 329
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 378,
With Geisel, 433
With Genscher, 405
International restraints for slowing
of, 323
With Gromyko:
London Suppliers Group
On comprehensive test ban, 153,
expansion, 359
References are to document numbers

Carter, James Earl—Continued
Carter, James Earl—Continued
Nuclear proliferation—Continued
Special Session on Disarmament—
Policy review for, 317
Continued
Presidential decision on controls
Cutoff and transfer agreements:
over reprocessing, 340
ACDA position, 491, 492
Quadripartite discussions of, 326
Smith’s final report on U.S. policy
DOD position, 490, 492
on, 395
Interagency study on, 482, 483
Statement of fuel cycle evaluation
Meeting with Delegates to, 499
Waldheim discussions of, 472
Storage for foreign spent nuclear
Speeches:
fuel, 343
U.S. policy toward, 364
During campaign (San Diego, Sept.
U.S. strategy for, 379
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 416
During campaign (United Nations,
Vance’s trip to Brazil, 426, 427
Nuclear reprocessing:
Inaugural (Jan. 1977), 142
By France, 349
INFCE organizing conference (Oct.
U.S.-Japanese talks on, 344, 352,
OAS Permanent Council (Apr.
U.S. policy on, 338, 340
Pan American Day (Apr. 1977),
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
To USDA employees (Feb. 1977),
Operation FULCRUM II, 161
PD/NSC–15, 70
PD/NSC–28, 81
PD/NSC–37, 27
U.S.-Mexican relations, 444
U.S. nuclear reactor part exports to
PD/NSC–39, 32
Argentina, 470
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 170, 171,
U.S.-Soviet relations, 245
Press conferences of, 145, 344
Visits:
PRM/NSC 15, 317
Brasilia (Nov. 1977), 424
PRM/NSC 16, 141
Brasilia (Apr. 1978), 433
PRM/NSC 37, 86
France (Jan. 1978), 361
Seismic station numbers, 208
India (Jan. 1978), 364
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 57,
Special Coordination Committee
Panama (June 1978), 441
Special Session on Disarmament:
Carter, Rosalyn, 415, 416
Carter’s speech at, possible, 486,
Cartledge, Brian, 233
Carvalho, Hervesio de, 461
Conventional arms transfers, 480,
Casten˜eda y A´ lvarez de la Rosa, Jorge,
References are to document numbers

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)—
Continued
Castro, Raul H., 439, 466
U.S.-Argentine relations, 443
U.S.-Brazilian relations, 443
CAT. See Conventional arms transfers.
Chaplin, Maxwell, 420, 466
Cavazos, Richard E., 266
Chapman, Ray E., 486
CBU–72, concussion bombs, 263
Chayes, Abraham, 375
Cecchini, Louis, 430
Chemical and biological warfare, 81
Central Europe, 139
Chemical explosions, 223
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA):
Chemical warfare, 95, 132
“Arms Sales to the Third World,
Chemical weapons (CW):
1977” (Intelligence Assessment),
Approval of U.S. posture for
limitation of, 69
ASAT talks:
British draft UNGA resolution, 89
Second round, 39, 41
Canadian/Polish draft UNGA
Soviet interest and objectives in, 60
resolution on, 77
CCD focus on limitations on, 61
U.S. framework for, 16
“Chemical Warfare in Laos” (CIA
paper), 104
Challenge inspections of, 82
Chinese People’s Republic’s
Conventional arms transfers, 274,
capabilities for use of, 90
Chinese People’s Republic’s
“Deadlock at the NPT Review
ratification of treaty on, 74, 94,
Conference: Causes and
Congressional attitude toward, 96, 97
Consequences” (Intelligence
Consultation with Allies on, 87, 89,
Assessment), 394
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 401
Disposition of, 73
“Latin American Arms Market:
DOD position, 78
Changing Patterns of Supply”
(Intelligence Assessment), 297
FRG draft treaty on, 69
Negative security assurances, 385
Funding for binary weapons:
Non-Proliferation Treaty, 368, 370,
Congressional action on, 95, 100,
“The NPT Review Conference: A
Preview” (Intelligence
For replacement of old devices, 124
Assessment), 385
Nuclear fuel access, 358
“The Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty: Looking Toward the 1980
Herbicides, 81, 118
Review” (CIA Paper), 368
House Resolution against use in
Nuclear proliferation, 342
Indochina of, 104
“The Politics of INFCE” (CIA Paper),
Incapacitants, 71, 81
Seismic station numbers, 222
Legislation on, 69
“Significance of Recent
NATO attitude toward, 96
Developments in Argentine
NATO capabilities for, 123, 132
Nuclear Policy” (Intelligence
NATO disarmament experts
Report), 431
discussion of, 65
“Soviet Civil Defense Against
NATO study on, proposed, 94
Chemical and Biological
Negotiations on (see also Verifications
Warfare” (Intelligence
below):
Assessment), 85
Agreed key elements proposal, 71,
Sverdlovsk incident, 109
References are to document numbers

Chemical weapons (CW)—Continued
Chemical weapons (CW)—Continued
Negotiations on (see also Verifications
below)—Continued
Quadrilateral consultations on, 87, 89,
Briefing of allies on, 76
Research and development of, 75
Confidence-building measures for,
Soviet Civil Defense against, 85
Convention on, 79, 86
Soviet draft treaty on, 69, 73
Destruction of stocks, 94, 136
Soviet stockpiles of, 94
Development of joint initiative
Soviet superiority in, 68, 69
through, 77
Special Coordination Committee
Drafting group issues, 102
meetings on:
During SSOD, 79, 83
Formation of CD Working Group,
Focus for, 90
Guidance for U.S. Delegation, 79,
Funding for binary weapons, 95,
JCS position, 100
Joint U.S.-Soviet statements, 98
U.S. military options, 68
Presentation of Soviet draft
Study proposal on, 61
convention during, 73
Teratogens, 76
Progress report on, 126
Rounds:
Fourth, 71, 79
Treaty ratification by UNSC
UN Committee on Disarmament’s
instructions on, 98
U.S.-British consultations on, 70, 79,
U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany
Soviet foreign policy as affected by,
U.S.-French consultations on, 70, 79,
Soviet position, 82
U.S. military options for, 68
Soviet slowdown in, 128, 136
U.S. overseas stocks of, 139
Staffing of Delegations for, 102
Stalemate in, 80
U.S. retaliatory capability, 132
U.S. objectives in, 63, 69
U.S. stockpiles of:
U.S.-Soviet working group, 65, 76,
Congressional budgeting for, 75
Deadline for destruction of, 88, 96
U.S. support for, 138
Deficiencies in, 95
U.S. topics for discussion in, 69, 83
In Federal Republic of Germany, 81
Use of CW in Asia as topic in, 108,
Options for, 95
Reduction of, 78
Nerve gas, 82
Retention of, 68, 72
No-first-use policy on, 81
Use in Asia of:
Non-circumvention of agreements on,
Call for international investigation
of, 122
Non-transfer of, 90, 98
Quadrilateral discussions of, 106,
PD/NSC–28, 81
Reports of, 104, 132
U.S. briefing of allies on, 125
References are to document numbers

Chemical weapons (CW)—Continued
China, People’s Republic of—Continued
Use in Asia of—Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
U.S. statements in CW talks, 108,
Adherence to—Continued
U.S. strategy for, 110
Vance-Dobrynin talks on, 117
U.S. discussions with, 151
Weapon and Space Systems
Conventional arms transfers, 282,
Intelligence Committee report
on, 111
Nuclear accident reporting, 488
Nuclear proliferation, 375
Nuclear testing by, 146
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 64,
OPANAL, 449
Pakistani nuclear weapons
Verification:
development, 376
FRG position, 89, 94
Soviet Union, relations with, 94
Special Session on Disarmament, 494,
Possibilities of, 87
U.S.-British discussion of, 89
Tlatelolco Treaty, 406
U.S. relations with, 146, 163
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 71, 102,
U.S. space cooperation with, 60
Vance visit (1977), 351
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
Christopher, Warren M.:
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
Argentine-U.S. relations, 468
World War I casualties from, 69
ASAT talks, 29, 43
Chemical Weapons Backstopping
ASAT testing, 34, 35
Committee, 100
Comprehensive test ban, 224, 252
Conventional arms transfers:
Chile:
Controls over promotion of, 261
Ayacucho Declaration, 288
France as obstacle to limits on, 298
Comprehensive test ban, 146
Policy Review Committee meetings
Conventional arms transfers, 296, 297
on, 266
Non-proliferation Treaty, 436
Nuclear weapons development by,
Dobrynin’s discussions with, 131
FRG nuclear sales to Argentina, 462
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 389, 400,
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission
(CCEN), 436
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
China, People’s Republic of:
NPT Review Conference, 389
As NPT non-signer, 364
Carter-Thatcher discussions of, 242
CD role of, 104
Chemical weapons capabilities of, 90
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Chemical weapons treaty ratification
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Comprehensive test ban:
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 254
Adherence to:
Special Coordination Committee
British position, 159
meetings:
International pressure for, 166,
Chemical weapons, 96
Refusal to negotiate, 146, 157
Comprehensive test ban, 252
References are to document numbers

Christopher, Warren M.—Continued
Committee on Disarmament (CD) (see
Special Coordination Committee
also Conference of the Committee
meetings—Continued
on Disarmament)—Continued
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Chinese People’s Republic’s role in,
Nuclear testing, 254
Comprehensive test ban treaty:
Special Session on Disarmament, 473,
Discussion in, 153
Trilateral working groups, 247
Tlatelolco Treaty, 414
Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
Church, Frank F., 115, 375
On-site inspections; Peaceful
Civil Defense, 85
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
Clark, Richard C., 269
stations; Verification):
Classification of information, 27
Algerian position, 146
Classified documents, 93, 451
Allied views in UN context on, 144
Articles of proposed treaty, 212, 231
As Carter’s campaign promise, 140
Clift, Denis, 376
ASAT test ban’s affect on, 40
Clinch River breeder reactor (CRBR)
Australian position, 144
Black boxes, 163, 180
CNEA (Argentine Commission on
Brazilian participation in, 145, 146,
Co-orbital jamming, 8
Coal mining, 427
British role in, 159, 187
Cochran, Thomas, 337
Carter discussion with DOD officials,
proposed, 149
Carter-Dobrynin discussions of, 142
Combs, Richard, 122, 387
Carter-Gromyko discussions of, 153,
Command-and-control capability, 6
Commerce, U.S. Department of, 245,
Carter’s press statements on, 140, 144
CCD role in, 204
Commercial arms sales, 260, 261
Commission on Security and
CD working group on:
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), 476
As discussed in NPT Review
Committee on Disarmament (CD) (see
also Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament):
Committee on Disarmament
Chemical weapons:
consideration of, 394
Australian proposal for technical
JCS position, 390
seminars, 106
Soviet proposal for, 126
CD instructions on, 98
Special Coordination Committee
Destruction of stocks of, 94
Negotiating working group on, 98,
Trilateral negotiations as affected
Progress report on negotiations,
Challenge inspections, 182, 184
Chemical explosions as verification
Quadrilateral discussions of, 107
obstacle, 223
Chilean position, 146
Chinese People’s Republic’s
Use in Asia of, 106, 110
adherence to:
Work on CW convention in, Soviet
British position, 159
position, 102
Refusal to negotiate, 146, 157
References are to document numbers

Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
On-site inspections; Peaceful
On-site inspections; Peaceful
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
stations; Verification)—Continued
stations; Verification)—Continued
Chinese People’s Republic’s
Indian participation in—Continued
adherence to—Continued
U.S. desire for, 145
U.S. resumption of testing, effect
Consultations with Allied and
on, 198
Indonesian position, 146
Coordination of language in Special
Italian position, 143, 144
Session on Disarmament on, 494
Japanese position, 144
Criteria for renewal of, 203
JCS position:
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 491
Danish position, 144
JCS memorandum on, 203
DOE position, 196
Non-proliferation value of, 211, 220
Dutch position, 144
Egyptian position, 146
Questions for developing of, 178
Entry into force of treaty on, 165, 166,
Three-year approach, 210
Mexican position, 144
Fixed duration treaty:
NATO perspectives on, 143
New Zealand position, 144
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Nigerian position, 144
Non-proliferation value of, 146, 210,
Carter’s approval of, 198, 200
Norwegian position, 144
Resumption of testing after, 198,
Nuclear testing during, 191, 202
Nuclear weapons design laboratories
Review conference proposals, 194,
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability
Seismic stations for three-year
Peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs)
under:
Soviet position, 221
As accommodated under, 145, 147
Three vs. five year options, 197,
As problem for verification, 146,
Three year treaty approach, 208,
DOD position, 167, 169
ERDA opposition to, 160
Verification and treaty length, 213
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
French adherence to:
British position, 159
Soviet protocol for, 182
International pressure for, 166, 168
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Refusal to negotiate, 146, 157
Periodic treaty review, 193
U.S.-French discussions of, 152
Permitted experiments:
British position, 215, 226
Icelandic position, 144
Carter’s approval of, 198, 202
Implementing options for, 146
DOD position, 178, 188
Indian participation in:
DOE position, 202
Agreement for, possible, 210
British position, 194
References are to document numbers

Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
On-site inspections; Peaceful
On-site inspections; Peaceful
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
stations; Verification)—Continued
stations; Verification)—Continued
Permitted experiments—Continued
Trilateral negotiations—Continued
Setting of levels for, 207, 210
Failure to complete before NPT
Zero yield, 202
Review Conference, 232, 237
Portuguese position, 144
Guidance for, 228
Preamble to treaty, 252
Lack of progress in, 237, 257
Presidential Directive on (proposed),
New Soviet instructions on, 174,
Quadrilateral discussions of, 157
Peaceful nuclear explosions issue
Ratification provisions for extension
as obstacle to agreement in,
Replacement treaty problem, 227
Progress in before NPT Review
Safeguards in, 102, 359
Conference, 240, 248
SALT linkage with:
Review of U.S. strategy for, 214,
As reinforcement, 146
SALT II ratification before CTB,
Scheduling of initial talks, 162
Sessions:
U.S. disapproval of, 163
Self-regulation of, 193
Senate ratification of, prospects for,
Senate ratification provision for
Feb.–Mar. 1979, 229
Soviet expression of interest in, 140,
Oct.–Dec. 1979, 241
Feb.–Apr. 1980, 247
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as
Oct.–Nov. 1980, 257
affecting, 244, 250
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
Spanish position, 146, 211
on peaceful nuclear
Sverdlovsk incident’s effect on, 248
Talks seen as unproductive, 241, 250
Speeding up of, 199
Status of verification issues at, 223
Trilateral negotiations:
Timing for, likely, 195
British position, 171
U.S.-British discussions of, 159
British withdrawal from, 236, 237,
CD working group, effect on, 390,
U.S. preparations for, 160
U.S. proposed memorandum for
Changing approaches to issues in,
Dobrynin on, 166
Weakening of Soviet position on
Continuation during NPT Review
peaceful nuclear explosions,
Conference of, 244
Duration of treaty, proposals for,
Working groups, 247
ERDA assessment of, 189
Turkish position, 144, 146
References are to document numbers

Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
Comprehensive test ban (CTB) (see also
On-site inspections; Peaceful
On-site inspections; Peaceful
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
nuclear explosions; SCC meetings
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
on comprehensive test ban; Seismic
stations; Verification)—Continued
stations; Verification)—Continued
U.S. advocacy for multilateral
Verification—Continued
adoption of, 151
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 153, 165,
U.S.-British discussions of:
June 1977, 159
Warnke-Petrosyants discussion of,
Withdrawal from treaty on, 176, 177,
Sept. 1978, 226
Yugoslav position, 144
Zero-yield testing, 202
Conference of Non-Aligned Nations
(Colombo, 1976), 471
U.S.-Chinese People’s Republic
Conference of the Committee on
discussions of, 151
Disarmament (CCD) (see also
U.S. negotiating position finalization,
Committee on Disarmament):
Allied views on, 144
U.S. Non-Paper on, 243
Ban on new weapons systems
U.S.-Soviet exploratory discussions
(proposed), 153
(June 1977), 162
Chemical weapons:
U.S.-Soviet relations as affected by,
British draft resolution on, 89
Convention on, 79, 86
U.S. statements on, 146
Limitation as focus of, 61
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 153
Vance-Dobrynin discussions of, 243
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 153,
Comprehensive test ban, 160, 163,
Verification:
Conclusion of, 84
As obstacle to agreement on PNEs,
French role in, 494
Genetic engineering, 89
As primary Soviet concern in
Reconstitution of, 212
negotiations, 189
Special Session on Disarmament, 475,
British role in, 187
By national technical means, 156,
Structural revisions of, possible, 473
Tlatelolco Treaty, 437
Capability for, 146, 163
DOE position, 196
Congress, Acts of (see also Nuclear
International seismic data
Non-Proliferation Act):
exchange, 189
Environmental Policy Act, 69
OSTP review, 230
Foreign Assistance Act, 269
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment,
problem for, 146
Prenotification of chemical
International Security Assistance and
explosions, 223
Arms Export Control Act (1976),
Role in Senate ratification of, 212
Status of verification issues at
trilateral negotiations, 223
Security Assistance Authorization for
Treaty length and, 213
U.S.-British discussions of, 244
Symington Amendment, 376
References are to document numbers

Congress, Acts of (see also Nuclear
Conventional arms transfers (CAT) (see
Non-Proliferation Act)—Continued
also Conventional arms transfers to
U.S.-Venezuelan discussion of, 432
Africa; Conventional arms transfers
Congress, U.S. (see also Congress, Acts
to Iran; Conventional arms
of):
transfers to Latin America)—
ASAT program funding by, 35
Continued
Chemical weapons:
Congressional notification of Ford
Attitudes toward, 96, 97
administration-era sales, 260,
Budgeting for R&D on, 75
Funding for binary weapons
Controls over promotion of, 260, 261,
production facility, 95, 100,
Legislation on, 69
Use in Asia of, 110
Deferral of requests for, 263
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
Dollar volume ceilings on, 258, 268,
Conventional arms transfers:
Notification of Ford
Employment of U.S. citizens for
administration-era sales, 260,
overseas projects, 268
Exemption from controls on, 268, 269,
Restraint as objective in, 302
State Department strategy for
For new systems, 268
limits on, 286
France as obstacle to limits on, 299
To Israel, 265
From Israel, 297
Vance’s report on, 316
Full-scope safeguards, 361
Nuclear Non-proliferation Act as
guidance for, 366
Nuclear proliferation, 366, 383
Nuclear reprocessing, 364, 381
FY 1980 sales, 312
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Incentives for stimulation of, 268
Interim restraint measures (IRMs),
Plutonium exports, 352, 353
Special Session on Disarmament, 488
International Traffic in Arms
regulations, 273
Consalvi Bottaro, Simon Alberto, 416,
Legislation on, 264
London Suppliers Group guidelines
Constitution, U.S., 166
as precedent for agreement on,
Convention on International Liability
for Damage Caused by Space
Management of restraints on, 279, 280
Objects (1972), 39
Multilateral restraints on:
Convention on Registration of Objects
British position, 267, 308
Launched into Outer Space (1975),
Efforts for encouragement of, 260
Conventional arms transfers (CAT) (see
FRG position, 267, 308
also Conventional arms transfers to
JCS position, 301
Africa; Conventional arms transfers
Lack of progress in, 312, 313
to Iran; Conventional arms
LDC position, 481
transfers to Latin America):
Mondale’s talks with allies on, 258
Allied discussion of (proposed), 298
Presidential directive on, 270, 271,
Ammunition re-supply, 263, 265
Assessment of policy on, 312, 313
Soviet attitudes toward, 283
Carter-Brezhnev discussions of, 309
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 267
New technology developed for
Channels for, 261
export, 268
References are to document numbers

Conventional arms transfers (CAT) (see
Conventional arms transfers (CAT) (see
also Conventional arms transfers to
also Conventional arms transfers to
Africa; Conventional arms transfers
Africa; Conventional arms transfers
to Iran; Conventional arms
to Iran; Conventional arms
transfers to Latin America)—
transfers to Latin America)—
Continued
Continued
Types of, 260
OAS discussion of, 296
U.S. policy on:
Pipeline and pending sales, 260, 262
Assessment of, 312, 313
Policy Review Committee meetings
Carter administration’s review of,
Qualitative and quantitative controls,
CIA review of, 274
Disagreements on, 268
Reduction in amount of, 258, 260,
Latin American transfers, 266
Regional Working Groups, 295
U.S.-Soviet talks on:
Significant combat equipment, 261,
Bartholomew-Mendelevich
Soviet paper on, 315
Special Coordination Committee
Briefing of Chinese People’s
Republic on, 282
Carter-Gromyko discussions, 278
Special Session on Disarmament:
Dobrynin-Brzezinski discussions,
LDC resistance to restraints, 481
Guidance for, 304
U.S. restraint on sales, 281
Israeli sales, 297
U.S. vulnerabilities in, 480, 481
State Department strategy for limits
on, 286
Study on consequences of, 280
Submission for approval to Carter,
Policy Review Committee meetings
Supplier/recipient consultations, 304
Regional vs. functional emphasis
To Iraq, 283, 300
Soviet areas of focus in, 304
Soviet attitudes and approaches to,
To Korean Republic, In FY 1977, 268
To low-income countries, 268
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as
To Middle East, 283
affecting, 57, 316
To NATO members in FY 1977, 268
Stalling of, 316
Three-part framework for, 296
To Pakistan, 268
U.S. embassy Moscow perspectives
U.S. Non-Paper on, 285
U.S.–ROK discussions of, 303
To Saudi Arabia, 268, 300
U.S. strategy on, 260, 281
To Spain, 268
Vance-Dobrynin discussions, 260,
To the Third World (CIA paper), 300
References are to document numbers

Conventional arms transfers (CAT) (see
also Conventional arms transfers to
Corden, Pierre, 159
Africa; Conventional arms transfers
COREDIF, 328
to Iran; Conventional arms
Cotter, Donald H., 150
transfers to Latin America)—
Council of Europe, 476
Continued
Council on Environmental Quality
U.S.-Soviet talks on—Continued
Vance-Gromyko discussions, 267,
Coutinho, Dirciu, 461
Crimmins, John:
Western European views on, 308
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 397, 398,
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
Vance meeting with Senators on, 269
Tlatelolco Treaty, 410, 415
Vance’s report to Congress on, 316
Crocker, Gary, 122
Conventional arms transfers to Africa:
Cuba (see also Cuban Tlatelolco Treaty
accession):
Study of consequences of, 280
As SSOD PrepCom member, 471
Conventional arms transfers, 283, 295
Missile crisis (1962), 304
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
Non-proliferation Treaty, 421
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 267
Soviet combat brigade in, 314, 315
Conventional arms transfers to Iran:
Soviet Union, relations with, 418
AWACS aircraft purchase request,
Cuban Tlatelolco Treaty accession:
ACDA memorandum on, 407
Electronic countermeasures systems,
As requirement for entry into force of
treaty, 406, 435
Colombian representations over, 441
Limitation of, 269
Studies of, 260, 280
Guantanamo’s inclusion and, 402, 434
TOW missile launcher kits, 263
Nuclearization of Puerto Rico and,
U.S.-Soviet talks on, 303
Conventional arms transfers to Latin
OPANAL position, 423, 450
America:
Soviet encouragement of, 415, 423
British, 288, 297
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
By Federal Republic of Germany, 297
Changing patterns of supply, 297
Soviet signing and, 418, 435
French, 288, 297
U.S. support of Latin American
Israeli, 297
encouragement of, 415
Latin American and Caribbean
Cubillos Sallato, Hernan, 436
conventional weapons meetings,
Culbertson, Philip, 35, 59
Cunningham, George, 381
Limitation of, 283
Cunningham, Woody, 468
Policy Review Committee meetings
Cutter, W. Bowman, 5, 17
Cyprus, 471
Self-restraint in, 296
Study on consequences of, 280
Dalton, James E., 100
U.S. policy, 499
DANBO nuclear test, 154, 161
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency), 6, 16
Western European, 297
Dashiell, Thomas, 139
Coon, Jane, 341, 381
Davies, Thomas D.:
Cooper, Frank, 232, 242
Coprocessing, 344, 353
References are to document numbers

Davies, Thomas D.—Continued
Defense, U.S. Department of (DOD) (see
also Office of the Secretary of
House testimony of, 104
Defense)—Continued
Special Coordination Committee
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
meetings, 207, 210
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 167, 169,
Sverdlovsk incident, 129
Davis, Dickson, 286
Davis, Jack, 468
Special Session on Disarmament, 489,
Declaration on Disarmament, 477
Technology transfers to the Soviet
Defense, British Ministry of (MOD), 159
Union, 245
Defense, Soviet Ministry of, 128
Tlatelolco Treaty, 409, 440
Defense, U.S. Department of (DOD) (see
Defense Advanced Research Projects
also Office of the Secretary of
Agency (DARPA), 6, 16
Defense):
Deming, Rust, 369
Democratic Party, 140
Chemical weapons:
Denend, Leslie G.:
Binary weapons funding, 100, 103,
Intra-departmental differences
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
over, 68, 69
PD/NSC–15, 78
PRM/NSC 27, 66
U.S. policy toward, 61
Desai, Morarji:
Use in Asia of, 110, 122
Carter meetings with, 361
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
Comprehensive test ban, 204, 206,
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter discussion, proposed, 149
Full-scope safeguards, 482
Fixed duration treaty, 197
On-site inspections, 184
Resignation as Prime Minister of, 372
Permitted experiments, 178, 188
Special Session on Disarmament, 491,
Proposed strategy for trilateral
De´tente, 499
negotiations, 167
Conventional arms transfers:
Deutsch, John, 112
CIA review of policies for
Development and disarmament:
promotion of, 274
Backstopping Committee report on,
FY 1977 amounts, 272
FY 1978 program, 287
SSOD’s endorsement of, 119
Lockheed sales of C–130 aircraft,
U.S. approaches to, 478, 494
U.S. guidance for discussion of, 475
Regulations for controls over
U.S. initiatives for, 481
promotion of, 261
Yugoslav position, 477
Devine, James, 346
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 489,
Diaz Bessone, Ramo´n G., 422
Diego Garcia, 251
DOE cooperation with, 178, 484
Diet, Japanese, 353
Hostile acts in space, 29, 31
Dinneen, Gerald, 43
Japanese reprocessing of spent
Disarmament (see also Special Session
nuclear fuel, 344
on Disarmament):
Nuclear fuel, 358, 392
CIA Intelligence Assessment, 394
Declaration on, 494
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
References are to document numbers

Disarmament (see also Special Session
Dodson, Christine, 227, 431
on Disarmament)—Continued
Domestic Council, 322
Indian position, 471
Duff, Robert, 159
Machinery for, 494
Dugway Army Depot, 124
Nuclear proliferation’s affect on, 477
Duncan, Charles W.:
Sri Lankan position, 471
ASAT Treaty, 17, 43
Ten Year Program for, 486, 488
Chemical weapons, 68, 96
U.S. eight objectives in, 495
Comprehensive test ban, 149, 210
Yugoslav position, 471, 477
Conventional arms transfers, 266
Nuclear proliferation in the
Dobrynin, Anatoly F.:
ASAT, Vienna Summit discussion of,
Policy Review Committee meetings,
ASAT talks:
PRM/NSC 23, 5
De´marche on, 49, 50
Special Coordination Committee
Hostile acts agreement, 52
Illegal satellites, 53
Special Session on Disarmament, 488,
U.S. de´marche on, 49, 50
Vance-Dobrynin discussions of, 12,
Earle, Ralph W., II:
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 3,
Comprehensive test ban, 252
Dobrynin’s discussions with, 131, 134
Brzezinski’s discussions with, 310
NPT Review Conference, 386, 389,
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Seismic stations, 247
Christopher’s discussions with, 131
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 253,
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter-Dobrynin discussions of,
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Sverdlovsk incident:
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Congressional consultation on, 115
Initial reports on, 109
Trilateral negotiations, 166, 175
SCC meetings on, 112
Vance-Dobrynin discussions of, 243
U.S.-British consultations on, 137
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
East Asia, 304
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
Eastern Europe, 501
Economic System of Latin America and
Earle’s discussions with, 131, 134
the Caribbean (SELA), 416, 432
Muskie’s discussions with, 138
Ecton, Stephen, 351
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 183
Edmonds, John:
Seismic stations, 166
Comprehensive test ban, 159, 187,
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 253
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Seismic stations, 240
Special Session on Disarmament, 474
Egypt:
Vance’s discussions with, 117, 243,
As NPT non-signer, 327
Conventional arms transfers, 263,
Documents not declassified, 93, 451
Full-scope safeguards for, 364
References are to document numbers

Egypt—Continued
Energy Research and Development
Israeli negotiations with, 20
Administration (ERDA)—Continued
Nuclear agreements with, 325
Nuclear proliferation, 364, 375
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Operation CRESSET, 172
Operation FULCRUM II, 161
Eighteenth Amendment to U.S.
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 147, 160
Constitution, 166
Seismic stations, 160
Einaudi, Luigi, 296, 423
Tokai nuclear plant, 238
Enhanced radiation (ER) weapons (see
also Bombs; Neutron bomb;
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 233, 482
Environmental impact statements
Eklund, Sigvard A., 373, 449
(EISs), 123
Elections:
Environmental modification (ENMOD),
British (1979), 229
French (1978), 364
Environmental Policy Act, 69
Japanese (1977), 344
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 358
Erb, Guy F., 288, 432
Erramuspe, Hugo, 466
Electronic countermeasures systems,
Escovar Salom, Ramo´n, 411, 416
Eshes, Michael, 305
Electronic intelligence (ELINT), 4
Eskdalemuir, 234, 240
Electronic warfare (EW), 6, 8
Eltz, Regina, 398
Estrada, Jaime, 436
Emergency Action Message, 6
Ethiopia:
Energy, U.S. Department of (DOE):
As SSOD PrepCom member, 471
Alternative nuclear technologies, 364
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
Comprehensive test ban, 184, 197,
Nuclear proliferation, 359
Cutoff and transfer, 484
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 20
Defense programs of, 230
EURATOM (see also U.S.–EURATOM
DOD cooperation with, 178, 484
Agreement for Cooperation (1958)):
Nuclear Non-proliferation Act as
Canadian cooperation agreement
guidance for, 366
with, 355
Lack of IAEA safeguards, 333, 348,
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 183
U.S. right of veto over reprocessing
Special Session on Disarmament, 488,
U.S. Senate acceptance of IAEA
U.S. reactor part exports to
safeguards for, 384
Argentina, 470
EURODIF, 328, 342
Energy conservation, 342
Europe:
Energy Research and Development
Adoption of full-scope safeguards by,
Administration (ERDA):
Clinch River reactor funding, 322
Conventional arms transfers, 281
Comprehensive test ban, 147, 160,
Independent nuclear deterrent in,
possible, 143
Japanese reprocessing of spent
Nuclear fuel exports to, 362
nuclear fuel, 344
Nuclear fuel transfers from, 396, 424
Nuclear fuel access, 358
Nuclear proliferation differences with
Nuclear proliferation, 317, 343
the United States, 365
References are to document numbers

European Coal and Steel Community,
Floweree, Charles C.—Continued
Encouragement of adherence to
Geneva Protocol and Biological
European Community (EC), 344, 348,
Weapons Convention, 62
Non-proliferation Treaty Review
European Economic Community (EEC),
Conference, 386
Special Session on Disarmament, 475,
European Gaseous Diffusion Uranium
Enrichment Consortium
(EURODIF), 328, 342
Evader MARV re-entry vehicle, 146
Fonseka, Ignatius Benedict, 389
Evans, Benjamin C., 431
Ford, Gerald R.:
Evans, Rowland, 440
Chemical weapons policy, 61, 81
Conventional arms transfers to Israel,
Export controls, 261
Export-Import Bank, 478, 488
De´tente, 499
“Eyes and ears of peace” proposal, 488,
SALT II Treaty, 499
Ford Foundation, 334
Facer, Roger, 232
Ford/Mitre study, 344
Fakley, Dennis, 187, 244
Foreign Affairs, Soviet Ministry of
Falk, George, 402
(MFA), 283
Falkland Islands, 251, 422
Foreign Assistance Act, 269
Far East, 146
Foreign Military Sales Program (FMS):
As type of arms transfer, 260
Federal Energy Administration (FEA),
C–130 aircraft as significant combat
equipment, 275, 276
Federal Register, 261, 262
Case study of, 260
Ferguson, Ewen A. J., 157, 476
Decision-making process for, 260, 261
For Kenya, 295
Finarelli, Michael, 120
FY 1977 amounts, 272
Finarelli, Peggy, 129, 139
Letters of Acceptance for, 272, 279
Findley, Paul, 375, 419
U.S. financing for, 268
Foreign Nuclear Policy Council
Fisher, Adrian:
(France), 357
Chemical weapons negotiations, 71,
Four-Power Summit (London, May
Comprehensive test ban, 204
France (see also French nuclear sales to
Fleischer, Eric, 170, 351
Pakistan):
Fleischer, Lowell, 282, 284
As NPT non-signer, 327, 364
Fletcher, James C., 2
Chemical weapons:
Quadrilateral consultations on, 87,
Floweree, Charles C.:
Chemical weapons:
CD working group on, 104
Consultation with allies on, 63, 106
Comprehensive test ban:
Guidance for negotiations on, 88,
Adherence to:
British position, 159
NATO disarmament experts
International pressure for, 166,
discussion of, 65
Report on negotiations on, 128
Refusal to negotiate, 146, 157
Soviet slowdown in negotiations
on, 136
U.S.-French discussions of, 152
References are to document numbers

France (see also French nuclear sales to
France (see also French nuclear sales to
Pakistan)—Continued
Pakistan)—Continued
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Adherence to—Continued
Tlatelolco Treaty:
Argentine accession to, 361
Quadrilateral discussions of, 157
French adherence to:
As requirement for entry into
UN resolutions on, 144
force of treaty, 419
U.S. advocacy of, 151
Brazilian position, 415
U.S. consultations on, 152, 214
French position, 433, 442
Conference of the Committee on
OPANAL-French talks on, 438
Disarmament, 494
Conventional arms transfers:
Signing of treaty, 406, 449
Allied talks on (proposed), 298
U.S.-French discussion of, 361
France as obstacle to limits on, 299
In FY 1977, 300
Multilateral restraints on, 267, 298,
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
To Latin America, 288, 297
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 486
to, 463
Elections (1978), 364
U.S. relations with, Soviet attempts at
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 347,
manipulation of, 163
Franc¸ois-Poncet, Jean, 361, 378
India, relations with, 357
Frank, Richard, 5
London Suppliers Group, 260, 317,
French Guiana, 442
French nuclear sales to Pakistan:
Nuclear power, 349
Canceling of, 381, 425
Nuclear proliferation:
French-Pakistani talks on, 356, 357
French policy on, 356, 377
French position, 364, 416
Fuel cycle evaluation program role
French reconsideration of, 350, 357,
Full-scope safeguards for
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 332
Fretwell, John, 250
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 376,
Fri, Robert W.:
Comprehensive test ban, 145, 147,
Quadripartite discussions of, 326
U.S. controls for, 430
Nuclear testing, 156
U.S.-French discussions of, 324,
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
PD/NSC–8, 330
PRM/NSC 15, 317
PRM/NSC 16, 141
Nuclear reprocessing:
Fritzel, Roger, 494
French position, 342, 365
Fromowitz, Samuel, 346
Of Japanese spent fuel, 341
Frosch, Robert:
U.S. policy differences over, 328
PD/NSC–37, 27
Nuclear testing by, 146
PD/NSC–39, 32
PD/NSC–45, 38
Pakistani relations with, 350
PRM/NSC 23, 5
South African nuclear weapons
Special Coordination Committee
development, 376
References are to document numbers

Full-scope safeguards (see also Nuclear
Fuel cycle evaluation program (FCEP)
proliferation)—Continued
(see also International Nuclear Fuel
For Argentina—Continued
Cycle Evaluation (INFCE)
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 348
Conferences):
U.S. strategy for, 419, 459
British position, 342
For Egypt, 364
Carter’s decision on reprocessing, 340
Carter’s policy statement on, 331, 333,
For Iraq, 395
Establishment of ad hoc NSC group
For Israel, 364, 395
on, 330
For Japan, 352
For avoidance of nuclear
For prevention of nuclear
For South Africa, 364, 395
IAEA’s coordination with, 346
For Spain, 364
Japanese position, 341, 344
For Venezuela, 430
London Suppliers Group and, 342
Multinational centers for regional
processing capacity, 323, 348
FRG position, 384, 447
Need for, 325
Outline of proposal for, 346
PD/NSC–8, 330
London Suppliers Group and, 347
Politics of (CIA paper), 370
Progress in establishment of, 364
Purpose and functions of, 328
Soviet position, 363
Reprocessing as question for
U.S.–FRG discussion of, 384
inclusion within, 338
U.S. legislation for support of, 361
Soviet position, 348
U.S. position, 373
Status reports on, 372, 373
Types of fuel cycles, 336
Galluci, Robert, 467
U.S.-French talks on, 355
Gandhi, Rajiv, 166
U.S. policy on, 330
Fukuda, Takeo:
Japanese reprocessing of spent
Gasberri, George, 122
nuclear fuel, 344
Gathwright, Wreathem, 176, 417
Geisel, Ernesto B.:
Argentine-Brazilian nuclear
Washington visit (Mar. 1977), 151,
competition, 417
Rosalyn Carter meeting with, 415, 416
Full-scope safeguards (see also Nuclear
Carter meetings with, 433
proliferation), 364
British model, 411
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil:
Brazil’s questioning of value of, 364
European adoption of, possible, 384,
Brazilian policy on, 405
Christopher’s discussions in Brazil
For Argentina:
on, 404
Argentine discussions with IAEA
Compromise settlement, possible,
Safeguards emphasized in, 399, 433
FRG position, 462
U.S. position, 357
OPANAL views on, 411
Nuclear fuel imports from the United
U.S.-Argentine agreement on, 426
States, 424
U.S. dilemma with, 458
Pe´rez’ meeting with, 432
References are to document numbers

Geisel, Ernesto B.—Continued
Germany, Democratic Republic of, 146,
Transition from Presidency of, 461
Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG)
(see also Germany, Federal Republic
Gelb, Leslie H.:
of, nuclear sales to Brazil):
ASAT talks, 29, 43
As London Suppliers Group member,
Chemical weapons, 88
Comprehensive test ban, 152, 153,
Chemical weapons:
Briefing of U.S. allies on
Conventional arms transfers, 278, 281
negotiations on, 76
FY 1978, program, 286
Draft treaty on, 69
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 284, 285,
Quadrilateral consultations on, 87,
Meeting with the Shah, 303
Nuclear proliferation, 321, 332
U.S. stockpiles in, 81
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
U.S. stocks in, 139
Verification issues, 89, 94
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Gelner, Michael, 122
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
General Conference for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
EURATOM and IAEA safeguards,
America (OPANAL):
Full-scope safeguards for Argentina,
Heavy water:
Nuclear energy development, 416
Resolution 121(VI), 464
Full-scope safeguards on, 457
Sessions:
Production technology assistance
International Atomic Energy Agency
board, 359
Negative security assurances, 488,
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318, 319,
Genetic engineering, 89
Geneva Conference on Middle East
Nuclear proliferation:
(proposal), 20
Argentine-IAEA negotiations, 443
Geneva Conference on Special
FRG nuclear sales to Argentina,
Weapons, 304
FRG reprocessing plants, 325, 328,
Genscher, Hans-Dietrich:
Fuel cycle evaluation program role
for, 336
Carter meetings with, 405
Full-scope safeguards for
Comprehensive test ban, 157
FRG nuclear sales to Argentina, 467
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 376,
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 400, 405
Full-scope safeguard for heavy water,
Quadripartite discussions of, 326
U.S. as supplier of uranium to, 325,
Nuclear proliferation, 342
Special Session on Disarmament, 476
U.S.–FRG discussions of, 395
Tlatelolco Treaty, 417
Pakistani nuclear weapons
Vance’s message to, 467
development, 384
References are to document numbers

Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG)
Glassman, Jon D.—Continued
(see also Germany, Federal Republic
Non-proliferation Treaty, 421, 450
of, nuclear sales to Brazil)—
Nuclear proliferation, 348
Continued
Special Session on Disarmament, 471
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Glenn, John H., 269, 375
Tlatelolco Treaty, 397
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Goheen, Robert F., 213
Goldsmith, Sydney, 181, 345
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
Goldstein, Martin, 471, 475
U.S. relations with, 401
Gonzalez, Raymond E., 449
Germany, Federal Republic of, nuclear
sales to Brazil:
Brazil’s questioning of value of, 361,
Goodall, Harry, 98
Goodby, James E., 239
Carter-Schmidt discussion of, 412,
Goodman, Dennis, 122
Goodpaster, Andrew, 467
French position, 364, 416
Gorman, Thomas, 284
Goronwy-Roberts, Baron, 62
London Suppliers Group expansion
Granger, James, 120
and, 335
Great Britain. See United Kingdom.
New U.S. approach to, 401, 427
Slowing of program for, 461
Greenberg, Robert A., 5
Soviet position, 367, 433
Griffin, Jack, 244
U.S.-Brazilian consultations, 400, 404
Griffiths, Eldon, 421
U.S.-Brazilian relations as affected by,
Gromyko, Andrei A.:
Carter meetings with:
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 332
On comprehensive test ban, 153,
Ghana, 494, 501
On conventional arms transfers,
Gilligan, John, 479, 488
Gilmour, Ian, 233
On peaceful nuclear explosions,
Giscard d’Estaing, Valery:
Chemical weapons:
Hardening of attitude toward
Carter’s letters to, 299, 347
negotiations, 128
Conventional arms transfers, 297, 298
Prohibition of, Vance-Gromyko
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 347,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter’s discussions of, 153, 168,
Pakistani-French relations, 350
Special Session on Disarmament, 491,
Permitted experiments, 215
SALT agreement ratification before
Visit to Latin America (Aug. 1978),
Soviet expression of interest in,
Givan, William D., 223
Glassman, Jon D.:
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Chemical weapons, 65
Geneva Protocol and Biological
Weapons Convention, 62
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
References are to document numbers

Gromyko, Andrei A.—Continued
Haig, Alexander M., Jr., 100, 319
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
Hanford project, 392
Hannifin, Patrick, 167, 281
Muskie’s discussions with, 138, 254
No-first-use of nuclear weapons,
Harriman, Averell, 498, 499
discussion of, 3
Harrop, William, 295
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Hart, Gary, 123, 124
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 168, 183,
Harte, Michael, 159
Hartman, Arthur A.:
Special Session on Disarmament, 487,
ASAT talks, 3
Chemical weapons, 64
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 157
Sverdlovsk incident, 137
Conventional arms transfers, 267
Tlatelolco Treaty, 444
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
Vance’s discussions with:
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318
Special Session on Disarmament, 476
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 165,
Hatoyama, Iichiro, 320, 329
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
Health, Education and Welfare, U.S.
Department of, 123
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Heaphy, Ilene, 402
Heavy water:
Argentine-Brazilian agreement for
Visit to Washington (Sept. 1977), 165
production of, 461
Gros Espiell, He´ctor:
Canadian exports of, 426, 447
Cuban adherence to Tlatelolco
Treaty, 423, 465
Non-proliferation Treaty, 450
Nuclear technology cooperation, 410
Full-scope safeguards for, 454, 457,
Pending ratifications of Tlatelolco
Treaty, 434, 450
Natural uranium fuel cycle (HWR),
Transit rights for nuclear weapons,
Production of, 318
Production technology assistance to
U.S. ratification of Protocol I, 464
Argentina:
Guadeloupe, 442
Guerreiro, Ramiro Elisio Saraiva, 455
By the Soviet Union, 448, 468
Guhin, Michael, 448
Guiringaud, Louis de:
Comprehensive test ban, 157
U.S. dilemma from, 458
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
Swiss exports of, 458
Heckrotte, Warren, 223, 257
Heilmeier, George, 15
Nuclear reprocessing, 349
Helicopters, 263
Special Session on Disarmament, 476
Helman, Gerald:
Comprehensive test ban, 247
Gwertzman, Bernard, 269
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Habib, Philip, 357
Helsinki Conference (1975), 138
References are to document numbers

Huberman, Benjamin—Continued
Henkin, Charles, 59
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Herbicides, 81, 118
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Seismic stations, 246
Hernandez Acosta, Valentin, 416
Special Coordination Committee
Heyl, Mary Jane, 486
Hibbert, Reginald, 157, 326
Hicks, John, 35, 43
Sverdlovsk incident, 112, 129
High-altitude interceptors, 6
Hulings, Joseph, 49, 226
High-energy lasers (HELs), 15
Hineman, Evan, 35, 43
Hume, Cameron, 494
Hirsch, John, 477
Humphrey, George, 63
Humphrey, Hubert H., 263
Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment, 468
Hiss, Dieter, 417
Humphreys, Marvin, 369
Hmong people (see also Laos), 106, 110
Hungary, 471
Hodges, Luther, 468
Hunt, John, 326
Hoettle, Charles, 122
Holloway, James L., III, 190
Holmes, Allen, 471
Homme, Robert, 471
Hussein, King (Jordan), 269
Hopkins, Robert, 266
Hutcheson, Rich, 322
Hormats, Robert, 329
Hydrogen as energy source, 427
Hydrogen cyanide, 82
Hostile acts. See under satellites.
House of Representatives, U.S.:
Foreign Affairs Committee, 110, 112
IBEX intelligence collection system, 263
Funding for binary weapons facility,
Iceland, 144
Ifft, Edward, 176
“House Resolution 512: Use of
Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), 89
Chemical Agents in Indochina,”
Incapacitants, 71, 81
Inderfurth, Rick, 358
International Relations Committee,
India:
As NPT non-signer, 327, 364
Permanent Select Committee on
Canadian nuclear assistance, 357
Intelligence, 131
Comprehensive test ban:
Non-proliferation value of, 211, 224
Participation in:
Howard, Robert, 139
Agreement on, 210
Howitzers, 263
British position, 194
Hsu Shang-wei, 151
Huberman, Benjamin:
U.S. desire for, 145
ASAT talks, 59
U.S. resumption of testing, effect
ASAT Treaty, 17
on, 198
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Permitted experiments, 215
U.S. consultations on, 214
Funding for binary weapons, 139
Conventional arms transfers, 300
Nuclear proliferation, 381
French relations with, 357
References are to document numbers

India—Continued
International Atomic Energy Agency
Non-acceptance of full-scope
(IAEA)—Continued
safeguards by, 395
Board of Governors meeting (Feb.
Nuclear proliferation:
Comprehensive test ban’s value
Developing countries’ representation
on board of, 359
Full-scope safeguards, acceptance
Fuel cycle evaluation program’s
coordination with, 346
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 378
General Conference of, 369
Motives for, 327
Model agreement on nuclear
Pakistan arms race with, 347, 466
technology, 339
Spent nuclear fuel storage, 364
Nuclear fuel, 236
Suspension of nuclear fuel
Plutonium storage study by, 377
shipments, 342
Safeguards system:
Argentine-IAEA discussions of,
At Tokai, 351
Nuclear weapons development by,
EURATOM’s approach to
Pakistani relations with, 347
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 166, 190
For heavy water, 454
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
For sensitive nuclear exports, 318
Senate acceptance for EURATOM
of, 384
Soviet position, 363
Test ban proposals of, 146
Strengthening of, 323
Verification of international
Indochina, 104
International Committee of the Red
Cross, 106
Inouye, Daniel K., 269
International Energy Agency (IEA), 358
Insecticides, 94
International Fuel Cycle Evaluation
Insertable Nuclear Components (INC)
Program, 325
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Intelligence collection systems, 263
Evaluation (INFCE) Conferences:
Intelligence Support Activity (ISA), 68
Argentine representation at, 420, 422
Inter-American Nuclear Energy
Carter’s speech to, 364, 373
Commission (IANEC), 419, 450
CIA paper on, 370
Interagency Committee on Public
Negotiations after the conclusion of,
Diplomacy and Disarmament, 497
Interagency Group on Nuclear
Non-proliferation in the era
following:
Interagency Review Groups, 245
Policy Review Committee meeting
Interagency Working Group (IAWG) on
Smith’s exploration with
Interim restraint measures (IRMs), 304
industrialized countries, 375,
Internal seismic installations (ISIs). See
Seismic stations.
Smith’s paper on, 381, 383
International Atomic Energy Agency
State Department status report on,
As central organization instrument
U.S.-Argentine discussions of, 466
for non-proliferation, 327
U.S.–FRG discussions of, 384
As institution for implementing U.S.
non-proliferation goals, 317
U.S. strategy for, 379
References are to document numbers

International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Israel—Continued
Evaluation (INFCE) Conferences—
Egyptian negotiations with, 20
Continued
Full-scope safeguards for, 364, 395
Non-proliferation in the era
Iraqi UN resolution on Middle East
following—Continued
armaments, 499, 501
Vance’s message to Franc¸ois-Poncet
Negative security assurances, 488,
on, 378
Plenary session for review of
Nuclear agreements with, 325
progress, 370
Summary of, 380
Nuclear weapons development by,
U.S. meeting with UN representatives
on, 359
U.S.-Mexican discussions of, 450
International plutonium storage (IPS),
Italy:
Chemical weapons, 76
International Research Institute
Comprehensive test ban, 143, 144
proposal, 501
Conventional arms transfers, 297
International Security Assistance and
Non-proliferation Treaty, 371
Arms Export Control Act (1976),
Nuclear proliferation, 375
Nuclear reprocessing, 334, 342
International Seismic Data Exchange
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
(ISDE), 189, 226
International Telecommunications
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Convention, 6
Cooperation (1958), 347
International Traffic in Arms
regulations, 273
Jackson, Henry “Scoop,” 375
Iran (see also Conventional arms
Jacomet, Andre, 371
transfers to Iran):
Jaipal, Rikhi, 501
Negative security assurances, 488,
Jamaica, 464
Jamming, 8
Japan (see also Tokai nuclear plant):
As London Suppliers Group member,
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Iraq:
Comprehensive test ban, 144, 214
As NPT signatory, 393
Conventional arms transfers:
As SSOD PrepCom member, 471
Conventional arms transfers to, 283,
U.S. exemption from controls on,
European nuclear fuel transfers to,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 309
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 491
Full-scope safeguards for, 395
Elections (1977), 344
UN resolution on Middle East
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 341,
armaments, 499, 501
Full-scope safeguards, 352
Negative security assurances, 488,
Isakov, V. F., 487
Israel:
NPT ratification by, 320
As NPT non-signer, 327
Nuclear proliferation:
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 376,
Conventional arms transfers by, 297
Conventional arms transfers to, 263,
U.S.-Japan discussions of, 344, 345,
References are to document numbers

Japan (see also Tokai nuclear plant)—
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS)—Continued
Continued
Chemical weapons—Continued
Nuclear proliferation—Continued
Funding for binary weapons
U.S.-Japanese bilateral nuclear
production, 95, 132
suppliers consultations, 341
Negotiations as seen by, 100
Nuclear reprocessing:
PRM/NSC 27, 66
Thermal recycling, 384
U.S. policy and retaliatory
U.S. agreements on, 395
capability, 132
U.S.-Japanese talks on:
Use in Asia of, 110, 132
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
Comprehensive test ban:
U.S. planning for, 352
Carter discussions with DOD
U.S. possibilities for regulation of,
officials, proposed, 149
CD working group on, 390
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
U.S. defense of, 146
JCS memorandum on, 203
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Non-proliferation value of, 211, 220
Cooperation (1958), 344
On-site inspections, 180, 184
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
to, 463
Questions for developing of
U.S. relations with, 329
position on, 178
Japan-U.S. Nuclear Cooperation
Three year approach, 210
Agreement (1968), 341
Treaty renewal, 228
Javits, Jacob, 115, 269
Trilateral negotiations, 167, 184
Jay, Peter, 194, 284
Conventional arms transfers, 287,
Jenkins, Frank, 59
Hostile acts in space, 29, 31
Jenkins, Kempton, 269
Jenkins, Roy, 319
Jillson, Anne, 430
John Paul I, Pope, 443
Negative security assurances, 492,
Johnson, David, PRM/NSC 23, 5
NPT Review Conference, 388
Nuclear fuel supply, 392
Johnson, Ralph, 305
Nuclear testing, 148, 254
Johnson, Richard E., 433
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Johnson, Warren D., 148
Johnson Island, 6, 7
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS):
PD/NSC–38, 203
ASAT arms control as seen by, 7, 9
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 169, 183
ASAT talks, 4
Seismic stations, 248
Agenda for possible future rounds,
Special Session on Disarmament, 486,
Satellites shared with third
Tlatelolco Treaty, 440
countries, 44
Jones, David C.:
Second round, 39, 41
ASAT, 29, 56
U.S. framework for, 16
Comprehensive test ban:
ASAT testing ban, 34, 35
Non-proliferation value of, 211
Chemical weapons:
On-site inspection quotas, 180
CD working group on, 104, 105
Review conference proposals, 227,
Difference within DOD over CW
policy, 68, 69
References are to document numbers

Jones, David C.—Continued
Kahan, Jerome—Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 254
Special Coordination Committee
meetings, 210, 228
Three year approach, 210
Special Session on Disarmament, 486,
Trilateral negotiations, 219
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
Conventional arms transfers, 280,
Kahan, Louis, 176
Kalkar breeder reactor (FRG), 371
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Kama-Pechora river project, 145
Katz, Abraham, 468
PD/NSC–13, 271
Keeny, Spurgeon M., Jr.:
PD/NSC–37, 27
ASAT talks:
Priorities in, 36
PD/NSC–45, 38
Special Coordination Committee
Special Coordination Committee
meetings:
ASAT, 29
Chemical weapons, 96
Comprehensive test ban:
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Conventional arms transfers, 303
Trilateral negotiations, 170, 176,
Special Session on Disarmament, 485,
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Sverdlovsk incident, 112
Tlatelolco Treaty, 440
Japanese reprocessing of spent
nuclear fuel, 344
Nuclear proliferation, 381
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Jordan, Hamilton:
ASAT, 56
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201
Special Coordination Committee
Chemical weapons, 101
meetings:
Conventional arms transfers, 309
Comprehensive test ban, 207, 210,
Special Coordination Committee
meetings, 210
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Jova, Joseph J., 402
Special Session on Disarmament, 488,
Joyce, John, 494
Kahan, Jerome:
ASAT Treaty, 17
U.S.-Argentine relations, 468
Comprehensive test ban, 210
Kennedy, John F., 180, 266
Conventional arms transfers, 284,
Kenya, 295
Kerr, Donald:
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
References are to document numbers

Kerr, Donald—Continued
Korniyenko, Georgiy M.—Continued
Special Session on Disarmament, 486,
Khlestov, Oleg:
Kosciusko-Morizet, Jacques, 355
Kozlov, M.M., 487
ASAT testing, 33
Kramer, Frank, 468
Conventional arms transfers, 283,
Krassulin, B.P., 80
Kreisky, Bruno, 365
Laser development verification, 30
Kreps, Juanita M., 2, 27
Kriebel, Wesley, 471
Krimer, William D.:
Kimmit, Robert, 269, 314
King, John, 402, 471
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Kissinger, Henry A., 499
Chemical weapons, 64, 101
Klingaman, Susan, 87, 445
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 168,
KNIGHTHEAD nuclear test, 154, 155,
Conventional arms transfers, 267, 309
Knoche, Enno Henry, 266
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Kokolas, John, 83
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Komplektov, Viktor G.:
ASAT, 56
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Kroll, Carlos A., 466
Comprehensive test ban, 168, 201,
Kuwait, 283
Conventional arms transfers, 309
La Reina reactor (Chile), 436
Heavy water technology exports to
Laboulaye, Francois Lefebvre de, 157,
Argentina, 448
LaHague, 336, 338
Lambsdorff, Otto, 447, 467
Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of,
Lance, Bert:
Chemical weapons, 68
Korea, Republic of:
Conventional arms transfers, 268
Comprehensive test ban, 146
Conventional arms transfers, 268,
PD/NSC–13, 271
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Negative security assurances, 488,
PRM/NSC 12, 259
LANDSAT, 60
Lane, H.B., 414
Korniyenko, Georgiy M.:
Laos (see also Hmong people):
Use of chemical weapons in, 104, 106,
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Chemical weapons, 64, 101
Laser isotope separation, 336
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 168,
Lasers:
Fusion research, 189, 206
Conventional arms transfers, 267
Ground-based, 6
Nuclear proliferation, 332
High-energy (HEL) weapons, 15, 26,
Seismic stations, 237
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Space-based, 6
References are to document numbers

Lasers—Continued
Verification of ASAT laser
Lockheed Corporation, 273, 275
development, 30, 59
London Economic Summit (London,
Latin America (see also Conventional
arms transfers to Latin America;
London Suppliers Group:
General Conference for the
As institution for implementing U.S.
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
non-proliferation goals, 317
Latin America; Nuclear materials
and equipment; Nuclear
Fuel cycle evaluation program and,
proliferation):
NPT Review Conference preparations
Full-scope safeguards, 347
in, 450
Meetings of, 348
Nuclear power, 416
NPT’s Article IV and, 225
Regional equilibrium in, 426, 429
Sensitive nuclear exports, 318, 323
Latin America and Caribbean
Trigger list of, 327
Conventional Arms Restraint
U.S. policy on enrichment technology
transfers, 369
Latin American Energy Organization
Lopez Michelson, Alfonso, 304, 441
(OLADE), 416, 432
Lo´pez Portillo, Jose:
Law of the Sea, 289
Carter communications, 402, 411
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, 147
Conventional arms transfers, 288
Ledogar, Stephan, 129
Legionnaire’s Disease, 114
Visit to Brazil (July 1980), 465
Less-developed countries (LDCs), 327,
Visit to Moscow (May 1978), 434
Lesseur Lauria, Carmelo, 288, 432
Lorton, Robert, 106
Letters of Acceptance, 272, 279
Louet, Phillipe, 369
Love, John, 317
Liberia, 471, 494
Lovelace, Alan, 5, 17
Low-income countries, 268
Lie´vano Aguirre, Indalecio, 441
Lowenstein, James, 321, 324
Light water reactors (LWRS), 342, 345,
Lucey, Patrick J., 423
Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963):
Luns, Joseph M.A.H., 319
Agreement on, 146
Luxembourg, 144, 347
Amending of, 141
Lyons, James A., Jr., 303
Member states of, 211
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
McClure, James A., 375
violation of, 145, 183
Prohibition of space detonations, 6
Soviet violations of, 148
Trilateral signing of, 204
Underground testing as permitted by,
MacFarlane, Lewis, 159
Linsenmayer, Neil, 303
Lipshutz, Robert, 271
McGiffert, David E.:
Liquid metal fast breeder reactors
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
(LMFBRs), 334, 337
Lissfelt, Mark, 446
Conventional arms transfers, 286,
Lo Aguirre reactor (Chile), 436
References are to document numbers

McGiffert, David E.—Continued
Marcum, John—Continued
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Nuclear proliferation, 72, 75
Nuclear testing, 178, 253
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Special Coordination Committee
Special Session on Disarmament, 488,
Special Session on Disarmament, 489,
Sverdlovsk incident, 135
Visit to Moscow (June 1979), 237
McGovern, George S., 269
Mark, Hans, 5
Machin, Jose´ Maria, 416
Marsh, William, 299
McIntyre, James T.:
Martin, Robert, 113, 122
Conventional arms transfers, 286
Martinique, 442
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 500
Massera, Emilio Eduardo, 422
Interagency Committee on Public
Diplomacy and Disarmament,
Matheson, Scott M., 124
Mathews, Jessica Tuchman. See
Nuclear proliferation, 382
Tuchman, Jessica.
Nuclear testing, 256
PD/NSC–37, 27
Matthias, Charles, 499
PD/NSC–39, 32
Mauritius, 471
PD/NSC–45, 38
Maynes, Charles William, 415, 475
PRM/NSC 37, 86
Special Session on Disarmament, 489,
Macklen, Victor, 159
“Measures Agreement to Reduce the
Mclean, Martin, 113, 122
Outbreak of Nuclear War,” 6
McMahon, John, 5
Mehta, J.S., 213
MacMillan, Harold, 233
McNeill, John, 62
McNutt, Louise, 471
Menold, William, 122
McWilliams, Edmund, 106, 122
Merrill, John, 299
Metzner, Clifton G., Jr., 466
Malaysia, 359, 471
Mexico:
Malev, Leonid P., 171
Comprehensive test ban, 144, 214
Man-portable air-defense systems, 281,
Conventional arms transfers, 296,
Manasov, Narlen, 421
Withdrawal of arms request, 288
Manley, Michael, 304
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Mansfield, Mike, 353
Evaluation Conferences, 450
Mantel, Robert, 284, 285
NPT Review Conference, 387, 389,
Marcum, John:
Chemical weapons, 104
Nuclear fuel imports, 449
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter meeting with nuclear
laboratory officials on, 206
Regional nuclear cooperation, 419
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Three year approach, 210
Tlatelolco Treaty:
U.S.-British discussions of, 159, 244
Aaron-Gonzalez Galvez
Nuclear testing by the Soviet Union,
discussions of, 444
Brazilian accession to, 415
References are to document numbers

Mexico—Continued
Missiles—Continued
Tlatelolco Treaty—Continued
Galosh, 6
Encouragement of holdout states
HARPOON, 146
HAWK, 263
U.S. adherence to Protocol I, 406,
LANCE, 161
U.S.-Mexican discussions of, 414,
Maverick, 260
Minuteman, 6, 19
U.S. nuclear aid to, 419
Minuteman III, 484
Meyers, Marilyn, 369
Pershing, 146
Michaud, Michael, 5
Sidewinder, 263
SL–12, (Proton), 28
Mid-East War (1973), 6
Middle East (see also Israel):
Conventional arms transfers, 258,
Soviet ICBM test notifications, 58
Geneva Conference proposal for, 20
Nuclear free zones in, 386, 501
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
Vance-Thatcher discussions of, 233
Test site in Zaire for, 357
Mikoyan, Sergo, 418
Thor, 6
Mikulak, Robert:
Titan II, 6
Biological Weapons Convention, 129
TOW, 263
Chemical weapons:
Consultation with allies on, 63, 87,
MK–12A re-entry vehicle, 146
Funding for binary weapons, 139
Mohr, Charles, 325
Mondale, Walter F.:
Argentine-U.S. relations, 442
Policy Review Committee meetings
ASAT talks, 46
on, 68
Conventional arms transfers, 258, 271
Use in Asia of, 122
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 397, 398,
Geneva Protocol and Biological
Weapons Convention, 62
Fuel cycle evaluation program,
Policy Review Committee meetings,
U.S.-French talks on, 355
Meetings:
Special Coordination Committee
Carter-Fukuda, 329
Carter-Thatcher, 242
Sverdlovsk incident, 129
With Allies, 258
Military Assistance Program (MAP),
With Fukuda, 320
With Haig, 319
Military Expenditure Limitations
(MEL), 494
With Videla, 443
Military Expenditure Reporting (MER),
NAC statement (Jan. 1977), 319
Non-proliferation Treaty, 320
Miller, Thomas, 494
Miniature homing vehicles (MHVs), 6,
PD/NSC–8, 330
PD/NSC–13, 271
Minimum Residual Radiation (MRR)
PD/NSC–15, 70
bombs, 146
PD/NSC–28, 81
Missiles:
PD/NSC–37, 27
References are to document numbers

Mondale, Walter F.—Continued
National Aeronautic and Space Agency
(NASA)—Continued
PD/NSC–39, 32
ASAT talks—Continued
PD/NSC–45, 38
Satellite protection, 43
PRM/NSC 12, 259
Second round, 39, 41
PRM/NSC 15, 317
U.S. framework for, 16
PRM/NSC 27, 67
ASAT testing ban, 35
PRM/NSC 37, 86
Space Transportation System, 27
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 255
National Intelligence Estimate: NIE
Special Session on Disarmament, 495,
National liberation movements, 289
Tlatelolco Treaty, 417, 443
National Security Council (NSC):
Visits:
Ad hoc Group on fuel cycle
evaluation program, 330
Rome (Sept. 1978), 443
Ad Hoc Group on Nuclear
Tokyo (Feb. 1977), 320
ASAT arms control policy
Morocco, 471
Morokhov, Igor:
Comprehensive test ban, 182, 184
Biological weapons policy, 81
EURATOM and IAEA safeguards,
Chemical warfare policy studies, 61,
Comprehensive test ban, 180
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
Nuclear testing, 160, 163
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 165, 171,
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 397
Interagency Group on Nuclear
Tlatelolco Treaty, 428
Morrisey, Arthur:
Meetings, 397
Nuclear fuel, 358, 392
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Nuclear proliferation, 327, 356
Special Coordination Committee
Special Session on Disarmament, 479,
Tlatelolco Treaty, 419
Moss, Marvin, 345
National Security Decision Memoranda:
Mujezinovic, M., 477
NSDM–35, “United States Policy on
Munitions Control Office, 260, 263
Chemical Warfare Program and
Munitions List, 273
Bacteriological/Biological
Murphy, Frank, 159
Research Program,” 81
NSDM–333, “Enhanced Survivablility
of Critical US Military and
Mutual and Balance Force Reductions
Intelligence Space Systems,” 6, 8
Weapons Stockpile,” 154
Namibia, 242
NSDM–345, “U.S. Anti-Satellite
Napper, Larry C., 387
Capabilities,” 1, 6
Narain, Raj, 372
National Security Study Memoranda,
National Aeronautic and Space Agency
NSSM 157, “Review of United
States Position on Chemical
ASAT talks:
Weapons Prohibitions,” 61
Agenda for possible future rounds,
National Seismic Stations (NSS). See
Seismic stations.
References are to document numbers

National Technical Means (NTM) of
Niger, 342
Nigeria:
Comprehensive test ban, 144, 214
NPT withdrawal by, 211
Natural gas stimulation, 183
Nuclear proliferation, 359, 494
Natural Resources Defense Council
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
(NRDC), 333
NAVSTAR Global Positioning System,
Nimeiri, Gaafar, 263
Noble, Steven V., 460
Navy, U.S. Department of, 161
Nogueira Batista, Paulo, 403, 433
Negative security assurances:
Non-governmental organizations
CIA paper discussion of, 385
(NGOs), 475
Special Coordination Committee
Non-proliferation Alternatives
Assessment Program, 395
Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) (1968),
(see also NPT Review Conference
Nepal, 359, 471
Article I, 318
Nerve gas, 82
Article II, 318
Netherlands:
Article III, 348
CCD, 494
Article IV:
Chemical weapons, 76
Criticism of nuclear-weapons states
Comprehensive test ban, 144
for failure to follow, 225, 385,
Genetic engineering, 89
Text of, 318, 342
Special Session on Disarmament, 474,
U.S.–FRG disagreements on
interpretation of, 333
As contentious in NPT Review
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Conference, 388
Cooperation (1958), 347
Soviet position, 387
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
Text of, 477
to, 463
As central legal argument against
Neutron bomb (see also Enhanced
proliferation, 327
radiation (ER) weapons), 20, 28,
As creating space for negotiating
disarmament, 477
New weapons systems ban (proposed),
Chile as signatory to, 436
CIA paper on, 368
Comprehensive test ban seen as
New Zealand:
Biological Weapons Convention
Cuban position, 421
Review Conference, 119
Chemical weapons, 76
Impact on sensitive nuclear exports
Comprehensive test ban, 144
Conventional arms transfers, 268,
Increase in number of adherents to,
Seismic stations in, 232
Italian position, 371
Special Session on Disarmament, 501
Japanese ratification of, 320
Newman, Paul, 499
Non-signers of, 327, 364
Newsom, Eric, 162
Nuclear fuel, 236
Permanent consultative committee
for overseeing of, 119
Niederste-Ostholt, Gisela, 417
Portuguese ratification of, 364
References are to document numbers

Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) (1968),
NPT Review Conference (Venice,
(see also NPT Review Conference
1980)—Continued
(Venice, 1980))—Continued
CTB working group in CD as
Principal foci of, 146
Prioritization for signers of, 488
Review Conference (Geneva, 1975),
Disagreement with U.S. positions
Review Conference (Geneva, 1985),
Failure to complete CTB before, 232,
South African accession to, 364
Israeli nuclear weapons development
U.S. commitments under, 498
as issue in, 386
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 348
Latin American preparations for, 450
Withdrawal from, 211
Nooter, Robert H., 489
NPT as supported at, 391, 393
North Africa, 304
Nuclear power, 393
North Atlantic Council (NAC), 162, 319,
Nuclear testing moratorium, 386
Pakistan as issue in, 375, 385
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Progress in CTB before, 240, 248
Reports on, 386
Results of, 391, 393
SALT Treaty ratification as advocated
Comprehensive test ban, 143
in, 391
Conventional arms transfers, 265,
South African nuclear weapons
CSCE preparations in, 476
development as issue in, 385, 386
Disarmament Experts meetings, 65,
Trilateral talks at, 387
U.S. diplomatic actions in advance of,
Negative security assurances, 486,
Nuclear accident reporting, 481, 486,
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 107
Special Session on Disarmament, 473,
Nuclear experts meeting (Paris, June
U.S. ASAT capabilities, 46
Nuclear Free Zones (see also Tlatelolco
U.S. conventional arms transfers to
Treaty):
As SSOD initiative, 478
U.S. nuclear umbrella, 146
In Africa, 386
Norton, Richard, 122
Norway:
Chemical weapons, 76
In Middle East, 386, 501
Chemical weapons use in Asia, 125
Nuclear fuel (see also Nuclear
Comprehensive test ban, 144
reprocessing):
Nuclear cooperation with the United
As restricted to IAEA-approved
States, 372
countries, 236
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Assurance of access to, 358, 394
Australian exports of, 383
Brazilian imports from the United
States of, 424
Novak, Robert, 440
Cutoff and transfer agreements:
NPT Review Conference (Venice, 1980):
Article VI as contentious in, 388
As other states’ initiatives, 496
Contingency guidance requested for,
Continuation of CTB talks and, 244
References are to document numbers

Nuclear fuel (see also Nuclear
Nuclear power—Continued
reprocessing)—Continued
NPT Review Conference
Cutoff and transfer agreements—
understandings on, 393
Continued
Reprocessing as unnecessary for, 432
Shifting U.S. policies on, 325, 379
DOE position, 484
Unpopularity of, 342
U.S. technical cooperation on
Special Coordination Committee
discussion of, 488
Yugoslav/Pakistani UN resolution
Verification for, 491
for peaceful uses of, 359
European transfers of, 396, 424
Nuclear Power Issues and Choices (report),
Exports to Europe of, 362
For nuclear-powered Naval vessels,
Nuclear proliferation (see also French
nuclear sales to Pakistan;
Fuel bank for, 358, 364
Full-scope safeguards; Latin
Mexican imports of, 449
America; Nuclear reprocessing):
NRDC request for denial of sales to
Additional conditions for new
FRG of, 333
nuclear cooperation agreements,
Options for augmenting supply of,
Argentine-IAEA negotiations, 439,
Parity pricing for, 358
Retransfers of, 339
Belgian position, 377
Sales of, 319, 371
Brazilian policy under Figueiredo
administration, 461
British position, 377
Storage of foreign spent fuel, 343,
Carter’s policy statement on, 331, 333,
Suspension of shipment to India of,
Comprehensive test ban as value
Transfer of weapons-grade material
Disarmament as affected by, 477
Efforts against, 327
Nuclear materials and equipment. See
Facilitating factors for, 327
Germany, Federal Republic of,
French policy on, 356, 377
nuclear sales to Brazil; Latin
FRG nuclear sales to Argentina, 462,
America.
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act (NNPA)
Full-scope safeguards for prevention
Canadian heavy water production
technology exports to Argentina,
Guidance for U.S. statements in
Special Session on Disarmament
FRG–U.S. discussions of, 384
on, 494
India as affected by, 211
HEU as dangerous for, 330, 396
Passage and signing of, 364, 366
In the post-INFCE era:
Requirements of, 395
Policy Review Committee meeting
U.S. non-proliferation objectives as
affected by, 373
Smith’s exploration with
Nuclear power:
industrialized countries, 375,
As status symbol, 342
Divisions in U.S. attitudes toward,
Smith’s paper on, 381, 383
State Department status report on,
French program for, 349
Latin America, 416
U.S.-Argentine discussions of, 466
References are to document numbers

Nuclear proliferation (see also French
Nuclear proliferation (see also French
nuclear sales to Pakistan;
nuclear sales to Pakistan;
Full-scope safeguards; Latin
Full-scope safeguards; Latin
America; Nuclear reprocessing)—
America; Nuclear reprocessing)—
Continued
Continued
In the post-INFCE era—Continued
U.S.-British discussions of, 395
U.S.–FRG discussions of, 384
U.S. controls for, 430
U.S. strategy for, 379
U.S.-European differences on, 365
Vance’s message to Franc¸ois-Poncet
on, 378
U.S.–FRG discussions of, 395
International restraints for slowing
U.S.-Japanese discussions of, 344, 345,
of, 323
U.S. policy toward:
Mondale-Fukuda talks on, 320
FRG position, 371
Motives for acquiring nuclear
History of, 396
weapons, 327
Policy Review Committee review
NSC Intelligence Report on, 327
of, 317
Nuclear experts meeting (Paris, June
Shifting of, 381
Smith’s final report on, 395
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 348, 360
Nuclear testing for stockpile
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288, 411,
reliability, effect on, 188
Outlook for, 327
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 332
Pakistani-U.S. talks on, 372
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 332
Vance’s message to Azeredo da
Peaceful nuclear explosions and, 145
Silveira, 398
Policy Review Committee meetings
Vance’s message to de Guiringaud
on, 321
Vertical, 400
Proliferation chains, 327
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Quadripartite discussions of, 326
Regional equilibrium for prevention
Nuclear fuel access, 358
Nuclear Non-proliferation Act as
Renegotiation of agreements on, 323,
guidance for, 366
Reviewing for export license by, 430
Restraints on, 326
U.S. nuclear fuel exports to Brazil,
Gerard Smith as negotiator on:
French position, 364
U.S. reactor part exports to
FRG position, 333, 342
Argentina, 470
London Suppliers Group
Nuclear reprocessing (see also Nuclear
expansion and, 335
fuel; Nuclear proliferation):
Soviet position, 367
Alternative types of, 346, 364
As unnecessary for nuclear power,
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 332
Soviet position, 363
Storage for foreign spent fuel, 343,
By Australia, 369
Suspension of fuel shipments to
India, 342
By France:
U.S.-Argentine discussions of, 357,
French position, 342, 365
Of Japanese spent fuel, 341
References are to document numbers

Nuclear reprocessing (see also Nuclear
Nuclear testing (see also Comprehensive
fuel; Nuclear proliferation)—
test ban; Nuclear tests; Nuclear
Continued
weapons)—Continued
By France—Continued
Augmented Nuclear Test Program
U.S.-French discussion of, 324, 349,
U.S. policy differences over, 328
By France, 146
By fuel cycle evaluation program,
By South Africa, 211
By Italy, 334, 342
By Japan:
Thermal recycling, 384
Calibration shots, 210
U.S. agreements on, 395
Carter-Callaghan discussions of, 191,
U.S.-Japanese talks on:
Detection thresholds, 189, 202
Digging of deep hole for, 254
U.S. planning for, 352
During comprehensive test ban, 191,
U.S. possibilities for regulation of,
By South Africa, 325
By Soviet Union, 342
By the United Kingdom, 341, 342,
Geological and geophysical data
needed for accurate yield
Carter’s decision on, 340
estimates, 243
For energy production, 395, 396
Hundred-pound limit on, 208, 210
Policy Review Committee meeting
In accordance with TTBT, 173
JCS position, 148
Presidential flexibility over controls
Progress on restraints on transfers of
Low-level, 205
facilities for, 364
Regional equilibrium in, 426, 429
Moratoria on:
Safeguards for, 325, 328
British position, 146, 233
U.S. budget increases for, 396
British-U.S. discussions of, 233
NPT Review Conference call for,
U.S. right of veto over EURATOM
Soviet acceptance for peaceful
nuclear explosions, 175, 176,
Nuclear Suppliers Group. See London
Suppliers Group.
Soviet instructions on, 163
Nuclear Test Monitoring Working
Soviet position, 146, 160
Group, 246
U.S. proposal for, 152, 206
Nuclear Test Moratorium (1958), 206,
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 165
Of neutron bomb functions, 161
Nuclear testing (see also Comprehensive
test ban; Nuclear tests; Nuclear
Operation CRESSET, 172, 173
weapons):
Operation FULCRUM II, 155, 161
ACDA position, 172
Operation GUARDIAN, 256
Asymmetry in, 145, 203
Operation QUICKSILVER II, 235
References are to document numbers

Nuclear testing (see also Comprehensive
Nuclear weapons (see also Bombs;
test ban; Nuclear tests; Nuclear
Enhanced radiation (ER) weapons;
weapons)—Continued
Nuclear testing)—Continued
Permitted by Limited Test Ban
Research and development of, 146,
Treaty, 140
Quotas for, 188
Stockpile plan, 483
Resumption after treaty expiration of,
Stockpile reliability of:
After five years, 213
SCC meetings on, 253, 254
Augmented Test Program’s
Soviet de´marche on, 243
contribution to, 249, 256
Underground, 140
British position, 192
U.S. de´marche on, 243
Carter-Callaghan discussions of,
Yield assessment issues, 254, 255
Nuclear tests:
BACKSTAY, 173
BEAFORT, 154, 161
DANBO, 154, 161
OSTP review of, 230
SCC meetings, 197
REBLOCHON, 154
SCC reports on, 146, 190
SCANTLING, 154
Surveillance for, 206
Nuclear weapons (see also Bombs;
Under comprehensive test ban, 146,
Enhanced radiation (ER) weapons;
Nuclear testing):
NUCLEBRAS, 403
Argentine development of, 415, 431
Nye, Joseph S.:
As status symbol, 401, 416
Banning in space of, 39
Brazilian development of, 443
Chilean development of, 415
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 166
Definition of, 327
Tlatelolco Treaty, 429
Detonation in space of, 6, 39
Independent European deterrent,
Oakley, Phyllis, 429
possibility of, 143
Oakley, Robert, 351
Indian development of, 378
Oberdorfer, Don, 393
Obninsk, 237
Obukhov, A.A., 487
Oduber Quı´ros, Daniel, 304
No-first-use discussions, 3
Office of Management and Budget
Non-use against non-nuclear states,
ASAT arms control as seen by, 9
Pakistani development of:
As NPT review conference issue,
Conventional arms transfers, 287
Ethiopian grant military aid program,
Motives for, 327
elimination of, 260
Status report on, 376
Nuclear fuel access, 358
U.S.–FRG talks on, 384
Nuclear fuel supply, 392
U.S. national security as impacted
Nuclear proliferation, 317
by, 393
U.S.-Pakistani talks on, 372
U.S. position, 373, 378
Special Session on Disarmament, 488
Physics of, 249, 256
Office of Science and Technology Policy
Politicization of third-world
programs for, 394
ASAT arms control as seen by, 9
Production halt, 482
ASAT talks, 43
References are to document numbers

Office of Science and Technology Policy
On-site inspections (OSI) (see also
(OSTP)—Continued
Comprehensive test ban)—
Augmented Nuclear Test Program,
Continued
SCC discussions of, 180
Comprehensive test ban, 180, 230
Technical characteristics of
Nuclear fuel access, 358
equipment for, 247
Nuclear testing, 254
U.S. proposal for, 184
Seismic devices, 190, 230
Withdrawal from CTB Treaty for
Space Advisory Group report on
refusal of, 184
ASAT, 8
O’Neill, Thomas P. “Tip,” 115
Special Session on Disarmament, 492
Onkelinx, Andre´ J. B., 474
Stockpile reliability, 230
Operation CRESSET, 172, 173
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Operation FULCRUM II, 155, 161
Operation GUARDIAN, 256
ASAT arms control as seen by, 7, 9
Operation QUICKSILVER II, 235
ASAT talks:
Oplinger, Jerry:
Agenda for possible future rounds,
Satellite protection, 43
Heavy water production technology
Second round, 39, 41
exports, 456
Conventional arms transfers, 301
Seismic stations, 248
Oralloy, 188
Ogarkov, Nikolai V.:
Orbital Bombardment Systems, 6
Chemical weapons, 101
Organization for Security and
Comprehensive test ban, 236
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), 138
Conventional arms transfers, 309
Organization of American States (OAS),
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), 329
Oil, 372
Ormsby, Robert, 273
Oksenberg, Michael, 151
Ortiz de Rozas, Carlos, 359, 501
OLADE (Latin American Energy
Organization), 416, 432
Overmeyer, Alan, 122
On-site inspections (OSI) (see also
Owada, Hisashi, 320, 329
Comprehensive test ban):
ACDA position, 180, 196
Owen, Henry D.:
Aerial photography, 247
Argentine-U.S. relations, 468
As major Soviet issue in CTB
Comprehensive test ban, 242
negotiations, 189
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 380
British position, 184
Expenses incurred during, 237
For chemical weapons agreements,
Immunity for inspectors, 237
Pace, Robert, 138
Lessening of U.S.-Soviet
disagreement on, 223
Pakistan (see also French nuclear sales to
Limited technical value of, 184
Pakistan):
Mandatory vs. voluntary, 166, 175,
Comprehensive test ban, 145, 146,
Political value of, 163
Conventional arms transfers, 268
Position-fixing, 223
References are to document numbers

Pakistan (see also French nuclear sales to
Pastor, Carlos W., 453
Pastor, Robert A.:
Pakistan)—Continued
Argentine-U.S. relations, 468
European nuclear fuel transfers to,
Conventional arms transfers, 266, 288
French relations with, 350
Indian relations with, 347
Non-acceptance of full-scope
Pauls, Rolf F., 143, 162
safeguards by, 395
Paye, Jean-Claude, 355
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318, 320,
Peaceful biological research, 119
Peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs) (see
Nuclear power, 359
also Comprehensive test ban;
Nuclear proliferation:
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE)
French-Pakistani talks on, 356, 357
Indian arms race with, 347, 466
U.S. meeting with UN Delegates
As violation of Limited Test Ban
on, 359
Treaty, 145, 183
Nuclear reprocessing by, 263, 320,
Carter-Gromyko discussions of, 170,
Nuclear weapons development by:
As NPT Review Conference issue,
Freezing of device design, 165
Indian uses of, 166, 190
Motives for, 327
Panama Canal’s replacement using,
Status report on, 376
U.S.–FRG talks on, 384
Problems with, 157
U.S. national security as impacted
Registration and measurement of
by, 393
explosive characteristics, 146
U.S.-Pakistani talks on, 372
Tlatelolco Treaty’s language on, 423
U.S. position, 373, 378
Under comprehensive test ban:
Refugees in Afghanistan from, 110
Accommodation of, 145, 147
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
As problem for verification, 146,
U.S. military and economic aid to,
DOD position, 167, 169
ERDA opposition to, 160
Palestine, 269
Soviet protocol in, 182
Palestine Liberation Organization
Trilateral negotiations:
(PLO), 269
British position, 171
PNEs as obstacle to agreement
Palmer, Mark:
in, 165
ASAT, 58
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
Chemical weapons, 122, 139
NPT Review Conference, 387
Seismic stations, 250, 251
U.S. negotiating instructions, 170
Sverdlovsk incident, 113, 137
U.S. proposed strategy for, 166,
Panama Canal:
Verification as obstacle to
agreement on PNEs, 146, 195
PNEs used in constructing
Weakening of Soviet position on,
replacement of, 153, 183
Ratification of treaties on, 434
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Soviet position, 421
U.S. public opinion on treaty for, 499
U.S. program for, 145
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
U.S. report for Soviets on experience
Parity pricing for nuclear fuel, 358
with, 183, 186
References are to document numbers

Peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs) (see
Plutonium—Continued
also Comprehensive test ban;
Argentine production of, 381, 443
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE)
As weapons-usable material, 336, 396
Treaty (1976))—Continued
Coprocessing, 344, 353
U.S.-Soviet cooperative program for,
Economical use of, 188
Exports of, 352, 353
U.S.-Soviet exploratory talks on, 162
IAEA study on storage of, 377
In spent fuel, 325, 327
International control of, 373
Warehousing of devices for, 146
Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE)
Multinational spent-fuel storage, 323,
National stockpiles of, 395
Peck, Robert, 122
Nitrate, 336
Pell, Claiborne dB., 269
Nuclear laboratories officials’
Percy, Charles H., 269, 375
meeting with Carter, 206
Pakistani reprocessing plant as
Pe´rez Rodriguez, Carlos Andres:
non-producer of, 350
Reprocessing:
Conventional arms transfers, 304
Full-scope safeguards, 430, 432
Geisel meetings with, 432
By the United States, 322
Policy Review Committee meeting
Special Session on Disarmament, 492
on, 338
Perry, Stephanie, 471
PRM on, 317, 328
Soviet production of, estimated, 392
U.S. exports of, 354
Peru:
U.S. push for agreement on controls
Argentine research reactor exports to,
on, 376
Ayacucho Declaration, 288
Polaris Improvement Program (UK),
Bolivia, relations with, 288
Conventional arms transfers, 263,
Policy Review Committee:
Afghanistan, 253
Nuclear proliferation, 359
Approaches to ASAT arms control, 9
Call for creation of, 2
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Chemical weapons, 68
Conventional arms transfers, 259,
Tlatelolco Treaty, 419
Criteria for meetings of, 27
Meetings:
Phosgene, 82
Pierrelatte gaseous diffusion plant, 365
Pisarev, I., 47, 48
Pitcairn Island, 251
Placer, Alejandro, 466
Platt, Alan, 296
Plutonium:
Applications for export of, 330
References are to document numbers

Policy Review Committee—Continued
Presidential Review Memoranda—
Continued
PRM/NSC 12—Continued
Nuclear reprocessing, 338
Text of, 259
PRM/NSC 12, 268
PRM/NSC 23, 5
PRM/NSC 23:
Political parties:
Approaches to ASAT arms control,
Democratic (U.S.), 140
ASAT arms control decisions based
Labour (UK), 229, 308
on, 18
Nationalists (Argentina), 429
ASAT test ban, 36
Palestine Liberation Organization
Issuance of, 2
(PLO), 269
Issues paper prepared by
Republican (U.S.), 499
Sandinistas (Nicaragua), 450
Policy Review Committee
Porcupine effect, 327
discussion of, 5
Powell, Jody, 201
Press, Frank:
Power and Principle (Brzezinski), 329
ASAT capabilities, 2, 24
ASAT report from Office of Science
Presidential Directives:
and Technology Policy, 8
On ASAT operational testing, 23, 24,
ASAT weapons test ban, 34, 35
On comprehensive test ban
Comprehensive test ban:
(proposed), 210
Carter meeting with nuclear
On conventional arms transfers, 270,
laboratory officials on, 206
On-site inspection quotas, 180
SCC work program for discussions
PD/NSC–26, 483
of, 164
PD/NSC–28, 81
Trilateral negotiations, U.S.
instructions for, 219
Nuclear proliferation, 381, 382
PD/NSC–37, 27
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
PD/NSC–39, 32
PD/NSC–28, 81
PD/NSC–59, 138
PD/NSC–37, 27
Presidential Review Committee, 190,
PD/NSC–39, 32
Presidential Review Memoranda:
PD/NSC–45, 38
International restraints on nuclear
PRM/NSC 23, 5
proliferation (in process), 323
Seismic stations, 196, 248
PRM/NSC 10, 15
Special Coordination Committee
PRM/NSC 12:
meetings:
Ad Hoc Interagency Group options
ASAT weapons and talks, 17, 29,
paper, 269
Awaiting the review of, 260, 262,
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
Policy Review Committee meeting
on, 268
Seismic stations, 248
References are to document numbers

Press, Frank—Continued
Reactors (see also Breeder reactors;
Special Session on Disarmament, 485,
Tokai nuclear plant)—Continued
Sverdlovsk incident, 112
Savannah River, 392, 484
Project Plowshare, 157
Public opinion, 117, 499
Pueblo Army Depot, 124
Valindaba (South Africa), 364
Windscale, 336, 338
Reams, Peter, 446
REBLOCHON nuclear test, 154
Purex, 392
Red Cross, International Committee of
Pustay, John:
the, 106
Chemical weapons, 104, 139
Reddy, Leo, 63, 321
Comprehensive test ban, 252
Reduced Enrichment for Research and
Nuclear testing, 253, 254
Test Reactors (RERTR) program,
Sverdlovsk incident, 112, 129
U.S.-Argentine relations, 468
Refugees, 110
Regional equilibrium, 426, 429
Pym, Francis, 232
Reinhardt, John E., 497
Reis, Robert, 494
Quinlan, Michael, 232
Rentschler, Jim, 104
Quintana, Enrique, 420
Research and development (R&D):
As augmented nuclear testing
program emphasis, 256
RA–6 reactor (Argentina), 459
For ASAT weapons, 46
Rabin, Yitzhak, 267
On alternate energy, 427
Radar, 263
On chemical weapons, 75
Radar ocean reconnaissance, 4
On co-processing, 354
Radioactivity levels, 145
On LMFBRs, 334, 337
Ramee, Mark, 152
On nuclear weapons, 146, 359
Ramey Air Force Base, 406
On reprocessing for energy
Raphel, Arnold, 240
production, 395, 396
Rathjens, George, 375
Rhodes, John, 115
Re-entry vehicles, 146
Rhodesia, 233
Reactors (see also Breeder reactors;
Ridgway, Rozanne L., 33
Tokai nuclear plant):
Angra I (Brazil), 424, 461
Rochline, Robert, 152
Rockwell International, 263
Becker nozzle process for, 412
Rocky Mountain Arsenal (RMA), 123,
Cienfuegos (Cuba), 465
Hanford, 392
Rodriguez, Carlos Rafael, 421
Heavy water (HWRs), 336, 346
High-temperature, 412
Rogers, Bernard W., 220
La Reina (Chile), 436
Romberg, Alan, 282
Rometsch, Rudolf, 360, 363
Lo Aguirre (Chile), 436
Rondon, Fernando, 429
Purex, 392
Roosevelt Roads Naval Station, 406
RA–6 (Argentina), 459
Research (Bolivian), 466
Rowden, Marcus A., 330
Research (Uruguay), 466
Rowe, John, 293, 299
References are to document numbers

Satellites (see also Anti-Satellite (ASAT)
weapons)—Continued
Ruhfus, Juergen, 417
U.S. dependence on, 6
Rumsfeld, Donald, 6, 61
Saudi Arabia:
Ruser, Claus W., 433, 466
Comprehensive test ban, 211
Rush-Bagot Amendment, 413
Conventional arms transfers, 263,
Rust, Dean, 348
Savannah River reactors, 392, 484
Sa, Calmon da, 427, 433
Sawhill, John, 381
Sadovsky, Mikhail A., 237
Sayre, Robert M., 455
Salisbury, William R., 348, 367
SCANTLING nuclear test, 154
Salmon, Charles, 448
SCC meetings on comprehensive test
Salmon, William, 467
ban:
Sanders, Cameron, 122
Changing approaches to issues in
negotiations, 252
Sarbanes, Paul S., 269
Entry into force of CTB, 205
Sardenberg, Ronaldo Mota, 433
Satellites (see also Anti-Satellite (ASAT)
weapons):
Guidance for talks on, 228
Attacks by, 48
Low-level testing, 205
Co-orbital jamming, 8
Mandatory vs. voluntary inspections,
Hostile acts on:
Agreement on, 52, 56
On-site inspections, 180
Soviet position, 51, 54
Special Coordination Committee
Preliminary review of issues in, 141,
PRM/NSC 16, 141
Review conference proposals, 227
Interference with:
Proposals on, 50
U.S. negotiating position on, 160
Verification capabilities, 163
Work program for discussion of, 164
International verification agency for
Scheinman, Lawrence, 423
(proposal), 501
Scheinman, Louis, 345
Launching systems for, 28
Schirmer, Kitty, 354, 381
Monitoring of attacks on, 31
Schlesinger, James A.:
NAVSTAR, 6
Clinch River reactor funding, 322
Of the Chinese People’s Republic, 42,
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter meeting with nuclear
laboratory officials on, 206
Reconnaissance, 6
DOE position, 197
Fixed duration treaty, 198
Skylab, 28
JCS position, 220
Space shuttle:
Non-proliferation value of, 211
Nuclear testing during, 191
On-site inspection quotas, 180
As military vehicle, 58
Permitted experiments under, 202
As satellite launcher, 28, 51
Review conference proposals, 227,
Sputnik I, 15
Tactical use of, 6
SCC discussion of, 205, 207
Trajectory changing of, 51
Unlawful, 33
Three year approach, 217
References are to document numbers

Schlesinger, James A.—Continued
Seager, Drake, 159
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Trilateral negotiations, Instructions
Security Assistance Authorization for
Heavy water production technology
Seignious, George M., II:
exports, 452
Japanese processing of spent nuclear
Chemical weapons, 101
fuel, 344
Comprehensive test ban, 231, 236
Nuclear fuel access, 358
Conventional arms transfers, 307,
Heavy water production technology
Nuclear testing:
exports, 452
Augmented program for, 230, 235
Nuclear proliferation, In the
Detection thresholds, 202
post-INFCE era, 382
During comprehensive test ban,
Nuclear testing, Augmented program
for, 235
For FY 1978, 173
Special Coordination Committee
Soviet, 238, 239
meetings, 228
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Seismic stations (see also
Comprehensive test ban):
PRM/NSC 15, 317
Ad hoc working group on, 247, 255
Special Coordination Committee
Analysis of contribution of, 164
And Senate ratification of
Special Session on Disarmament, 478,
comprehensive test ban, 212
Components of, 252
Storage for spent nuclear fuel, 364
Development of, 199
Schmidt, Helmut:
Chemical weapons, 87, 139
Conventional arms transfers, 299
Funding for, 230
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil:
In Alaska, 241, 245
Carter-Schmidt discussions of, 412,
In Australia, 226, 232
In Canada, 226
Message exchanges with Carter on,
In New Zealand, 232
In the Falkland Islands, 251
Mondale-Schmidt discussions of,
In United Kingdom and dependent
territories:
Smith’s discussions of, 401, 426,
Heavy water technology exports to
Financing of, 244
Argentina, 447
Non-CTB benefits arising from
Southern Hemisphere stations,
possible, 245, 248
Special Session on Disarmament, 491,
SCC discussions of, 248
Soviet position, 226, 237
Tlatelolco Treaty, 417, 425
U.S. de´marche on, 240
Schrage, Barbara, 226
Schroeder, Patricia, 123, 124
Schueler, Manfred, 417
Joint cooperative development
Schultze, Charles L., 259, 271
proposal on, 245, 247
Scowcroft, Brent, 61
Seabrook, 342
Limitations of, 202
References are to document numbers

Seismic stations (see also
Senate, U.S.—Continued
Comprehensive test ban)—
SALT ratification—Continued
Continued
NPT Review Conference call for,
Loan to Soviets of, 245
Numbers of:
CIA position, 222
Soviet nuclear testing’s effect on,
ERDA position, 160
Interagency study on selection of,
U.S.-Soviet observation of pending
ratification, 394
Presidential decision on, 208
U.S. support for, 138
SCC discussion of, 205, 210
Soviet nuclear testing, 238
U.S. position, 167, 250
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 185, 212,
Ownership of, 180
Readiness for installation of, 206
Warnke testimony before, 202
Senior Review Group (SRG), 61
Sennewald, Robert, 293
Sensitive weapons, 268
Tamper-proof, 162
Sergeant, William, 430
U.S. negotiating position on, 170
U.S. prototypes, 245, 252
Seymour, Jack, 471
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 165, 182
Shaba, 357
Seismic Verification Agreement
SELA (Economic System of Latin
Shankle, Arthur, 341
America and the Caribbean), 416,
Shchukin, A.N., 30
Shelepin, Alexander N., 449
Seletsky, Aleksander S., 421
Shinn, William, 58
Senate, U.S.:
Shoesmith, Thomas P., 320, 329
Comprehensive test ban:
Shulman, Marshall D.:
DOE position, 196
On-site inspection quotas, 180
Comprehensive test ban, 168, 176
Ratification provision for extension
Conventional arms transfers, 278, 282
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Seismic stations and ratification of,
Shumate, John, 62
Conventional arms transfer, 269
Siberia, 117
Foreign Relations Committee:
Siegel, Jeffrey, 429
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
Sievering, Nelson F., 338
Sievering, Nicholas, 348
Sverdlovsk incident, 112
Significant combat equipment, 261, 270,
Tlatelolco Treaty ratification
hearings, 440, 464
Silveira, Antoˆnio Francisco Azeredo da:
Carter-Geisel meetings, 433
IAEA safeguards, 384
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 397, 398,
Ratification hearings on Threshold
Test Ban Treaty, 158
Rosalyn Carter meeting with, 415
Resolution 405, 127
Tlatelolco Treaty, 434
SALT ratification:
Simokaitis, Frank, 59
Simonsen, Mario H., 433
Singapore, 263, 359
Failure of, 257
Singh, Charan, 372
References are to document numbers

Smith, Gerard C. “Gerry”—Continued
Skylab, 28
Slipchenko, Victor R., 223
Nuclear Non-proliferation Act’s
Sloane, Robert, 430, 448
signing, 366
Slocombe, Walter B.:
Nuclear power, 393
ASAT arms control policy
Nuclear proliferation:
discussions, 10
Final report on U.S. policy on, 395
ASAT talks:
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 401,
Dismantling of Soviet systems, 40
Lasers, 40
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 377,
PD–45 instructions for, 40
Special Coordination Committee
Smith as negotiator on:
French position, 364
Suspension of testing during, 28, 40
FRG position, 333, 342
Third round, 53
London Suppliers Group
U.S. framework for, 16
expansion and, 335
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 3
Soviet position, 367
Comprehensive test ban:
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 332
JCS position, 178
U.S.-Argentine discussions of, 466,
Lack of progress in negotiations
for, 257
U.S.-French discussions of, 347, 349
Proposed strategy for trilateral
U.S.-South African discussions of,
negotiations, 167
SCC discussion of, 252
U.S. strategy for, 379
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 168
Conventional arms transfers, 281
Nuclear proliferation, 381
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Argentine accession to, 419, 422,
Soviet high-yield nuclear testing, 254
Special Coordination Committee
Brazilian accession to, 419
meetings:
Carter-Schmidt discussions of, 417
Vance visit to Brazil and Argentina,
Comprehensive test ban, 228, 252
Conventional arms transfers, 281
Smith, Jack, 122
Funding for binary weapons, 139
Smith, William Y.:
Nuclear testing, 254
Chemical weapons, 68, 96
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Comprehensive test ban, 167, 205,
Conventional arms transfers:
Coproduction limits, 268
Dollar volume ceilings, 268
Smith, Emery, 423
For new systems, 268
Smith, Gerard C. “Gerry”:
FY 1978 program, 286
EURATOM and IAEA safeguards,
Of sensitive weapons, 268
Policy Review Committee meetings
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 356,
U.S.-Soviet talks on, 294, 295
Heavy water technology exports, 447,
Policy Review Committee meetings,
References are to document numbers

Smith, William Y.—Continued
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—
PRM/NSC 23, 5
Continued
Special Coordination Committee
U.S. technology transfers to Soviets
meetings:
restricted because of, 245, 246
Soviet Union (see also Conventional
Chemical weapons, 96
arms transfers (CAT), U.S.-Soviet
Comprehensive test ban, 205, 207,
talks on; Sverdlovsk incident):
Argentina, relations with, 468
Conventional arms transfers, 294,
As London Suppliers Group member,
Special Session on Disarmament, 488,
As superpower, 60
Sokolov, O., 3, 64
ASAT talks:
Solana Morales, Fernando, 414
First round, 33
Solar energy, 427
Interest and objectives in, 60
Solomon, Anthony M., 266
Interference with satellites, 37, 47,
Sommer, Peter, 232
Somoza Debayle, Anastasio, 450
Questions around test bans, 41, 47
South Africa, Republic of:
Soviet comments at, 47
Apartheid, 144
ASAT Treaty, 60
ASAT weapons testing, 33, 58
Conventional arms transfers, Soviet
Biological weapons, 85, 111
position, 289
Biological Weapons Convention
Full-scope safeguards for, 364, 395
NPT accession by, 364
Chemical weapons, 82
Bilateral consultations on limitation
of, 61
Nuclear weapons development by:
Draft treaty on, 69, 73
As NPT Review Conference issue,
Foreign policy as affected by, 283
Joint initiative on, 77
French position, 376
Joint U.S.-Soviet statements, 98
Prohibition of, 63
Testing, 211
Slowdown, 128, 136
U.S. national security as impacted
Soviet Civil Defense against, 85
by, 393
Soviet foreign policy as affected by
negotiations on, 283
Uranium exports to, 325
Soviet position, 82
South Asia, 290, 304
Soviet superiority in, 68, 69
South Yemen, 303
Stockpiles of, 94
Southeast Asia. See Cambodia; Laos.
U.S.-Soviet working group, 65, 76,
Southern Africa (see also South Africa,
Use in Asia of, 104, 132
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan:
Arms control negotiations as affected
Work on CW convention in CD,
Cuban rejection of Tlatelolco Treaty
Chinese People’s Republic, relations
and, 465
with, 94
NATO discussion of, 107
Civil Defense, 85
SALT II Treaty ratification as affected
Comprehensive test ban:
by, 251
CD working group on, 126
Soviet response to U.S. measures
Chinese People’s republic
against, 468
U.S. public opinion on, 117
Fixed duration treaty, 221
References are to document numbers

Soviet Union (see also Conventional
Soviet Union (see also Conventional
arms transfers (CAT), U.S.-Soviet
arms transfers (CAT), U.S.-Soviet
talks on; Sverdlovsk incident)—
talks on; Sverdlovsk incident)—
Continued
Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Nuclear testing—Continued
Soviet and U.S. de´marches on, 243
Peaceful nuclear explosions under:
Nuclear weapons transit rights, 446,
Soviet acceptance of moratorium,
OPANAL, 402, 449
Soviet protocol, 182
Pakistani nuclear weapons
Weakening of position on, 171,
development, 376
Panama Canal, 421
Peaceful nuclear explosions:
Soviet expression of interest in,
Cooperative program with United
States on, 146
Trilateral negotiations, 174, 177
Soviet acceptance of moratorium,
U.S.-Soviet exploratory discussions
(June 1977), 162
Soviet protocol, 182
Verification of, 163
Conventional arms transfers (see also
Conventional arms transfers
(CAT), U.S.-Soviet talks on):
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
In FY 1977, 300
Multilateral restraints on, 283
Tlatelolco Treaty Protocol II, 428
Soviet paper on, 315
Tlatelolco Treaty Protocol II
To Africa, 283
adherence:
To Middle East, 283
As requirement for entry into force
of treaty, 419
U.S. talks on, 303
Brezhnev’s message on, 435, 492
Cuba, relations with, 418
Cuban influence on, 418
Czechoslovakia invasion (1968), 6
OPANAL position, 402
Enhanced radiation (ER) weapons,
Possibility of, 434
Reservations on, 446, 449
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 348
U.S. position, 478
GDR recognition by, 146
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 348, 360
Heavy water technology exports to
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Argentina, 448, 468
Cooperation, 363
ICBM test notifications by, 58
U.S. relations with:
Israeli-Egyptian negotiations, 20
Carter-Brezhnev message
Limited Test Ban Treaty violations
exchanged on, 142, 221
by, 148
Construction of U.S. embassy
Non-proliferation Treaty, 348, 387
Moscow, 138
NPT Review Conference, 386, 387,
CTB Treaty as benefit for, 146
Irradiation of U.S. embassy
Moscow, 131
Nuclear reprocessing plants, 342
Space hostilities, 29, 31
Space systems, 6
Acceptance for peaceful nuclear
Space Transportation System, 27
References are to document numbers

Special Coordination Committee (SCC)
Special Coordination Committee (SCC)
(see also SCC meetings on
(see also SCC meetings on
comprehensive test ban)—
comprehensive test ban):
Continued
ASAT talks:
Meetings—Continued
Dismantling of Soviet systems, 34,
1979:
Protection of satellites, 44
July 12, 311
Text of agreement at, 34
1980:
Treaty on, 16, 17
U.S.-Soviet talks on, 281
Chemical weapons:
Formation of CD Working Group
on, 104
June 10, 59
Funding for binary weapons
July 2, 252
July 9, 129
Reviews of U.S. policy on, 67, 86,
July 29, 135
U.S. military options for, 68
Sept. 15, 253
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 485,
Negative security assurances, 486,
Interagency Committee on Public
NPT Review Conference, 386, 388,
Diplomacy and Disarmament,
Nuclear testing, 253, 254
Meetings:
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
1977:
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 170, 186
Last week of June, 160
Special Session on Disarmament, 485,
Dec. 22, (postponed), 16
1978:
Working group on national seismic
stations, 246
Special nuclear materials (SNM), 393
Special Operations Field Office (SOFO),
Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) (see also United Nations
General Assembly):
June 12, 205
Agenda for, 475
Argentine role in, 475
July 6, 210
ASAT weapons ban, 478
July 10, 295
References are to document numbers

Special Session on Disarmament
Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) (see also United Nations
(SSOD) (see also United Nations
General Assembly)—Continued
General Assembly)—Continued
Finnish role in, 478, 501
Four-power discussion of, 476
Carter meeting with delegates to, 499
Carter-Waldheim discussions of, 472
FRG role in, 476, 494
Carter’s speech at (possible), 486, 488,
Ghanaian role in, 494, 501
Guidance for delegates to, 471, 475,
CCD as affected by, 475, 494
Chemical weapons negotiations
during, 79, 83
Iranian role in, 475
Chinese People’s Republic’s role in,
Comprehensive test ban, 211, 212
Conventional arms transfers:
Mexican role in, 471, 494
LDC resistance to restraints on, 481
NATO discussion of, 473, 474
Negative security assurances, 486,
U.S. restraint on sales, 281
U.S. vulnerabilities on, 480, 481
New Zealand role in, 501
Coordination of language on
NGO’s role minimized in, 475
comprehensive test ban in, 494
Cutoff and transfer agreements:
Nuclear accident reporting, 481, 486,
As other states’ initiatives, 496
Nuclear free zones as initiatives at,
Nuclear proliferation, 494
Pakistani role in, 471, 501
Preparatory committees (PrepComs),
DOE position, 484
Preparatory conferences (PrepCons),
Special Coordination Committee
discussion of, 485, 488
Reports on, 492, 501
Verification for, 491
Resolution calling for, 471
Danish role in, 501
Romanian role in, 471, 477
Declaration on disarmament, 494
SALT II as affected by, 475, 494
Development and disarmament:
Backstopping Committee report on,
Soviet-U.S. discussions of, 475, 494
SSOD’s endorsement of, 119
Sri Lankan role in, 471
U.S. approaches to, 478, 494
U.S. guidance for discussion of, 475
Tlatelolco Treaty ratifications during,
U.S. initiatives for, 481
Yugoslav position, 477
U.S. Backstopping Committee for,
Disarmament experts meeting, 471,
U.S. change of tactics toward holding
Dutch role in, 501
U.S. consultation and coordination
Enhanced radiation (ER) weapons,
with major actors, 475, 494
Final documents for, 477, 501
U.S. position, 480
References are to document numbers

Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) (see also United Nations
General Assembly)—Continued
Stone, Richard B., 269
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 487
Strand, Robert, 87, 98
Strategic Air Command (SAC), 406
Verification of chemical weapons
Strategic Arms Control Treaty (SALT I),
ban, 87
Strategic Arms Control Treaty (SALT
II):
Spent fuel:
French reprocessing of, 341
Comprehensive test ban linkage with:
Japanese reprocessing of, 341, 344,
As reinforcement, 146
SALT ratification before CTB, 214,
Plutonium in, 325, 327
U.S. disapproval of, 163
Speth, Gus, 381, 382
Continuing commitment to, 478
Squire, Robert, 159
Cruise missile testing, 177
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 492
Definition of heavy bombers, 177
Standing Consultative Commission
Finalization of treaty, 229
Interagency Working Group on, 488
Stansberry, Kent, 59
Lack of progress in negotiations for,
Stapleton Airport, 124
Starkey, James, 468
Senatorial ratification of:
State sovereignty, 60
Stebbins, Charles:
Failure of, 257
NPT Review Conference call for,
Conventional arms transfers, 311, 314
Special Coordination Committee
Soviet nuclear testing, effect on,
Stefanas, Anne, 448, 467
Steiner, Charles, 446
U.S.-Soviet observation of pending
Steiner, Steven E.:
ratification, 394
Chemical weapons, 104, 106
U.S. support for, 138
Comprehensive test ban, 240, 244
Signing of, 60, 236
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 412
Soviet nuclear testing as affecting
NPT Review Conference, 387
ratification of, 238
Seismic stations, 250, 251
Special Session on Disarmament, 475,
Special Session on Disarmament, 494
Stennis, John, 269
U.S. public opinion on, 499
Vance-Thatcher discussions of, 233
Stevens, Sayre:
Strategic Arms Control Treaty (SALT
Comprehensive test ban, 210
Streator, Edward, 232
Conventional arms transfers, 286,
Strickland, Harold L., 5
Stuart, Ian, 375
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Suchan, George, 448, 467
Special Coordination Committee
Sugar, 427
Sukhodrev, Viktor M.:
Special Session on Disarmament, 486,
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Stocker, Carol Kay, 369, 448
Chemical weapons, 64, 101
References are to document numbers

Sukhodrev, Viktor M.—Continued
Sweden—Continued
Comprehensive test ban, 101, 153,
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Conventional arms transfers, 267, 309
Sverdlovsk incident, 112, 137
Nuclear proliferation, 332
U.S. highly enriched uranium exports
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
to, 463
Switzerland:
Argentine import of heavy water
Sunoda, Sunao, 320, 329
“Supreme national interest,” 206
Survivability, 27
Chemical weapons use in Asia, 125
Svart, Ankar, 162
Fuel reprocessing, 325
Sverdlovsk incident:
Full-scope safeguards on heavy
ACDA White Paper on, 133, 135
water, 457, 460
Comprehensive test ban as affected
Heavy water exports from, 458
by, 248
Spent nuclear fuel storage, 364
Congressional interest in, 115, 127,
Symington Amendment, 350, 376
Taborda, Jesus, 430
Hodding Carter’s statement on, 127
Taft, Dan, 381
Initial reports on, 109
Muskie-Dobrynin discussion of, 138
Tanks, 263
Soviet non-compliance with
Biological Weapons Convention,
Tarasov, Boris, 199, 223
Tarnoff, Peter:
U.S.-British consultations, 137
Chemical weapons use in Asia, 110
U.S. consultation with allies on, 134
Conventional arms transfers, 290,
U.S. de´marches on:
British position, 137
Full-scope safeguards for heavy
water, 457
Heavy water production technology
exports to Argentina, 454, 457
Nuclear proliferation, 321, 376
Pakistani development of nuclear
U.S. proposals for investigation of,
weapons, 376
Vance-Dobrynin discussions of, 117
U.S. nuclear reactor part exports to
Sweden:
Argentina, 470
Biological Weapons Convention
Taylor, John, 113
Review Conference, 112, 119
Television broadcasts, 33
U.S. consultations on, 214
Tello Macı´as, Carlos, 414
Verification proposals by, 153, 160,
Teltsch, Kathleen, 397
Tengler, John A., 139
NPT Review Conference, 389
Teratogens, 76
Nuclear proliferation:
Terekhov, Andrei, 47, 48
Fuel reprocessing, 325
Terfloth, Klaus, 157, 476
Full-scope safeguards for
prevention of, 339
Thailand, 110
In the post-INFCE era, 375
Spent nuclear fuel storage, 364
Thatcher, Margaret:
U.S. meeting with UN Delegates
on, 359
Chinese People’s Republic, 242
References are to document numbers

Thatcher, Margaret—Continued
Tindemans, Leo C., 319
Tlatelolco Treaty (see also Argentine
Comprehensive test ban, 233, 234,
Tlatelolco Treaty accession;
Brazilian Tlatelolco Treaty
Election victory, 229, 308
accession; Cuban Tlatelolco Treaty
Namibia, 242
accession; Nuclear Free Zones):
Seismic stations, 234, 242
Article 25, 434
Vance’s discussions with, 233, 234
Article 30, 413
Carter-Schmidt discussions of, 417
Visit to Washington (Dec. 1979), 242,
Thayer, Harry E.T., 151, 282
CTB as reinforcement for, 211
Theater force modernization, 146
Guyana’s accession to, 434, 464
Jamaican accession to, 464
Thomas, Andrew, 296
Merger of Ayacucho Declaration
Thomas, Charles, 138
with, 304
Thompson, David, 475
Mexican encouragement of holdout
Thompson, Herbert B., 402, 414
states for entry into, 419, 435,
Thompson, Richard, 122
Thorium:
Nicaraguan accession to, 464
Available reserves of, 341
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
Brazilian-FRG cooperation on, 433
covered by, 423
Brazilian supplies of, 432
Prospects for ratification of, 434
Production of U–233, from irradiation
Protocol I:
of, 336
As interpreted in OPANAL, 409,
Technical talks on, 426
British adherence to, 364, 406
Thorne, Robert D., 341
French adherence to:
Thornton, Dick, 244
As requirement for entry into
force of treaty, 419
Thorsson, Inga, 385, 501
Brazilian position, 415
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (1974), 141,
French position, 433, 442
OPANAL-French talks on, 438
Thurmond, Strom, 269
Thyden, James, 162, 445
Signing of, 406, 449
Thyden, John, 285
U.S.-French discussion of, 361
Tice, Donald, 321
Tighe, Eugene F., 148
U.S. adherence to:
Timbie, James:
ACDA memorandum on, 407
Basis for, 478
Decision memorandum on, 406
Comprehensive test ban, 162
DOD position, 409, 440
Policy Review Committee discussion
Exclusions for Puerto Rico and
of PRM/NSC 23, 5
Virgin Islands, 402
Special Coordination Committee
JCS position, 440
meetings, ASAT weapons and
OPANAL position, 464
Reservations included in
Timerbaev, Roland M.:
ratification, 413
Comprehensive test ban, 171, 174,
Senatorial ratification of, 364,
Nuclear proliferation, 348, 369
Seismic stations, 237
State Department memorandum
Tlatelolco Treaty, 418, 423
on, 408
References are to document numbers

Tlatelolco Treaty (see also Argentine
Tooele Army Depot, 123, 124
Toon, Malcolm:
Tlatelolco Treaty accession;
ASAT talks, 3, 56
Brazilian Tlatelolco Treaty
Brezhnev meetings with, 177
accession; Cuban Tlatelolco Treaty
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
accession; Nuclear Free Zones)—
Chemical weapons, 64, 101
Continued
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 168,
Protocol II:
British adherence to, 406, 422
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
Chinese People’s Republic’s
adherence to, 406
Nuclear proliferation, 332
French adherence to, 406
Special Session on Disarmament, 487
Soviet adherence to:
As requirement for entry into
force of treaty, 419
Toronto Star, 452
Brezhnev’s message on, 435, 492
Torres, Julio, 252
Cuban influence on, 418
Torrijos Herrera, Omar E., 304
OPANAL position, 402
Toumanyan, Alec, 355
Possibility of, 434
Toussaint, Donald, 471
Reservations on, 446, 449
Traid, Eduardo Alberto, 420
U.S. position, 478
Train, Russell, 337
U.S.-Soviet discussion of, 348,
Treaty of Tlatelolco. See Tlatelolco
Treaty.
U.S.-Brazilian discussion of, 410
Treverton, Gregory F., 417
U.S.-Soviet discussions of, 428
Tricastin nuclear enrichment plant
Ratification during SSOD of, 438, 439
(France), 365
Tenth anniversary of opening for
signature of, 402
Transit rights:
British position, 446
Tsien Ta-yung, 151
Tuchman, Jessica:
OPANAL position, 411
Soviet position, 446, 449
Conventional arms transfers, 281,
Through Panama Canal, 421, 434,
Encouragement of adherence to
Geneva Protocol and Biological
U.S.-Mexican discussion of, 414, 444
Weapons Convention, 62
U.S. support for, 464, 499
FRG nuclear sales to Brazil, 401
Todman, Terence A.:
Heavy water exports, 447
Carter-Geisel meetings, 433
Nuclear fuel assurances, 358
Carter-Perez meetings, 432
Nuclear reprocessing, 354
Conventional arms transfers, 266, 288
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Tlatelolco Treaty, 414
Tlatelolco Treaty, 402, 435
Togo, Fumihiko, 320, 329
Tunisia, 263, 471
Tokai nuclear plant (Japan):
Turk, Lynn, 460
ERDA position, 238
Readiness for testing at, 336
Turner, Stansfield M.:
U.S.-Japanese discussions of, 329, 341,
Comprehensive test ban:
U.S. policy toward, 325
On-site inspection quotas, 180
References are to document numbers

Turner, Stansfield M.—Continued
United Kingdom (UK)—Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
British role in negotiations for, 159,
accommodated in, 145, 147
Review conference proposals, 227,
British withdrawal from trilateral
Chinese People’s Republic
U.S. instructions for trilateral
adherence to, 159
negotiations, 219
Conventional arms transfers, 274,
Indian participation in, 194
Permitted experiments, 215, 226
Nuclear proliferation, 381, 382
Quadrilateral discussions of, 157
UN resolutions on, 144
U.S.-British discussions of, 159, 160,
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Verification, 187, 244
PD/NSC–8, 330
Conventional arms transfers, 263,
PD/NSC–13, 271
PD/NSC–15, 70
Cutoff and transfer agreements, 482,
PD/NSC–28, 81
PD/NSC–37, 27
Elections (1979), 229
Full-scope safeguards, 311
PD/NSC–39, 32
Intelligence conference with the
PD/NSC–45, 38
United States (1978), 89
Policy Review Committee, 2, 381
Negative security assurances, 486,
PRM/NSC 12, 259
PRM/NSC 15, 317
NPT Review Conference, 389
PRM/NSC 16, 141
Nuclear proliferation:
PRM/NSC 27, 67
Argentine-IAEA negotiations, 443
PRM/NSC 37, 86
Fuel cycle evaluation program role
Seismic stations, 222, 246
for, 336
Special Session on Disarmament, 479,
Full-scope safeguards for
prevention of, 339, 347
Sverdlovsk incident, 112
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 376,
Quadripartite discussions of, 326
U.S.-British discussions of, 395
Ueki, Shigeaki, 427
United Kingdom (UK):
As London Suppliers Group member,
Nuclear testing moratorium, 146, 233
Nuclear tests, 226
Biological Weapons Convention
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Chemical weapons:
On-site inspections, 184
British draft UN resolution on, 89
OPANAL, 449
Draft treaty on, 69
Polaris Improvement Program, 146
Quadrilateral consultations on, 87,
Seismic stations:
Financing of, 244
U.S. stocks of, 139
Non-CTB benefits arising from
Verification issues, 89
Southern Hemisphere stations,
Comprehensive test ban:
possible, 245, 248
SCC discussions of, 248
References are to document numbers

United Kingdom (UK)—Continued
United Nations Secretariat, 475
Seismic stations—Continued
United Nations Security Council
Soviet position, 226, 237
U.S. de´marche on, 240
Chemical weapons treaty ratification
by permanent members of, 74,
Special Session on Disarmament:
On-site inspection, 184
Sverdlovsk incident, 133
Uranium:
Cutoff for production of fissionable
As a product of coprocessing, 344
materials for nuclear weapons,
As weapons-usable material, 336
NATO discussion of, 473, 474
Nuclear accident reporting, 488
Depleted, 459
PrepCom membership, 471
Ease of access to, 342
Sverdlovsk incident, 137
Exports to South Africa of, 325
Fear of cartel in sale of, 371
United Nations (UN), 153, 472
For Venezuela, 430
Hexafluoride, 336
Highly-enriched (HEU):
United Nations Conference on Trade
As fuel for nuclear powered Naval
and Development (UNCTAD), 476
vessels, 484, 492
United Nations General Assembly
As weapons-usable material, 330
(UNGA) (see also Special Session on
Danger for nuclear proliferation of,
Disarmament):
Aggression as defined by, 293
Difficulty in production of, 369
Exports for FRG reactors, 333, 463
Comprehensive test ban, 140, 144,
Forms of, 336
U.S. approvals for export of, 362,
Conventional arms transfers, 278
Declaration of Friendly Relations, 293
Nitrate, 336
Origins of ore for, 355
Iraqi resolution on Middle East
Oxide, 336
armaments, 499, 501
Resource exploration for, 358
Outer Space Committee, 60
Resolutions:
Uruguay, 260, 466
U.S.–EURATOM Agreement for
Cooperation (1958):
Application to France of, 347, 349,
Canadian cooperation agreement’s
3314/XXIX, 293
similarity to, 355
On establishing preparatory
Japanese views on, 344
committee for BW conference,
Soviet position, 363
Seventh Special Session, 499
Special Political Committee, 494
31st Session, 471
32nd Session, 475
Vaerno, Oscar, 119
United Nations Human Rights
Commission (HRC), 110
Vajpayee, Atal B., 211
References are to document numbers

Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued
Comprehensive test ban—Continued
Valindaba enrichment plant, 364
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Van der Stoel, Max, 319
Van Doren, Charles:
Carter-Thatcher discussions of, 242
FRG nuclear sales to Argentina, 467
Consultations with Allied and
Heavy water technology exports, 460
Non-Aligned states, 214, 216
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318, 386
Non-proliferation value of, 211,
On-site inspections, 179, 180
Peaceful nuclear explosions as
Vance, Cyrus R.:
accommodated in, 145, 147,
ASAT:
Soviet testing, 58
Quadripartite discussions of, 157
Resumption of testing after
Vienna Summit discussion of, 55,
fixed-duration treaty, 198
Review conference proposals, 227,
ASAT talks:
Approval of goals for, 11, 18
De´marche to Dobrynin, 49, 50
Lasers, 50
Thatcher-Vance discussions of, 233,
Protected vs. illegal satellites, 42, 53
Special Coordination Committee
Three year approach, 210
meetings on, 17
Trilateral negotiations, 166, 176,
Testing ban, 31
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 153
U.S. proposals for, 13
Vance-Dobrynin discussions of, 243
Vance-Dobrynin talks on, 12, 13,
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 3,
Vienna Summit discussion of, 236
Conventional arms transfers:
Belize, 242
Brezhnev’s discussions with, 153, 332
Congressional notification of, 263,
Carrington’s discussions with, 242,
Coproduction limits, 268, 312
Carter-Geisel talks, 433
Dollar volume ceilings, 268
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
For new systems, 268
Carter-Perez talks, 432
FY 1978 program, 286
Chemical weapons:
FY 1979 ceiling, 301
Congressional budgeting for
Legislation on, 264
facilities for stockpiling of, 75
Management of restraints on, 279,
DOD position, 78
Meeting with Senators on, 269
Middle East nations reduction in
purchases, U.S. request for, 258
U.S. guidance for talks on, 83
Multilateral restraints on, 267
Use in Asia of, 117
New technology developed for
Vance-Gromyko talks on, 64, 65,
export, 268
Of sensitive weapons, 268
Vienna Summit discussion of, 101
Comprehensive test ban:
To Latin America, 266
British-U.S. discussions of, 232
U.S. policy assessment on, 312, 313
Carter-Dobrynin discussions of,
References are to document numbers

Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued
Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued
Nuclear proliferation—Continued
Conventional arms transfers—
Message to Azeredo da Silveira,
Continued
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288
Message to de Guiringaud on, 321
Vienna Summit discussion of, 307,
Gerard Smith as negotiator on, 344
U.S.-Brazilian consultations, 400
Dobrynin’s discussions with, 117,
U.S.-French discussions of, 357
U.S.-Japanese bilateral nuclear
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355,
suppliers consultations, 341
U.S. policy toward, 364, 371
Gromyko’s discussions with:
U.S. strategy for, 379
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 416
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 332
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 332
Comprehensive test ban, 153, 165,
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Heavy water production technology
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
exports, 452, 456
PD/NSC–8, 330
Interagency Committee on Public
Diplomacy and Disarmament,
PD/NSC–28, 81
Meetings:
PD/NSC–37, 27
Carter-Fukuda, 329
Carter-Giscard, 361
PD/NSC–39, 32
With Carlos Pastor, 453
PD/NSC–45, 38
Peaceful nuclear explosions:
With Hermes, 318
As accommodated in a
With Huang, 151, 153
comprehensive test ban, 145,
With Pe´rez, 426
DOD position, 169
Messages:
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
To Aubert, 467
on, 176
To Azereda da Silveira, 398
U.S. report for Soviets on
To de Guiringaud, 321
experience with, 183, 186
To Franc¸ois-Poncet, 378
Vance-Brezhnev discussions of, 153
To Genscher, 467
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 153
Middle East, 233
Policy Review Committee meetings,
Negative security assurances, 493
No-first-use of nuclear weapons
discussion, 3
PRM/NSC 15, 317
Non-proliferation Treaty, 318
NPT Review Conference, 389
PRM/NSC 27, 67
Nuclear proliferation:
PRM/NSC 37, 86
Argentine-U.S. discussions of, 466
Report to Congress on, 316
Carter-Fukuda talks on, 329
Carter-Giscard talks on, 361
Carter’s policy statement on, 331,
Senate Foreign Relations Committee
G–7 summit discussion of, 342
Special Coordination Committee
In the post-INFCE era, 375, 377,
meetings:
ASAT talks, 17
References are to document numbers

Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued
Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued
Visits—Continued
Special Coordination Committee
Moscow (Mar. 1977)—Continued
meetings—Continued
Conventional arms transfers, 260,
Comprehensive test ban, 164, 205,
Nuclear proliferation, 332
Sverdlovsk incident, 109
Special Session on Disarmament:
Carter meeting with delegates to,
Vandenberg Air Force Base, 6
Carter speech proposal for, 491
Carter’s decisions for, 493
Cutoff and transfer agreements,
Velloso, Joa˜o Paulo dos Reis, 433
Venezuela:
Four-power discussion of, 476
Ayacucho Declaration, 288
U.S. Backstopping Committee for,
Brazilian nuclear agreement with, 461
Conventional arms transfers, 288,
U.S. initiatives for, 478
U.S. position, 480
Full-scope safeguards for, 430
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 487
Nuclear proliferation:
Sverdlovsk incident:
Brazilian-Argentine nuclear arms
Congressisional consultation on,
race, 401
U.S. meeting with UN Delegates
SCC meetings on, 109
on, 359
U.S. de´marches on, 114
U.S.-Venezuelan talks on, 288, 411,
U.S. proposals for investigation of,
Regional nuclear cooperation, 419
Vance-Dobrynin talks on, 117
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Thatcher’s discussions with, 233, 234
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (1974), 153
Tlatelolco Treaty, 419
Tlatelolco Treaty:
Uranium imports by, 430
Argentina accession to, 419, 434,
U.S. nuclear aid to, 419
Brazilian accession to, 419
Carter-Schmidt discussions of, 417
Verification (see also Under chemical
Cuban accession to, 435
weapons; Under comprehensive
test ban):
U.S.-Mexican discussion of, 414
U.S. support for, 464
By national technical means, 13, 31,
For cutoff and transfer agreements,
Visits:
International agency for satellites
(proposal), 501
Lack of provision in Biological
Weapons Convention for, 68
Caracas (Mar. 1978), 288
Of ASAT capabilities, 4, 6
Caracas (Nov. 1977), 426
Of ASAT laser development, 30, 59
China (1977), 351
Of EURATOM by IAEA, 348
Moscow (Mar. 1977):
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 102, 146,
Chemical warfare discussions,
Vertical proliferation, 400
Comprehensive test ban
Vest, George S.:
discussions, 153
ASAT talks, 58
References are to document numbers

Vest, George S.—Continued
Warheads—Continued
Chemical weapons use in Asia, 117
Talos/Terrier, 206
Comprehensive test ban, 232, 242
Trident, 206
Fuel cycle evaluation program, 355
Warner, Michael, 244
Heavy water exports to Argentina,
Warnke, Paul C.:
ASAT capabilities, 2, 24
Nuclear proliferation, 357
Nuclear testing, 253
ASAT testing ban, 37
Tlatelolco Treaty, 417
Carter-Gromyko talks, 201, 221
Vick, M. Christine, 106
Chemical weapons, 64, 74
Videla, Jorge Rafael:
Comprehensive test ban:
Carter-Gromyko discussions of,
Carter’s message exchange with, 437
Mondale meeting with, 443
Consultations with Allied and
Tlatelolco Treaty:
Non-Aligned states, 214, 216
Argentine accession to, 416, 429,
JCS position, 220
Carter-Videla discussions of, 420,
NAC briefing on, 162
Non-proliferation value of, 211
U.S.-Argentine discussion of, 466
Vienna Convention on the Law of
Review conference proposals, 227
Vienna Summit (1961), 180
Senate testimony on, 202
Vienna Summit (June 1979):
Trilateral negotiations:
Finalizing of U.S. negotiating
Chemical weapons, 101
position, 160
Proposed strategy for, 166, 174
Conventional arms transfers, 307,
Review of U.S. strategy for, 214,
Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, 104,
Vine, Richard D., 460
Soviet acceptance of moratorium
on peaceful nuclear
Von Brandt, Max, 436
explosions, 175, 183
Von Den Steinem, Erwin, 467
U.S. instructions for, 163, 181,
Von Welck, Stephan, 384
Vorster, Balthazar J., 211, 224
Vance-Gromyko discussions of,
Voutov, Peter, 119
Vukovic, Miljenko, 477
Warnke-Petrosyants discussion of,
Wade-Gery, Robert, 248
Conference of the Committee on
Walden, George, 242
Disarmament, 204
Conventional arms transfers, 267,
Waldman, Roger, 326
Warheads:
EURATOM and IAEA safeguards,
Minuteman, 206
Interagency Committee on Public Di-
NOVA, 230
plomacy and Disarmament, 497
Pershing II, 230
Negative security assurances, 493
Polaris, 206
Poseidon, 206
Nuclear testing, 154, 156
Sprint, 206
Operation FULCRUM II, 155
References are to document numbers

Warnke, Paul C.—Continued
Willens, Harold, 499
PD/NSC–8, 330
Williams, Ross N., 16
PD/NSC–13, 271
PD/NSC–15, 70
PD/NSC–28, 81
Wilson, George, 57
PD/NSC–37, 27
Wilson, Harry, 108
PD/NSC–39, 32
Windscale, 336, 338
PD/NSC–45, 38
Woesner, William, 445
Peaceful nuclear explosions, 168, 183
Woolfley, Dufour, 87
PRM/NSC 12, 259
World Disarmament Conference
PRM/NSC 15, 317
PRM/NSC 16, 141
World Energy Conference, 328
PRM/NSC 27, 67
World War I chemical weapons
PRM/NSC 37, 86
casualties, 69
Seismic stations, 222
World War II, 96
Special Coordination Committee
Wright, James C., Jr., 115
Special Session on Disarmament, 478,
Yamazaki, Ryuchiro, 320
Yamazaki, Toshio, 320, 329
Carter speech proposal for, 491
Carter’s decisions for, 493
Yemen, 303
Cutoff and transfer agreements,
York, Herbert F.:
Vance-Gromyko discussions of, 487
Comprehensive test ban, 228, 237,
Warsaw Pact, 60
Nuclear weapons stockpile reliability,
Washington Post, 419
Watanabe, Koji, 329
Seismic stations, 240
Special Coordination Committee
Visit to Moscow (June 1979), 237
Weapons and Space Systems
Yoshino, Bunroku, 320
Intelligence Committee, 111
Weapons-usable materials, 336
Yugoslavia:
Weber, Heinz, 157, 476
Comprehensive test ban, 144, 214
Weber, Karl, 96
Development’s link to disarmament,
Weil, Frank, 266
NPT Review Conference, 387, 389,
Weitnauer, Albert, 460
NPT withdrawal by, 211
Nuclear power, 359
West Asia, 303, 304
Peaceful biological research, 119
Western Africa, 290
Special Session on Disarmament, 471,
Western Europe, 297, 308
Westinghouse, 263
Weston, John, 240, 250
Weteye bombs, 123, 124
White, John, 381
Zambia, 471
Whiting, John, 471
Whitman, John, 467
Zangger Committee, 327, 348
Wickel, James, 320, 329
Zimmermann, Robert W., 400, 429
References are to document numbers
