and 155, and in the Countercase of Peru, on pages 7, 26, 50 and 71, the correct translation of “expirado este plazo un plebiscito decidirá” was given, and on page 26 of the Countercase of Peru it is clearly shown that these Spanish words can only be correctly translated into English as “at the expiration of that term a plebiscite will decide.” While the Opinion and Award mentions the rather inaccurate translation in the Appendix to the Case of Peru, it does not mention the fact that twice, in the Case of Peru, and four times in the Countercase of Peru, the accurate translation was made entirely clear, and urged earnestly as the claim of Peru.

The importance of this error of translation is shown on page 7 of the Opinion and Award, where the following language is used: “The plebiscite was to be had ‘after the expiration of that term,’ that is, after the ten years, but no limit was defined.” In point of fact, correctly translated, there was a specific limit of time, and that limit was “at the expiration of that term,” which was limited, by the Treaty, to ten years from the date of ratification of the Treaty. The Treaty was ratified March 28, 1884. The ten years therefore expired on March 28, 1894. The word “plazo” is defined in Spanish dictionaries to mean “time limit”, so that the language of the Treaty, correctly translated, expressly fixes a time limit for the holding of the plebiscite. The exact translation of the words would be “expirado”, “having expired”, “este”, “this”, “plazo”, “time limit”, which is the equivalent of “at the expiration of that term”, and clearly places a time limit upon Chilean possession of the provinces, and upon the holding of the plebiscite. The Spanish word “después” means “after”, in the sense adopted by the Honorable Arbitrator. No such word is found in the Treaty, and no other word that could be properly interpreted to mean “after” in such a sense. To insert the word “después”—“after”—in the second paragraph of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is to change entirely its meaning and add an express provision not therein contained. The consequence of this error of translation runs through the entire Opinion and Award. It is made the basis of excusing Chile for failing to surrender possession of Tacna and Arica at the time named in the Treaty, when the right of Chilean possession ceased, and
