Arms Control and Disarmament  1267
e. The Nuclear Component. A system for collecting radioactive debris 
from a test utilizes airborne filters for removing the particulate debris 
from the air along the flight tracks of the aircraft. Specially designed 
air filters have been mounted on WB/50 aircraft operated by the Air 
Weather Service out of bases in Japan, Alaska and Burtonwood, England. 
WB/50 aircraft fly tracks northeast and southwest out of Japan, north 
and southwest out of Alaska and to any predesignated point in Europe 
or the Middle East out of Burtonwood, England. (See Figure 4.) The 
flight tracks from Japanese and Alaskan bases are planned to cover on 
a once-­each-­24-­hour basis all air mass trajectories coming out of the 
USSR between 30° N and 85° N. The aircraft usually fly at 10,000 feet 
outbound and about from 20,000 to 30,000 feet on the return track so 
that two altitudes are covered during each flight.
Instantaneous radiation detectors mounted behind the filter papers 
indicate to the pilot when the filter paper is collecting unusual amounts 
of radioactive debris. This information is radioed back to the base and 
used for vectoring special missions to intercept “hot” parts of the atomic 
cloud and is used as a guide to enable the aircraft to orbit within the 
cloud while sampling.
The airborne filters are analyzed in a field laboratory (Japan and 
Alaska) by physical and chemical methods to determine whether or not 
fresh radioactive debris has been encountered on the flight. Although 
in most instances early warning by geophysical techniques alerts the 
air crews to the possibility of intercepting debris, in five cases the ini­
tial and only detection of Soviet tests has been by the radiochemical 
analysis of filter papers. The field laboratories at operational bases in 
Japan and Alaska also conduct comprehensive radio-­chemical analyses 
of the filters, concentrating mostly on short-­lived isotopes for dating 
and other purposes, and thus provide information which would not 
be obtainable by the time the filters had been sent back to the central 
laboratory in Sacramento, California.
Reports of unusual amounts of radioactive debris, or the detec­
tion of fresh debris together with the preliminary reports on chemical 
analysis of short-­lived isotopes, are submitted by the field laborato­
ries through priority dispatch to the headquarters, AFOAT–1, Wash­
ington, D.C. All significant filter papers are transmitted to the central 
laboratory at McClellan Air Force Base, where a decision is made with 
respect to the distribution of samples among the laboratories in the 
U.S. which contribute to various phases of the analysis program, as 
well as to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermas­
ton, England. Laboratories participating are the McClellan Central 
Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory, Knolls Atomic Power Lab­
oratory, and Tracerlab, Inc. In certain cases, the Los Alamos Scientific
