January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1343 The Secretary said he had not meant to say anything different from what he had said in his UN speech. Defining the present status of Jerusalem is a most difficult and complex question. To return to the main point, the Secretary said, when I spoke of unilateral action my point is actions taken outside of the negotiations in regard to issues in the negotiations that tend to disrupt the negotiations. That, the Secretary concluded, is really all I have to say. I was not trying to establish Israel’s sovereign rights in any part of Jerusalem, or anything else. Evron said the result of the Security Council vote has been to cast doubt on Israel’s sovereignty in West Jerusalem. He had been surprised when the State Department Spokesman the previous day had said that he was not aware that the State Department was taking any position on the question of other countries moving their embassies from Jerusalem.6 We were taken aback by this statement by the Spokesman, Evron said. Mr. Christopher said the Spokesman’s statement was not inconsistent with our position as it has been stated at the United Nations. Christopher distinguished between the UN seeking to tell countries where to locate their embassies (which we opposed in New York) and the right of a country to decide on its own whether to move its embassy from Jerusalem (which we would respect). Evron asked what the United States would do to correct the impression that it does not care about the Security Council call for removal of the embassies from Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher said we have brought the Secretary’s statement, that we do not regard the Security Council call as binding, to the attention of those governments which maintain their embassies in Jerusalem. Evron urged that the United States find an opportunity “to denounce” the ultimatum given by the Arab countries to the countries that maintain embassies in Jerusalem. The call for removal of the embassies is “an abuse of Security Council power,” Evron said. Evron then presented the second letter, on the oil MOA negotiations, and said that Israel urges the negotiations be resumed as quickly as possible. After reading through the Prime Minister’s letter, the Secretary said the President had agreed that there should be another meeting in September.7 Mr. Christopher cautioned that this should not be made 6 The referenced comment was made by Department of State Director of Press Relations David D. Passage during the Department’s August 25 daily press briefing. The text of the briefing is in telegram 226192 to multiple posts, August 25. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800406–0887) 7 The same day, August 26, Carter commented on the U.S. position for the oil negotiations in a handwritten note to Brzezinski (with a copy to Mondale): “Re oil for Israel, I think we could change our proposal to substitute: top 10% to apply to the kind of oil Israel actually uses rather than to top 10% of most expensive imports. Also, if strict conformance to formula is assured, we might let the triggering be automatic.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 37, Israel: 8/ 15–31/80)
