Hungary 489 would be sufficiently broad to allow those nations who presently abstain from the negotiations to rejoin them. The U.S. does not believe the forum of the ultimate discussions is a matter of great consequence. They can take place in Geneva or some other city. 15. Puja said the GOH sees the Arab world as split into two. He agreed that the Palestinian question is the most difficult one to solve. Hungary rejects extremist solutions, such as the Iraqi solution. The right to self-determination is the nucleus of the Palestinian problem. Hungary is interested in a global settlement because any complication in the Middle East leads to East-West confrontation. 16. CSCE. Puja noted the large number of proposals on the table and asked U.S. views on how to proceed. The Secretary replied that we believe progress has been made and that, through the constructive review which has taken place an important principle has been established. It is now important that we agree on a date for a follow-on meeting. A final document for the Belgrade meeting should be rather general in nature, thus taking care of many of the proposals. 17. Nimetz added that we believe Belgrade has been very successful. It is part of a longer term process; in the interim period bilateral exchanges of views and concrete steps have been and should be taken. The U.S. would like to conclude the meeting on schedule, midor late February. Specific proposals which cannot be agreed upon should be left to discussions in other forums. The tone of the final document should reflect the positive atmosphere of Belgrade, but should not hide our differences of views. In conclusion Nimetz said the U.S. delegation would return to Belgrade with instructions to seek a general and positive final document. 18. Puja said that Hungary wants to end the conference by mid- February and prefers a short and noble final document. The GOH will pursue proposals that remain on the table in bilateral channels. 19. MBFR. Puja referred to reports that the FRG is preparing a new proposal and asked for the Secretary’s views. The Secretary said it is important to make progress in MBFR, which has languished too long in a state of uncertainty. There are two current questions: Data exchange and the relation between Phase I and II. On data exchange, we hope to solve this question. Resolution would not only create a better atmosphere but it is important that both sides have facts about the other. The allies realize that the relation between the two Phases is a major concern to the Warsaw Pact. The Allies have not reached any conclusion about any new initiative, although this is under consideration. 20. Puja said the GOH believes some progress has been made in MBFR; that the negotiations are worthwhile and that both sides have made concessions. While there is a strong divergence of views on percentage reductions, the GOH believes this is the way to proceed.
