986 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement C. Take no action on prisoners except possibly in cases where they appeal to Indian Embassy of their own volition for return to Communist China. D. Refuse to take any action on prisoners in any event on thesis that Agreed Announcement does not apply to common criminals con­ victed of offenses involving moral turpitude. If we should take action in regard to these criminals, question whether to demand reciprocity for our imprisoned nationals would arise. Should we endeavor to obtain balancing quid pro quo from ­Chinese Communists for every action taken by us? We could make offer to deport all Chinese prisoners contingent upon simultaneous deportation of all imprisoned Americans. Also could equate visits by Indian Embassy representatives to Chinese prisoners with visits by British Embassy rep­ resentatives to American prisoners. Or we could refuse to descend to trading tactics, seeking place added moral pressure on Communists by keeping our action on higher plane independent of Chinese Communist transgressions. Your detailed evaluation these courses and any variants which you may wish comment on, with your recommendations, are invited in time for formulation your instructions for next meeting. While effect each proposal on prospects of American prisoners and on future course of negotiations should be carefully assessed, also bear in mind effect on our public position in event of break off. Dulles 614. Telegram 1925 from Geneva1 Geneva, May 24, 1956, 3 p.m. 1925. From Johnson. 1. Two hour 25 minute meeting this morning. Wang opened with prepared statement again rejecting April 19 draft and advocat­ ing May 11 draft para by para. Said “mutual respect” clause replaces “self-­defense clause which embodies ulterior motive” to justify contin­ ued US seizure Taiwan and interference in liberation offshore islands. ­Second para was “more conspicuous” accommodation to our views by 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/5–2456. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.
