116 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement for the purpose of concerting the bases of agreement to be approved in a final meeting.” The U.S. Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, extended an invitation to the American Foreign Ministers, many of whom were already in New York for a session of the United Nations General Assembly, to meet in Washington on September 23 and 24, 1958.8 The Secretary proposed informal meetings to discuss several matters, among them the manner in which Brazil’s proposals, called “Operation Pan America,” might be carried out. During the meetings the Foreign Minister of Brazil9 recommended joint hemispheric action on six principal points: 1. Study and adoption of measures favoring the use of private capital of the industrialized countries in developing nations. 2. Increase in the volume, and easing of the terms, of loans made by international public credit agencies or the creation of inter-American financial agencies organized with the same objectives in mind.10 3. Study and implementation of other measures to strengthen the domestic economies principally to fight inflation and to encourage savings and local investment. 4. Study and implementation of measures to permit equitable regulation of the market in basic commodities. 5. Study of joint measures to be adopted to meet problems arising from the formation of large European trade blocs such as the European Common Market; studies and measures leading to the establishment of regional markets in the Western Hemisphere. 6. Expansion of technical assistance programs. Upon the conclusion of the Foreign Ministers’ meetings a communiqué was issued which called for Intensification of action to promote the greatest possible economic development of the continent.11 The Ministers indicated gratification at President Eisenhower’s pledge of full U.S cooperation in achieving concrete results in the common effort to promote the economic development of the American Republics because it [the U.S.] considers that peace, prosperity, and security are truly indivisible. The Ministers recommended that during the period before the Eleventh Inter-American Conference [now scheduled for 8 Documentation on the meeting in Washington on September 23–24 is in Department of State decimal file 363 as well as in the following Department of State lot files: OAS Files, Lot 60 D 665; Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 533, and Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, CF 1117–CF 1121. 9 Franciso Negrão de Lima. 10 It may be noted that the announcement of the establishment of the Inter-American Development Bank, with U.S support, had been made in mid-August. [Footnote in original source text.] 11 For the text of the communiqué issued on September 24 at the conclusion of the Foreign Ministers’ meetings, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 13, 1958, p. 575.
