522
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation:
That you agree that no response to Orfila’s letter is necessary.
That you approve our proposed plan of action to explore the possi-
bilities of securing ratification of the pending human rights treaties—
especially the OAS Convention—during the next session of Congress.4
4 There
is no indication that
Brzezinski
approved
or
disapproved
either
recommendation.
162.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva and the Mission to the United Nations1
Washington, September 7, 1978
226448. Subject: Human Rights Initiatives at the 33rd UNGA.
1. On August 9, 1978 there was a meeting in the Department
chaired by Assistant Secretary Maynes to discuss the human rights
scope paper that was circulated in July.2 All of the IO agency direc-
torates were represented, as were the Office of the Legal Advisor, the
Bureau of Humanitarian Affairs, Mission Geneva, and USUN. The fol-
lowing items were discussed, with decisions reached to move forward
on some initiatives and to further explore the feasibility of others. The
United States overall position is to build upon and preserve the posi-
tive accomplishments which have been made during the past year,
both at the last UNGA session and especially at the 1978 Human Rights
Commission session.3 We hope that the discussion of the 30th anniver-
sary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which is to be considered in plenary meetings, will be the occasion for a
general stock taking on the part of all members and serve as the plat-
form for renewed efforts at international cooperation in promoting
human rights.
2. The scope paper was endorsed as a sound approach for the U.S.
at the General Assembly. It was determined that it could be strength-
ened, however, by adding an initiative concerning the development of
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780366–0860.
Confidential; Stadis. Drafted by Dalley; approved by Maynes.
2 See Document 155.
3 See Document 125.
