1955  45
released until put up $15,000 bail Sept 23. Later Dean of Cal Tech stated 
Dr. Tsien not carrying classified material of US Government but only 
his own research work and published books. Returned students in 1955 
reported Tsien’s movements restricted to county of residence. In letter 
June 15, 1955 to Vice Chairman People’s Republic Dr. Tsien restated his 
anxiety to return and appealed for assistance.
Wang continued he could cite further evidence from American 
newspapers. UP reported September 23, 1953 indicating no evidence 
discovered connecting Dr. Tsien with Communists. However he unable 
return to his country and awaiting trial in US. On March 6, 1953 New 
York Times stated Dr. Tsien had been ordered deported to China but 
that at same time had received orders preventing him from leaving US. 
Times added this contradictory situation revealed by Chief of District 
Immigration Los Angeles.
Case of Dr. Tsien vividly explains how many Chinese doctors in 
US desire return and unable to do so. Up to present Dr. Tsien’s move­
ments still restricted to county of residence. Only charge against him is 
desire return to motherland and reunite with family. This utterly unrea­
sonable situation suffices to show appropriate way must be found to 
assure return of nationals.
Wang referred my statement August 4 that no general deadline 
existing on departure individuals from US and those required leave 
only those who no longer held student status. Wang declared even 
those no longer students should not be subjected to unreasonable 
departure time limit causing them difficulty. Especially unreasonable 
aspect is that these people given unreasonably short time. If cannot 
leave within limit suffer “torture” of Immigration Service procedure 
including interrogation, payment of bail, arrest and other actions which 
cause pressures on their minds. At same time they notified can spare 
selves such tortures if they apply for permanent residence. This means 
they compelled remain US against their will.
Wang then referred my statement that even if alien had applied 
for and was granted permanent residence he still could proceed to any 
place of his choice at any time. Wang said this is “matter of course”. 
Whether Chinese national applied under immigration laws or Refugee 
Relief Act still should be able to go to any place of his choice without 
stating reason therefor. In order that those Chinese nationals compelled 
to apply for permanent residence under Refugee Relief Act or other 
regulations not be prevented from leaving in future is necessary find 
appropriate way give them assurance.
Wang said he had checked list of 76 given him last meeting and 
found 44 not yet returned China. Handed me list these names for 
investigation. Referring to Department’s April 2, 1955 press release 
concerning rescinding restraining orders these students he pointed out
