270 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII and some of our Pakistani colleagues here have already expressed genuine fears that this airlift is merely the initial stage of a larger Soviet “occupation” aimed at dominance in the region. India as well may not welcome a massive Soviet military presence here, despite constant DRA assertions that Indian-Afghan relations rate in importance only behind Afghanistan’s fraternal relations with the Socialist countries. We presume that the chaos in Iran will greatly diffuse whatever concern that government would normally have over this development. 9. In sum, not only may the Soviet military airlift—which may by no means be over—have potentially damaging ramifications on our relations with the USSR and with the DRA, but it adds one more seriously destabilizing factor to a region already rife with instability and potential chaos. 10. Within Afghanistan, the airlift is likely to have both political and military goals. Several of the points discussed in our reftel remain valid in the wake of the airlift. These newly arrived forces could clearly provide security for the hundreds of Soviet citizens in and around Kabul, although the forces which have been sent to the capital appear excessive to this particular role. Likewise, these units now deployed at the political heart of the country could constitute the “stiffener” for the Afghan Army in its counterinsurgency fight. The Soviet units may, moreover, take on the added responsibility for the security of the capital, in order to free certain of the apparently loyal and more heavily armed Afghan units for active deployment against the insurgents operating near Kabul. The prospect, however, that is most sobering is that in the year ahead Soviet forces (Army and Air Force) will undertake a direct role in the fighting, side by side with loyal DRA forces. 11. At this point, political considerations rather than strictly military concerns may be at the root of the Soviet move. The mid-December gunfight at the “People’s House” in Kabul, which resulted in the probable death of Assadullah Amin (Second Deputy Foreign Minister, a top party official and President Hafizullah Amin’s son-in-law) and perhaps Politburo member Abdul Hakim Sahrayee Jauzjani, highlights the instability of the Khalqi leadership. Moscow may, therefore, have decided to move now in order to have its own forces on the scene in the event that the fragile political leadership were to suddenly shatter as a result of an assassin’s bullet, or following another intramural gunfight. Since Soviet advice to the Afghans last summer to form a broader political base was apparently ignored by the Khalqis, the Soviets may feel that locally available “muscle” to back up future “advice” is mandatory to protect Moscow’s interests and investment in this country. An integral element here, of course, is the flexibility the Soviet forces provide to Moscow should the Afghan political leadership split into contending factions, or should some Afghan military contingent
