International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
247
Japan and Europe were still weak; it no longer makes sense in the
1970s. The private sector’s awareness of this change is reflected in the
Trilateral Commission, whose recent meeting in Bonn focused on both
economic and non-economic issues.3 It is time for us to edge the
Summit toward increasing trilateral discussion of the political, as well
as economic, aspects of relations among the industrial regions.4
If you have any reactions that you wish me to take into account in
Summit planning, please let me know.
3 See footnote 5, Document 65.
4 Brzezinski highlighted the final four lines of this paragraph beginning with the
phrase “whose recent meeting in Bonn” and wrote “I very much agree. ZB.”
79.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to President Carter1
Washington, December 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Summary of Steel Task Force Report
The steel task force report consists of three major sections:2
—an introduction which provides
a
background on
those
problems of the steel industry which are addressed by the report;
—an outline of the general objectives which guided the task force
in developing the program; and
—a five-part program which is responsive to problems in those
areas where government policies impact upon the industry.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 284, Steel/Chrome (CF, O/A 24) (2). No classification marking. A stamped notation
reads: “The President has seen,” and at the top of the page, Carter wrote: “a) We should
state that pollution standards will not be lowered, b) Tax measures will be ‘considered’ to
encourage modernization.”
2 The task force was chaired by Solomon; see Document 63. Attached but not
printed is the undated “Report to the President—A Comprehensive Program for the Steel
Industry.” A notation on the report’s cover page reads: “The President has seen.” Carter
initialed the cover page and wrote: “To: Stu & Tony—This is ok. See comments on Stu’s
memo. a) Too many ‘task forces’ and committees—consolidate if possible. b) Reread this
for typos & some confusing language.” The memorandum from Eizenstat to which
Carter refers is printed as Document 80.
