260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
figures, some escaped senior military officers, and elements among the
tribal and ethnic minorities. This is a coalition with precedent in Iranian
history, and so it is possible to imagine its assumption of power
some day.
Prospects
This survey of the political scene suggests four general develop-
ments that are possible over the coming months:
1. The Islamic republic under Khomeini moves haltingly to implement
its ill-defined policies. This is the most likely possibility for the next 6 to
12 months. Khomeini remains Iran’s essential figure. No alternative
leader or group exists. A significant amount of the forward thrust from
the revolution still exists, the constitution and its institutions are about
to come into being, oil money is still flowing in, and the masses are
still on Khomeini’s side. These considerations should suffice to keep
the leaders of the new republic in power.
But problems will mount. As noted above, the economy and the
minorities need urgent attention. Many members of what remains of
the armed forces are increasingly unhappy and frustrated. Iran has
still not found a comfortable place on the international scene. Kho-
meini’s rule to date has given no indication that he and his associates
will be able to move rapidly and effectively to solve any of these
problems. Thus, the unhappy opposition will surely grow. The question
is: how long will the regime’s basic strengths continue to outweigh its
mounting problems?
2. A coup. It is possible to imagine a coalition developing among
some of the opposition groups—Bakhtiar, the moderate secular figures,
minority leaders, and a few senior military officers—in an effort to
seize power. But the opposition groups which these leaders represent
lack wide popular support or means to appeal to the lower-class masses
that form the base of Khomeini’s power. Such a coalition would be
united chiefly by opposition to Khomeini, and that would not provide
sufficient unity to overcome the underlying mistrust and rivalries
between the constituent factions. It is not likely, therefore, that this
broad grouping could act effectively enough to take over.
3. The greatest threat to the regime is simply that it could collapse under
the weight of its problems. This might happen if the government lost
visible control over events. The Embassy’s captors might even emerge
as an alternative power center as a result of the hostage crisis. Insurrec-
tion in Tabriz could spread to all of Azerbaijan if Shariat-Madari were
to depart Qom and openly lead the rebellion. That could facilitate
successful Kurdish action against the regime. The government’s inabil-
ity to handle ethnic dissidence on a broad scale coupled with economic
reverses and maldistribution of food would severely undermine the
