184 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement readjustments between supply and demand and reduce price fluctu­ ations. Treasury and Commerce wished to add that the U.S. should not discuss the making of, or participate in, any international commodity agreement. The Planning Board did not agree with this addition. Mr. Randall has called my attention to the fact that the CFEP on October 11/55 generally disapproved international commodity agree­ ments, and that CFEP policy requires interagency policy level approval before such an agreement may be discussed with a foreign nation. Neither of these points is reflected in par. 27–­d. Mr. Randall believes that the whole paragraph should be deleted until present policy in this regard is modified by the CFEP, on motion of a CFEP member. May I suggest, accordingly, because I agree, that this paragraph should be stricken and its substance referred to the CFEP for action as a matter within its jurisdiction. (COMMENT:) (2) Page 13, par. 29–­a. This paragraph deals with the total level U.S. economic assistance world-­wide. Treasury and Budget wished to continue the qualifying provi­ sion, which appeared in the 1957 policy statement: “Increases in economic development assistance should, to the extent politically and militarily fea­ sible, be offset by decreases in other economic or in military assistance programs.” The Planning Board did not agree with this addition. Mr. Randall thinks the addition of this provision undesirable, because there may be circumstances where such an offsetting would not be wise. He thinks each problem should be determined individually in the light of all the pertinent considerations. SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY DIRECTOR, BUDGET SECRETARY OF STATE (3) Page 18, par. 37–­c. This paragraph states the existing U.S. policy for a unilateral embargo on U.S. trade with the Chinese Communist Bloc. The ODM member suggested a liberalization of our embargo policy to conform with multilateral liberalization. The Planning Board did not agree with this suggestion at this time. Mr. Randall commented that proposals for changes in our eco­ nomic defense policy should be made first in CFEP. I agree with his position. MR. GRAY (4) Page 12, par. 27–­e (6). This paragraph, part of our economic policy towards less-­ developed nations, provides: “Be prepared to consider, on a case-­by-­ case basis, participation with other Free World nations in multilateral development projects or funds.” Treasury and Commerce would delete. The Planning Board did not agree with the deletion. Since the circulation of the policy statement before you, State, Trea­ sury, and Commerce have agreed to a rewording of this paragraph as
