574 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I “We’ve been centrally involved in this region, and we will stay involved politically, economically, and militarily. We will stand by our friends. We are ready to place our strength at Israel’s side when you want it to ensure Israel’s security and well-being. “We know Israel’s concern about many issues. We know your concern for an adequate oil supply. In the context of peace, we are ready to guarantee that supply. “I’ve recommitted our Nation publicly to this commitment, as you know, only in recent days in my own country. “We know Israel’s concern that the price of peace with Egypt will exacerbate an already difficult economic situation and make it more difficult to meet your country’s essential security requirements. In the context of peace, we are prepared to see Israel’s economic and military relationship with the United States take on new and strong and more meaningful dimensions, even than already exist. “We will work not only to attain peace but to maintain peace, recognizing that it’s a permanent challenge of our time. “We will rededicate ourselves to the ideals that our peoples share. These ideals are the course [cause?] not only of our strength but of our self-respect as nations, as leaders, and as individuals. “I’m here today to reaffirm that the United States will always recognize, appreciate, and honor the mutual advantages of the strength and security of Israel. And I’m here to express my most heartfelt and passionate hope that we may work together successfully to make this peace.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 427–428) The complete text of the address is ibid., pages 424–428. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski participated in a meeting with Begin and his Cabinet later that afternoon. The Presidential party departed Tel Aviv en route to Cairo the afternoon of March 13. At a departure ceremony, the President commented: “President Sadat, Prime Minister Begin, and I remain determined to exert every ounce of effort at our command to bring the peace negotiations to a successful conclusion. We will not fail.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, page 429) After meeting with Sadat, the President told reporters assembled at the Cairo International Airport that Sadat had accepted the proposals the United States had made and that Begin had agreed to present them to the Knesset, asserting: “I am convinced that now we have defined all of the main ingredients of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, which will be the cornerstone of a comprehensive peace settlement for the Middle East.” (Ibid., page 430) For the President’s remarks upon arrival at Andrews Air Force Base shortly after midnight on March 14, see ibid., pages 430–432.
