1172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tion—ten or twelve—like Egypt. Let’s do it a simple way: with the
teams there, and only 45 minutes to be on the spot.
The President said that he had no objection. But Sadat favors having
the first week in the United States. We can ask Sadat (about Prime Min-
ister Begin’s suggestion), or Prime Minister Begin can do so through the
Israeli Embassy in Cairo. We can find this out today.
Prime Minister Begin agreed.
The President asked Secretary Vance to ask Sadat if Prime Minister
Begin’s proposal is all right.
Secretary Vance agreed.
The President said that there are some key issues, which Prime Min-
ister Begin had described to him. They are controversial in some in-
stances. Prime Minister Begin is talking from an Israeli paper. Israel is
inclined to see the Self-Governing Authority as an administrative
council—and no more—as a cabinet, with one person for each function
to be performed. Sadat sees a much broader approach, with several
hundred members: 200, he (the President) thinks. His response to both
leaders is that the delineation of authority and responsibilities is more
important than how they are identified. Ambassador Linowitz has lan-
guage, so the group will not have allocated to it legislative authority.
The idea of legislative, executive, and judicial would make (the SGA)
like a nation. We agree with Israel that there should be no nation, or in
effect an independent government. It will be difficult how to ascribe to
the group some powers and responsibilities. Egypt wants it to have
more members. The number is arbitrary. We suggest 40, elected in a
free process. Obviously there are difficulties: e.g. settlements on the
West Bank and Gaza and the Israelis living there. The U.S. under-
standing, under the Camp David Accords, is that when the Self-
Governing Authority is formed, then the Israeli military government
will withdraw and the Self-Governing Authority will have broad re-
sponsibilities. Israeli security is a special subject; the Camp David Ac-
cords guarantee Israel’s security. A difference of opinion was inevitable
in defining that security relationship. We have interpreted this, in the
past, as covered in the “designated security locations,” with strong po-
lice forces under the aegis of the Self-Governing Authority. Prime Min-
ister Begin goes to subversion and violence, which can again lead to ter-
rorist acts. This is a broader scope than Egypt has in mind. There is a
dispute on who, how, and in what circumstances Israelis can live in the
West Bank and Gaza. The right to settle; the official nature of the settle-
ments; and Israeli government financial support—all these will be well
discussed in the future. The U.S. positions are well known. He is trying
to get this right. Would Prime Minister Begin like to comment?
