Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II the object of the majority of resolutions, mainly produced by Cuba. The Latin group, however, eventually began to assert itself and became active in protecting its own. Treatment of human rights cases under 1503 produced some progress on several cases and at least one precedent setting action, the decision to remove the case of Equatorial Guinea from the confidential proceedings and deal with it in public session. 4. The Commission made progress on the drafting of the legal instruments on torture and began unenthusiastically to work on a convention on the rights of the child. The West achieved some satisfaction on the drafting of a declaration on religious intolerance by forcing to a vote over strong Soviet objections the texts of the first three articles. And the Commission’s consideration of economic, social and cultural rights centered on a discussion of the right to development, a concept which the Commission referred to governments for further comment. The majority of Western, and some developing countries such as Brazil expressed uncertainty over the need to establish new “rights” but indicated they were prepared to take constructive approach. Resolutions on the overall analysis of human rights in the UN, national institutions, and the Human Rights Yearbook were also adopted. 5. One of the most frustrating aspects of the session was the failure of the Commission to take any action on Cambodia. The procedural maneuvers of this issue left everyone a loser. The Non-Aligned pushed through a motion to adjourn debate and take no action concerning the report on Cambodia, even before the debate had begun. The West objected vehemently to this move, but were overruled at the time. This imposition of a gag rule made some delegates from all groups uneasy. The silencing of the debate proved shortlived. The Chairman later allowed the representatives from Democratic Kampuchea, China, and Vietnam to speak, thus opening the way for a full exchange of insults among those three plus the USSR, Mongolia and Bulgaria. Two additional disappointments were: (1) the failure of the Canadian initiative on the causes of mass exodus, which was withdrawn in order to prevent it from being distorted with Syrian amendments, focussing the resolution on the Palestinian question, and (2) the initiative on disappeared persons which was deferred until next year. The Canadians decided to opt for deferral rather than accept a watered down result. 6. The discussion of the Report on Genocide involved the participation of a significant number of delegations speaking out in support of the original par. 30 relating to Armenian massacres.2 The decision ended with a statement by the Chairman of the HRC endorsing our ob-
