1978  459
(1) Begin full-­scale development of a new ICBM this fiscal year 
(after a review in early December by the Defense Systems Acquisition 
Review Committee), with an IOC (Initial Operating Capability) of 1986, 
and a goal of deploying up to [less than 1 line not declassified] The missile 
would be constrained [less than 1 line not declassified] also be used in the 
TRIDENT II missile.6
(2) Conduct a parallel development program for two alternative 
basing systems—MAPS and an air transportable system—­with the 
objective of making a final choice in one year. If MAPS is selected, and 
IOC in 1986 could be achieved, with an FOC (Full Operational Capabil-
ity) of 290 missiles by 1990. The air transportable system we envision 
requires a new aircraft having fast takeoff, high nuclear hardness, and 
short takeoff and landing characteristics. It would operate in a land-­
and-­launch mode in conjunction with a few thousand pre-­surveyed 
landing strips (perhaps sod).7 Each aircraft would carry one of the 
ICBM’s described above. An IOC of 1987 and FOC of 200 aircraft by 
1990 seems possible. Because this system would have a “dead time” 
while the aircraft were being dispersed on strategic or tactical warning, 
I believe it would be wise also to deploy about 100 of the new ICBM’s in 
existing MINUTEMAN silos, to provide an immediate response capa-
bility of the sort that the Soviets will have (though theirs will be much 
larger). The silos already exist, the missiles would be the same, and the 
operating costs in a silo mode are very low. This would therefore be a 
relatively inexpensive diversification.
At the same time, detailed study efforts on other basing modes 
for ICBM’s, including off-­shore and (perhaps hardened) ground mobile 
versions, would be carried out to provide a backup or a possible 
­follow-­on basing system.
(3) Develop a “stop-­gap” survivable basing mode for MINUTE-
MAN, since the program just described will not be operational until 
four or five years after the threat becomes serious. [2 lines not declas-
sified] On strategic warning they each would be redeployed to one of 
several thousand pre-­surveyed sidings along the existing highways in 
the states where MINUTEMAN is based.8 This system is relatively sim-
ple, quick (IOC of 1983), and—­by the standards of strategic force—­of 
moderate cost (about $1.5 billion, including necessary improvements in 
our warning system). It would be effective only until the Soviet Union 
6 Carter underlined “also be used in the Trident II.”
7 Carter drew an arrow pointing to this and the preceding sentence and wrote in 
the adjacent right margin: “seems very costly & vulnerable vs ground carriers a la SS 16.”
8 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence and the two preceding sen-
tences: “seems Better.”
