that this, in the main, accounts for unemployment and, in turn, had reduced
wages and purchasing power to a lower level.
The discussion of the Conference further disclosed the fact that if the
development of unused or inadequately developed resources throughout the
world could be initiated and financed, increased consumption of capital
goods would follow, with the result of reduction or elimination of
unemployment, and the probable increase in the wage level and
consumption of consumable goods.
The Conference divided itself into three committees on Commerce,
Industry and Agriculture. Each of these divided itself into subcommittees
for specialized discussion. In the Committee on Commerce the discussion
revolved largely about trade barriers. A limited discussion on tariff levels
disclosed the age old differences of opinion, but at the same time brought
out the fact that even more important than relative differences in levels of
custom duties was their freqeunt and abrupt alteration. Lack of continuity of
policies, differences in the standards of classification, discrimination and
other unequal treatments are more injurious than differences in tariff levels.
No recommendation was made in respect of tariff levels but the support of
all the members was secured approving the principle of “equality of
treatment” and the “unconditional most-favored-nation” clause as well as an
accord condemning the policy of artificial limitation of raw material
exports. The resolutions will also disclose that existing trade barriers would
be less harmful if general adoption could be obtained of improvements in
practice resulting in simplification of customs formalities, standardization
of tariff nomenclature and consolidation of customs charges and other
technical improvements.
On rationalization in industry there was a full discussion; the principal
differences grew out of the fact that the European workers regarded
rationalization as likely to bring about increased unemployment. However,
finally agreement was had on a formula based on experience of the
countries in which rationalization had been most highly developed. The
conference went on record in opposition to indirect and direct states
subsidies, but without undertaking critical definitions of the terms, urging
that subsidies should not be likely [lightly?] invoked.
