172  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
BL–15.	
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
 
Washington, November 3, 1958.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING 
BOLIVIAN PROGRAM
I. General
A. Our primary objective in Bolivia remains the maintenance of 
relative political stability in order to forestall a serious politico-­social 
upheaval. This will be difficult to achieve unless the Bolivian economy 
can be stabilized and economic progress can be made. To realize our 
objective we are prepared to support any Bolivian government which 
can satisfy two basic criteria:
1. Freedom from Communist influence;
2. Ability and disposition to carry out an effective stabilization 
program.
In our economic policy toward Bolivia, the primary emphasis 
must still be on stabilization. There should also be increased support 
for development.
B. The sharp drop in Bolivian export earnings in the past two 
years because of the declining world metals market and the need to 
show economic progress in Bolivia in order to retain popular sup-
port for the stabilization program cause a need for United States aid 
to Bolivia in FY 1959 above the $17 million already requested of the 
Congress.
C. A longer-­run economic purpose remains the achievement of 
economic viability and strength which will, in turn, permit the termi-
nation of emergency aid to Bolivia.
D. Bolivian performance in the stabilization program has been 
less satisfactory this year than in 1957. The United States should take a 
firmer stand on the points discussed in Part II below.
II. Performance in the Stabilization Program
A. If the stabilization program in Bolivia is to be successful, the 
principle of flexibility of the exchange rate to follow market forces 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 724.5-MSP/11–358. Secret. This paper 
was prepared by Samuel D. Eaton of the Office of International Finance and Development, 
and cleared with the Treasury Department, ICA, and the IMF. It was transmitted to the 
Embassy at La Paz under cover of Department of State Instruction A–66, November 3, 1958.
