1478  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
authority between the Commission and the Administrator. A particu­
larly important point for us to insist upon, in his view, is the automatic­
ity of the mobile inspection in response to carefully defined geophysical 
signals.
Dr. Bethe said that the Delegation had been encouraged at the fact 
that the Soviet Union had not made a big point out of the peaceful uses 
testing problem and that their reference throughout the meeting has 
been to barring “weapons” tests.
The main Soviet fire is focused on our one-­year position and our 
insistence on the link to disarmament, according to Dr. Bethe. The Del­
egation feels that the Soviet Union is in a strong position on this point 
and that their opposition would be sustained by public opinion. The 
Delegation had been happy to see the evidences of Washington flex­
ibility on this point. Dr. Bethe recounted a conversation that he had 
had with Dr. Feodorov who had agreed, in a private conversation, that 
governments should be free to withdraw from the treaty if the con­
trol system was not installed and operating, although this was not the 
officially-­stated Soviet position. However, the USSR would never agree 
to a loose provision leaving it to U.S. judgment whether satisfactory 
progress was being made in disarmament as a basis for treaty termi­
nation. He felt that the USSR was firm on this point and that he, him­
self, felt that it would be “monstrous” to have a treaty dependent upon 
other treaties not in existence.
Mr. Herter inquired whether it would be in our interest to have 
an open-­ended commitment for cessation of nuclear tests and whether 
or not, in ten years, we would find that the Soviets had been able to 
improve their weapons position, even without testing, to such a degree 
that our security would be jeopardized. Dr. Bethe said that in the 
absence of testing, the U.S. would be in a far better position to con­
tinue nuclear weapons development than the Soviet Union. Our past 
tests have gone a lot further into diagnostics then we have any evi­
dence to that the Soviet Union has and, consequently, we understand 
the interior workings of the nuclear weapons much better than they do. 
Therefore, we are in a better position to make further progress without 
testing than the Soviet Union. Dr. Killian said that a consideration on 
the other side is that the Soviet system might be better able to main­
tain good weapons laboratories in the absence of testing than the U.S. 
would. Dr. Bethe said that he was not convinced of this point, but that 
an important factor would be the ability of the USSR to cheat in the face 
of any system of control.
In this connection, Mr. Herter asked about the validity of the point 
which is often made about our need to improve our small weapons posi­
tion, and what the Soviet small weapons capability was. Dr. Bethe said 
that we have little firm knowledge about Soviet very low-­yield tests, but
