1
National Security Policy, 
1977–1980
1.	
Notes of a Meeting1
July 26, 1976, 3–6:30 p.m.
PRESENT
Governor Jimmy Carter, Senator Walter Mondale; Barry Blechman, Harold Brown, 
Lynn Davis, Paul Nitze, Walter Slocombe, Paul Warnke, James Woolsey, and Cyrus 
Vance; David Aaron, Stuart Eisenstadt, Richard Holbrooke, Jack Watson, and other 
staff members.
1. Summary. The meeting began at about 3:00 P.M. and adjourned 
at about 6:30 P.M. The discussion focused first on strategic forces, sec-
ondly on general purpose forces, thirdly on questions of efficiency 
in the utilization of manpower, and finally on the overall size of the 
defense budget. There was also a brief discussion of the benefits and 
risks of arms transfers.
2. Strategic forces. Mr. Vance spoke first. He said that all the advisors 
present at the meeting agreed that there was rough equivalence between 
U.S. and Soviet strategic forces at present. The Soviets have advan-
tages in some measures of strategic capabilities (e.g., throw-­weight), 
while the United States has advantages in other measures (warheads, 
for example). He noted, however, that there was disagreement among 
the group as to where present trends in strategic deployment programs 
were leading, and what the United States should do about those trends. 
He concluded by briefly reviewing recent developments in Soviet stra-
tegic capabilities.
Mr. Brown spoke next. He noted his agreement with what Mr. Vance 
had said and emphasized that the key question is what would happen 
if present trends continued into the future. He then discussed specific 
changes which might be made to U.S. strategic programs in response 
to trends in relative strategic capabilities. He particularly emphasized 
modernization of the bomber force as an important program, and 
1 Source: Carter Library, Jimmy Carter Pre-Presidential Papers, 1976 Presidential 
Campaign Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 9, Defense, 7/27/76–8/76. No classifica-
tion marking. Drafted by Blechman, who forwarded the notes to Eizenstat under a July 
29 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)
