Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII decision. The first sought Carter’s approval to take legislative steps to exempt Pakistan from the Symington Amendment. Carter approved, and wrote in the right margin: “I would still prefer some mention of non-prolif. assurance—not exceeding those we have already gotten.” The second item, with several sub-items, summarized an attached memorandum from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regarding the military and economic assistance package to Pakistan. The issue for Carter’s decision included $100 million in Foreign Military Sales credit, about which Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree that this is required.” Carter approved the sub-item. Next was $100 million in Economic Support Funds. Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree in this sum,” and the only question was if the aid should be conditional. Brzezinski concurred with the Department of State that the aid package would not be as effective if it was tied to ongoing Pakistani financial reform measures, and that the United States should pledge to rejoin the international aid consortium for Pakistan but not “attach additional strings” to the economic package. At the end of the sub-item, Brzezinski handwrote: “This is really important.” Carter neither approved nor disapproved the sub-item, but wrote in the right margin: “$100 mil ok—I prefer auth. to waive reform requirement if necessary Paks must be under constraint to behave economically.” The next sub-item offered a choice on the level of specificity for the aid package. Brzezinski noted the Department of State “argues strongly” that the United States should present a $400 million aid package, composed of $100 million in both economic and military aid per annum over two years. OMB, Brzezinski noted, advocated a looser approach “both for reasons of impact and to concretely demonstrate the enduring nature of our commitment.” Brzezinski concurred with the Department of State, and handwrote: “because it indicates a longerterm political commitment.” Carter approved the OMB approach, but wrote in the right margin: “I may change. Let me see what Agha Shahi
