440
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
decision. The first sought Carter’s approval to take legislative steps to
exempt Pakistan from the Symington Amendment. Carter approved,
and wrote in the right margin: “I would still prefer some mention of
non-prolif. assurance—not exceeding those we have already gotten.”
The second item, with several sub-items, summarized an attached
memorandum from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
regarding the military and economic assistance package to Pakistan.
The issue for Carter’s decision included $100 million in Foreign Military
Sales credit, about which Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree that
this is required.” Carter approved the sub-item. Next was $100 million
in Economic Support Funds. Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree in
this sum,” and the only question was if the aid should be conditional.
Brzezinski concurred with the Department of State that the aid package
would not be as effective if it was tied to ongoing Pakistani financial
reform measures, and that the United States should pledge to rejoin
the international aid consortium for Pakistan but not “attach additional
strings” to the economic package. At the end of the sub-item, Brzezinski
handwrote: “This is really important.” Carter neither approved nor
disapproved the sub-item, but wrote in the right margin: “$100 mil
ok—I prefer auth. to waive reform requirement if necessary Paks must
be under constraint to behave economically.”
The next sub-item offered a choice on the level of specificity for
the aid package. Brzezinski noted the Department of State “argues
strongly” that the United States should present a $400 million aid
package, composed of $100 million in both economic and military aid
per annum over two years. OMB, Brzezinski noted, advocated a looser
approach “both for reasons of impact and to concretely demonstrate
the enduring nature of our commitment.” Brzezinski concurred with
the Department of State, and handwrote: “because it indicates a longer-
term political commitment.” Carter approved the OMB approach, but
wrote in the right margin: “I may change. Let me see what Agha Shahi
says.” Carter also approved the following sub-items: 1) a $10–20 million
increase in P.L.–480 aid; 2) $600,000 for military training; 3) $6 million
in additional aid for Afghan refugees; and 4) whether humanitarian
aid should be sent through the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). Brzezinski wrote: “it should be bilateral with
Pakistan” to which Carter responded: “bilateral, at least as option.”
The third item laid out what Brzezinski identified as a “key issue”:
the kind of military hardware the United States should sell to Pakistan.
Brzezinski noted that $100 million “will not go far,” and that a “critical
question” was whether or not Carter was prepared to sell Pakistan
advanced aircraft such as the F–16. Brzezinski did not recommend one
or the other, but counseled that if Carter disapproved of selling the
F–16 to Pakistan “we should let the Paks know soon so that India does
