1979  609
132.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Victor Utgoff of the 
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant 
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s 
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, May 10, 1979
SUBJECT
M-X Basing PRC (U)
There is a new contender in the field: Open trench/rail mobile! 
Awaiting the full PRC, those gathered in the Sit Room on 9 May2 heard 
Bill Perry preview what he had planned to present. He covered the 
following:
1. Open Trench/Rail Mobile M–X Basing
The rail mobile variant of Option 5 (DYAD with 300 D–5s in silos 
and 100 on trains) has evolved into a distinct basing option for the M–X. 
The concept is very like the hybrid trench, except that the trench and 
appropriately spaced hardened shelters along the trench can be opened 
to overhead inspection. Ease of verification results. Ability to move mis-
siles rapidly on the rails in the trench, even on tactical warning, makes 
long-­lasting denial of location information less critical than in MPS. If 
necessary simulators could be used to defeat close-­in sensors. (S)
In principle, this concept could be as survivable as MPS. Verifiabil-
ity on the US side is more easily achieved than in MPS, and is probably 
easier on the Soviet side. On the other hand, impact on public use of 
land and on the environment is probably more severe than with MPS. 
This was one of the several factors that removed the open trench from 
consideration over a year ago. (S)
In the discussion it was pointed out that costs and environmen-
tal impact might be reduced by laying the track between shelters at 
ground level, but security and location secrecy might be made more 
difficult. It was noted that our selection of this concept would not con-
strain the Soviets to it (this applies to any concept). Open trench might 
be less susceptible to Soviet breakout within the basing system than 
MPS would be. But it might, like MPS, give the Soviets an incentive to 
proliferate RVs covertly, which they could deploy outside any multiple 
shelter system. Clearly, if limiting force size is important for arms con-
trol and stability, we need controls on system production in SALT. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Utgoff, Box 182, [MX]: 5/78–4/80. Secret. Sent for information.
2 No minutes of this meeting were found.
