January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1211
Sadat make statements about aspects of full autonomy that are justifi-
able, but letting them stand can be a problem. We need to find common
ground. The second approach is good. We do not need to decide what,
today, should be the division of powers and responsibilities among the
three categories, but this approach gives us good flexibility.
Prime Minister Begin: Now there is the question of the number of
members.
Ambassador Linowitz said that in the negotiations, Prime Minister
Begin feels that this should correspond to the number of functions.
Egypt has a different view.
Prime Minister Begin said that the U.S. has proposed a number
which is arbitrary. What we need to do is create a basis for establishing
the number of members.
The President said that this opens up additional problems: How
many fragmented parts into which to divide actual responsibilities?
Ambassador Linowitz’s paper has 22 different functions.16 Should edu-
cation and culture be one function or two? On administration of justice,
is there a separate function for prisons?
Minister Burg mentioned Health, Education, and Welfare.
The President asked whether that should be one function or three. If
there is one member for each function, then Egypt will work to get
many functions, while Israel will try to get a few. This is a question of
balance and imbalance. On agriculture, there can be a function for
planting, harvesting, marketing. We do not favor anything that will
lead to the creation of an independent Palestinian state. We are pre-
pared to say so in a final signed document. He thinks there is a chance
that Sadat would also sign that there is no authority ever (sic!) to de-
clare itself an independent Palestinian state. He (the President) can’t
speak for Sadat, but the Israelis should think about it. He (the Presi-
dent) wants the Self-Governing Authority to have the needed au-
thority, and no chance to declare itself an independent state.
Minister Kubersky asked whether there was agreement in principle
that the number of members should equal the number of functions, for
the negotiations?
The President said that this would make the negotiations more diffi-
cult. Then each time that Egypt proposes having more, there will be
16 Reference is presumably to an April 14 draft version of the draft Heads of Agree-
ment, a copy of which is in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign
Affairs File, Box 3, Israel, 4/79–11/81. The draft agreement lists 22 responsibilities to be
accorded to the self-governing authority: education, culture, religious affairs, administra-
tion of justice, agriculture, health, labor and manpower, social welfare, internal transpor-
tation, municipal affairs, housing, tourism, budget, taxation, civil service, administrative
operations, police, internal finance, industry and internal commerce, internal communi-
cations and post, private property, and local banking.
