486  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
nuclear forces in striking the Warsaw Pact nuclear and conventional 
military threat to NATO. Should further analysis suggest that more 
effective ways can be found to target the Soviet/Warsaw Pact threat to 
NATO, these should be the basis for discussion with our allies under 
the aegis of the NPG. The opportunity should be seized to involve the 
allies in a more meaningful way in the development of alliance nuclear 
employment policy. Improvements in the vulnerable and outdated 
NATO C3 system clearly are needed, along with better means for rapid 
processing of intelligence. We need to take steps that assure that both 
NATO Selective Employment Plans (SEPs) and SACEUR’s Nuclear 
Operations Plan (NOP) are consistent with our own; that if current 
LNOs or SAOs are employed there will be corresponding NATO plans 
that are complementary rather than conflicting. (See Issue #9)11
10. The JCS should develop a launch under attack package for ICBMs 
only that will be directed at a range of military and defense production 
targets but will result in minimum collateral damage consistent with 
achievement of its targeting objective. This launch under attack pack-
age should be ready for use beginning in the 1981–82 period and should 
include a broad set of nuclear and non-­nuclear targets and command 
and control. It should also include such targets as the Soviet ASAT 
launch facilities and Soviet ASW bases which might support attacks 
which could reduce US endurance. The attack should be designed so as 
to minimize collateral damage to population consistent with achieve-
ment of the attack objective. We do not see LUA as a solution to the 
problem of ICBM vulnerability, but believe such an option should, nev-
ertheless, be available to the NCA. (See Issue #10)12
11. Employment policy for China should not require the extensive plan-
ning process which is devoted to the Soviet Union. We should, of course, 
recognize that China does pose a threat to some US interests in the Far 
East and that the PRC might attempt to coerce US friends or gain assets 
of interest to us, particularly in the aftermath of a US-Soviet exchange. 
We would assume that if China’s posture substantially changed, we 
would be sensitive to this and could accommodate modifications in 
our targeting policy accordingly. Implicit in this recommendation is the 
belief that U.S. and Allied conventional and U.S. theater nuclear forces 
(using non-SIOP options) are sufficient to deter the likely range of Chi-
nese threats in peacetime and that the SRF, available for protection and 
coercion worldwide could be used to deter China in a trans- and post-­
attack environment. (See Issue #11)13
11 Issue #9 in the report is titled “The Policy Interface with NATO.”
12 Issue #10 in the report is titled “Launch Under Attack.”
13 Issue #11 in the report is titled “Employment Policy for China.”
