1108 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 10. Brooks told Nazarkin that he had checked on an assertion Nazarkin had made the previous day concerning the memorandum of understanding (MOU). Nazarkin had claimed that the U.S. side had taken some peacekeeper missiles out of the MOU. This was not correct. Nazarkin thanked Brooks for the clarification. 11. Nazarkin asked for a summary of the U.S. position on MOU confidentiality. Brooks said that, in the initial draft of the separate agreement listing coordinates and site diagrams, the U.S. side had included the detailed specifications for site diagrams previously found in Annex J of the MOU. On reflection, the U.S. side had concluded that, while the actual site diagrams should remain confidential, the requirements for them belonged in the treaty. The U.S. side thus proposed moving the original Annex J language back into Annex J. Brooks said this should pose no problem for the Soviet side. Nazarkin agreed, saying that the Soviet side simply needed to understand the U.S. position. 12. Nazarkin and Brooks agreed that the U.S. side would prepare an updated paper on the subject of submarine tunnels and Anderson Air Force Base. 13. Nazarkin said he was worried about Annex 9 to the inspection protocol and asked if that annex could be dropped or deferred for consideration in the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission (JCIC). Brooks said that, at a minimum, the portions on which agreement had been reached should go into the inspection protocol (IP). The two agreed to return to the subject at a later date. 14. Nazarkin asked what the acronym “STARS” stood for. Brooks said he would find out. 15. Brooks referred to a proposal Nazarkin had made the previous day for the sides to make identical statements obligating themselves to refrain from acts which would defeat the objects and purposes of the treaty prior to its entry-into-force. Brooks asked where such a statement would be made. Nazarkin said the statement would be made in Geneva. Brooks said that he could agree to such an exchange of statements. 16. Nazarkin said that the decision on the Soviet JCIC commissioner had not yet been made. The two candidates were Ambassador Masterkov and Soviet delegation member Kryuchkov. Brooks said the U.S. side would probably name Ambassador Steven Steiner, the special verification commissioner. Brooks explained that the U.S. believed it important that the approaches to the two treaties be the same and wished to draw on the expertise Ambassador Steiner had gained during the three years of INF implementation. 17. Nazarkin briefly mentioned follow-on negotiations. Nazarkin said he assumed there would be a recess in the START talks of at least half a year. The sides needed, however, to determine what next steps to take in strategic offensive arms, as well as determining how to meet
