1336  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
22. Wang replied, on their part they had also many grievances 
in connection with treatment their nationals in US. I had described 
these meetings as going backward. He agreed with me, but pointed 
out they had nothing to do with it. If one of two partners trying go 
forward while other trying pull backward, of course it very difficult 
have results. I had referred release 11 member American Air Force on 
their own initiative and had referred to release number Americans 
on day agreement. These releases had been effected simply as result 
decision Chinese authorities in accordance judicial procedure. Also 
took these measures in expectation and hope such lenient measures 
given Americans would be example goodwill and eventually lead 
to improvement relations between two countries. What was reward 
of this gesture goodwill their part? US taken series unfriendly actions 
against Wang’s country and had demanded Wang’s country do that 
and that while my authorities doing unfriendly things toward Wang’s 
country. For us demand that other side do something, and not do it our­
selves would not improve relations. In last part statement I had referred 
to responsibility US protect Americans in China. They had just seen 
number American correspondents returning in safety to my country 
from visit China. Nothing wrong done to them. One could not fail note 
American press, including Association American Publishers, refuted 
allegation that protection and safety of correspondents was an issue. 
It was friendly thing for American correspondents to wish visit China, it 
was friendly for Chinese Govt to let them come, but US Govt forbidding 
them was unfriendly act; to say it was matter of safety was still more 
unfriendly act. It would bring no good to American Govt continue pose 
such unfriendly and hostile attitude and spreading unfriendly state­
ments against China.
23. I replied, he had spoken of release 11 fliers, and of 10 civilians 
released Sept 10 as motivated by desire improve relations. I supposed 
then I could only interpret continued holding of 10 who still there in 
spite our agreement as motivated by opposite desire. Certainly hard for 
me believe behavior of 10 still here so much worse than behavior those 
released as to preclude release. Let us be clear about this. We given as 
first task question civilians. That been completely resolved on independ­
ent evidence of agency and govt which he designated to confirm this 
with respect Chinese in US. Even though did not enter into original 
discussions, it been resolved even for Chinese imprisoned for common 
crimes. I had not thrown off fog of arguments about jurisdiction, sover­
eignty, other such terms—we had gone ahead and resolved it. We still 
did not see evidence intent his authorities resolve it equally as far as 
Americans his country concerned. We resolved it without asking any 
political concessions. We resolved it completely in spirit and letter of 
agrement into which we entered. We still look for similar intent on part 
his authorities.
