3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
803
and creative energy to dealing with the Soviet Union. Soviet affairs are
thus neglected at the bureau level. SOV now has just a shade of its
former influence and competence. It is largely ignored on high policy
matters. The creation of a new bureau devoted exclusively to Soviet
and East European affairs would demonstrate that:
—Secretary Muskie is taking a creative and dynamic approach
toward US-Soviet relations;
—he is giving them the emphasis they deserve during these trou-
bled times;
—he intends to implement organizational changes which demon-
strate that he is convinced he will be Secretary of State for the next five
years; and
—he recognizes that NATO and Soviet affairs should not be in the
same bureau of the State Department because the problems we face in
dealing with these areas are in many cases antithetical and therefore
should not be settled within the bureau, but rather be dealt with at the
high policy level. (C)
Finally, the person in charge of such a bureau (or for that matter
Shulman’s replacement if a new bureau is not organized) should obvi-
ously be somebody who has been closely associated with you in the
past. This would help the President because—together with the Nimetz
appointment—it would be a striking symbol of the new unity between
the Department and the NSC on Soviet affairs. With Nimetz (a Vance
protege) in command and one of your own colleagues or former col-
leagues as the new Assistant Secretary for East European affairs, we
would have in place what would be perceived as a new, balanced team.
This would be an important symbol that there are no longer funda-
mental differences in viewpoint within the Administration on how we
should be dealing with the Soviets during the Era of Afghanistan. Pos-
sible candidates which occur to me might be Sam Huntington or Made-
leine Albright, but you, of course, are in the best position to suggest
somebody, if you believe the idea has merit. (C)
(c) Adopt Sound Basic Principles on How to Deal with the Soviets. Sen-
ator Muskie has an opportunity to behave toward the Soviets in a way
that makes sense diplomatically, that will strike the right tone publicly,
and that will gladden the heart of the State Department and of all pro-
fessional observers of US-Soviet relations. To do so he should adopt the
following basic principles of behavior. (C)
(1) Maintain a multiplicity of channels, i.e., do not use Dobrynin as
the single means of communication for dealing with the Soviet gov-
ernment on high policy matters. It is Gromyko and Brezhnev who
should be the recipients of our message, not Dobrynin, who cannot
always be counted on to convey our message in the way we want it
conveyed.
