March–August 1953
513
tion as president of the Majlis despite Mosadeq’s disapproval was the
result of a tactical maneuver of the moment, and provides no assurance
that the Majlis would support Kashani for Prime Minister. Opposition
to the Mullah, which would be formidable, would arise from the fol-
lowing considerations: (1) his personal conceit and ambition for power,
which discourage cooperation; (2) doubts of the genuineness of his pro-
fessed interest in social and political reform; (3) his well-known record
for unscrupulousness and opportunism; (4) his open antagonism
toward the Shah and the army; (5) his outspoken support of various
bigoted practices; (6) his lack of business experience; and (7) his lack of
executive experience at any level of government.3 Should he gain
power his tenure might well be short, especially if his resort to violent
methods should result in his own assassination.
One other alternative must be considered, and that is the very real
possibility that Kashani does not want the responsibility of being Prime
Minister. He would probably prefer the power without the office, and
may actually envisage himself as president or titular head of an Iranian
republic.
What Is Kashani’s Appeal?
Kashani’s support derives from two factors: (1) political and reli-
gious emotion, and (2) material self-interest. Since World War I, when
his father lost his life allegedly as a result of British action in Iraq and
when Kashani participated in the declaration of Jihad (Holy War)
against the Allies, he has been in frequent bitter clashes with British au-
thority. During World War II he was interned by the British Army. This
record of suffering at British hands has made Kashani a popular hero—
a veteran in the fight against “imperialism” imposed by nations not
only foreign, but Christian. He has used this religious factor effectively
to stir up political support from pious figures throughout Iranian so-
ciety. He has also secured support by providing employment or mate-
rial advantages for followers. His political and philanthropic activities
require considerable funds. Reports that he receives contributions from
Iranians of all classes for favors promised or received are undoubtedly
true. But it is significant that this is a usual Iranian practice to which no
stigma is attached.
Kashani has—like Mosadeq—built his political career on oppor-
tunism, i.e., by taking advantage of developments for which he was not
primarily responsible. The most important of these, of course, was the
growing resentment of foreign interference and pressure in Iran during
and following the 1941–46 Anglo-Soviet occupation of Iran. Kashani
3 In the left margin of the memorandum is the handwritten question, “no opposi-
tion of mujtahids?” This question is in an unknown hand.
