to give the term its widest possible intendment. Consequently, it
is the Secretary’s view that if the offer were accepted by both
parties the Government of the United States should be prepared to
exercise its good offices to any extent reasonably consistent with
the main object of effecting a genuine and lasting settlement of
the differences referred to. The Secretary of State would, if the
parties desired, place at their disposition his services as mediator
in any negotiations which might ensue and by his presence or
representation if desired at the negotiations exert every effort to
see that the fullest opportunity of reaching an essential agreement
is afforded to the two Governments concerned. I am instructed by
the Secretary of State to submit to the Government of Chile the
foregoing explanation and interpretation of the nature and scope
of the offer.”
If you think it appropriate in order to avoid leaving any false impressions,
you may state to Minister for Foreign Affairs that the above memorandum
has been formulated on our initiative and that a memorandum in same sense
is being forwarded American Embassy in Peru18 for delivery to President
Leguía and the Minister for Foreign Affairs. For some time we have
contemplated advisability of making this further interpretation of offer of
good offices so as to guard against any misunderstanding.
Referring to your telegram No. 30 of March 10, 5 p.m., we have been
informed by Lassiter that Peruvian member of the Plebiscitary Commission
has presented resolution reciting that the assaults and offenses against
Peruvian delegation and Peruvian officials are incompatible with the
plebiscitary proceedings, and calling for the indefinite postponement of the
program. Whether Government of Peru eventually accepts offer of good
offices is impossible to predict, but in meantime you will appreciate
importance of our being promptly advised of any change or modification of
attitude of Chilean Government in this matter. It is not our understanding
that liberal interpretation of the offer embodied in above memorandum can
induce any change in attitude of Chile.
GREW
