3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
269
The first involves the Soviet propaganda campaign directed at the
United States and its Allies against the defensive tactical nuclear
weapon called by you “the Neutron Bomb.” That particular weapon is
defensive; it is a tactical weapon of limited range; it is designed against
concentrated tank formations; it is meant to be used primarily against
military targets; and it is not even being produced. In every respect, it
contrasts vividly with the Soviet SS–20, which can be used in an offen-
sive attack; which has extensive range; which can be targeted against
industrial and urban centers in Western Europe; which generates three
times as much radiation and more than ten times the blast damage; and
which is already being deployed. I am quite prepared to discuss the
issue in a serious and thorough manner, but I do not believe that public
campaigns, designed to inflame emotions, are helpful to a constructive
dialogue on as complicated a matter as theater or tactical nuclear
weapons of either NATO or the Warsaw Pact.
Secondly, I am concerned that our respective policies in the Middle
East may be pointing in different directions. We are not promoting
“separate deals.” We are seeking a comprehensive settlement, to be
worked out within the Geneva framework. We believe the current
Egyptian-Israeli negotiations can be channeled in that direction and en-
larged in their scope to embrace, as you say, “all the parties,” including
moderate Palestinians prepared to accept the existence of Israel. This is
why we have kept you fully informed regarding our initiatives and at-
titudes, and we continue to hope that the Soviet Union will use its good
offices to encourage Syria and the Palestinians to adopt a moderate and
constructive attitude. Such a development would make the holding of
an early Geneva conference more likely.
Finally, let me turn to the most worrisome concern: the Horn of Af-
rica. The United States is not supplying arms to either side, nor have I
been exaggerating when I expressed U.S. reservations regarding Soviet
and Cuban involvement. That involvement is a fact, and is very trou-
bling to us.
At the same time, the United States has abstained from becoming
involved and has not encouraged concerned neighboring states to be-
come involved. We do not wish either to intensify nor to perpetuate the
Ethiopian-Somali conflict. Our preference is an early and peaceful set-
tlement respecting the territorial integrity of the African states, and the
complete removal of all foreign military personnel from both Ethiopia
and Somalia. We intend to promote such a peaceful resolution of the
conflict—and I think it would be a most constructive development if
our two countries could join in proclaiming the need for a negotiated
solution, based on respect for the territorial integrity of both Ethiopia
and Somalia, accompanied by the immediate recall of both Soviet and
Cuban military personnel from Ethiopia.
