Arms Control and Disarmament  1551
He realized that Macmillan is himself a strong and able man but that he 
was being strongly influenced at this time with respect to the problems 
of Europe because of impending elections and his preoccupation with 
retaining power.
He has looked into the situation in France, and particularly that of 
NATO, and held a rather pessimistic view of the present effectiveness 
of the alliance because of the remote and difficult attitude of General 
de Gaulle. He remarked that Chancellor Adenauer had not recovered 
as quickly from his recent illness as he had in previous instances in the 
past, that he was somewhat remote from public opinion in Germany 
and that the men surrounding him were loath to tell the Chancellor 
unpleasant things because of the risk of displeasing him and hence 
lessening the chance of any one of them becoming Dr. Adenauer’s 
heir apparent. Mr. McCloy remarked that there was no government 
in Italy and that recent shifts in Italian political parties had disrupted 
the precarious balance which has maintained middle-of-the-road and 
pro-Western governments for some time. He felt that in the light of this 
situation the Russian attitude toward Germany, and particularly Berlin, 
represented a serious and even dangerous situation.
The Secretary expressed general agreement with Mr. McCloy’s 
assessment and posed the question as to whether or not the United States 
should exert vigorous leadership in order to pull the West together to 
meet the situation. All of the members of the Advisory Committee and 
Mr. William Foster emphatically advised in the affirmative.
418.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between John Foster 
Dulles and Farley1
February 1, 1959, 5:10 p.m.
Sec read proposed cable to Wadsworth to F. F. said he had two com­
ments. (1) the Soviets did table their list of the subjects on which they 
wanted a vote by unanimity of the 3 powers. There were 6 or 8 items, 
no real surprises. They wanted it on all major decisions. (2) it was a 
close thing as to whether Wadsworth’s judgment was right, that it might 
leave them the excuse we were stalling. Sec said he did not know about 
the Soviet list, does it provide for veto power on all major issues? Sec 
asked why that had not been played up. F. said it happened the last 
1 Source: Soviet veto proposal in nuclear testing suspension talks. No classification 
marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
