1026 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement COMMENT: This was not brought out at the meeting. THE PRESIDENT—Then discussed in general the vulnerability of SAC land-­based equipment. He asked how long does it take to fire Minuteman and when the research would be done on Minuteman? He asked when Hound Dog would be operational? Then, he noted that the reserves for Polaris were very few, and he thought we should have 100% reserves of Polaris missiles in coastal areas where we could pos­ sibly get them. ADM BURKE—Told him we had 33% reserves in tenders. THE PRESIDENT—Said he didn’t think that was enough, that it should be 100%. ADM BURKE—Said thank you. —Then said we had thought of putting reserve missiles in tenders and sending them into safe waters such as Trinidad or African or South American ports. THE PRESIDENT—Said well, you would have to send a subma­ rine a long distance to get reserve missiles and he thought it would be wise to have some reserves right in the United States. I heard Mr. Douglas whisper to Andy Goodpaster that it would take weeks to get reload on this basis. THE PRESIDENT—Then said, in answer to a question, that he wanted to have some residual power left so that he wouldn’t be help­ less—that, if he had started a war like that, he wanted to be able to finish it, and he was interested in having a capability after the initial strikes were over. MR. GATES—Asked him if he thought the follow-­on strike capa­ bility would have any deterrent effect. THE PRESIDENT—Said no, he just wanted to have military capa­ bility afterwards. MR. MC CONE—Then asked if we had studied the growing inter­ cept capability of the Russians against aircraft. He pointed out that the Russians had been improving their surface-­to-­air missiles. They had good interceptors, good communications, and there was a lot of intelligence information which indicated that the Russians were really stressing air defense, particularly against high altitude aircraft. With the introduction of missiles into the Soviet arsenal, aircraft were becom­ ing increasingly vulnerable while missiles were not, and yet 90% of our stockpile was now for aircraft delivery and only 10% was for other types of delivery—and, I think he said only 2% was for missile delivery.
