710 Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement just which side has sincerity towards settlement our problems, it plain to everybody. 13. Wang said if US side desirous peaceful settlement it must there┬Ł fore withdraw its unreasonable demands. If US side should continue persist in its unreasonable demands, Wang saw no point in continuing these dragged out talks. 14. In partly extemporaneous partly prepared reply I said he had given his views on how he saw situation in which we find ourselves and had renewed charges against my government and discussed mat┬Ł ters which I couldnŌĆÖt see would help us advance in reaching agreement on problem directly in front of us. I, too, was seriously concerned with situation with which we confronted in our talks which could and still can have such favorable potentialities not only for our two peoples but for world. I would like to discuss that situation with him with utmost candor. I did not want to make charges or engage in fruitless debate but would like him understand how situation appeared to me at present moment. 15. I said I came here on August 1 last year with hope that his gov┬Ł ernment fully shared spirit which led my government propose these talks and with hope real progress could be achieved by exercise of good will and understanding of each others point view, and would continue carry this out to best my ability. 16. I said it was not through accident, or lightly, that in its specific proposal for these talks my government placed matter of return civil┬Ł ians first, and had hoped that acceptance of that by his government proved that it also appreciated great importance of promptly resolving that matter. At very outset our conversations I carefully tried explain to him not only official attitude my government with regard this matter but also exactly how American people felt about it and relationship it had to atmosphere in which we might seek resolution of other matters facing us. 17. I said action his government had taken July 31 in freeing 11 American airmen led me to hope that his government also fully appre┬Ł ciated importance this matter and was desirous of promptly and com┬Ł pletely resolving it. In order show its goodwill with regard matter and in hope it would facilitate prompt resolution of problem of Americans in his country, my government unilaterally rescinded all measures under which some few Chinese had been prevented from returning his country. I had informed him of this at very outset our talks. 18. I said no attempt was made to hold these people to extract political or other concessions from them nor was action in any way con┬Ł ditioned on taking of action by his government with respect Americans in his country. As I had pointed out to him at time, taking of similar
