216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 63. Telegram From the Department of State to the United States Observer Mission in the Sinai1 Washington, September 20, 1978, 2203Z 239358. Subject: Intsum 653—September 19, 1978. London for Glaspie. Paris for Nicholas Murphy. Other addressees for Chiefs of Mission. Warning notice sensitive sources and methods involved not releasable to foreign nationals 1. Camp David Summit. The Jordanian Government issued an official statement on Camp David yesterday following a three-hour Cabinet session. The statement said Jordan: (A) would not be bound by agreements it had not helped to negotiate; (B) believes that the Arab-Israeli crisis requires a comprehensive solution; and (C) criticized the signing of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. “The dissociation of any of the Arab parties from the responsibilities of the collective action to reach a just and comprehensive solution . . . constitutes a weakening of the Arab stand and the chances of reaching a just and comprehensive solution.” 2. Despite this negative statement, King Hussein’s attitude toward the post-Camp David era is not yet clear. The King, however, seems aware that the outcome of the summit will oblige him to make a difficult decision on his entry into the peace process. 3. The Jordanian press has been universally critical, and the majority of Jordanians seem to oppose entry into direct peace negotiations. The East Bank Jordanians who dominate the government are very reluctant once again to be held responsible for the West Bank and the Palestinian problem. They also fear that if Jordan becomes saddled with negotiating for the Palestinians, the future of the Hashemite Kingdom would be jeopardized. 4. The large Palestinian community in Jordan is also unlikely to support a Jordanian role in the negotiations. They recognize the PLO as 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780385–0095. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Albert A. Vaccaro (INR/RNA/NE); approved by W.D. Wolle (INR/RNA); cleared by C. William Kontos (SSM). Sent for information Priority to Abu Dhabi, Algiers, Baghdad, Brasilia, Cairo, Doha, Jerusalem, Kuwait, London, Madrid, Manama, Mogadiscio, Moscow, Muscat, Nicosia, Nouakchott, Paris, Rabat, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Tripoli, Tunis, Sana, USUN, and the Department of the Treasury.
