564 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI SLBMs, and also heavy bombers. Indeed the entire spectrum of arms, not just one component of the armed forces. Baker: I understand that’s your counter-­proposal. We are not in a position to agree at this point but I think we ought to at least be thinking about some kind of generic statement on de-MIRVing of land-­based missiles because this is something that could enhance our ability to talk about follow-­on negotiations and its purposes. Shevardnadze: Well, let’s think about that. In our statement we are trying to identify all the main areas or aspects of future talks, emphasizing the most de-­stabilizing weapons. But, let’s take into account the fact that we each have interests and that historically our forces and structures have evolved in a certain way. That ought to be reflected in the statement. Baker: Well, we will see. Certainly whatever you have to present, we will take a look at. Whether we could agree to it will depend upon what’s in it. Shevardnadze: Yes, of course. The main element is our readiness to begin follow-­on talks after the 50% reduction treaty has been completed. The objectives and the main aspects of those talks are what we are outlining. But we could compare our draft with yours and we will see where they overlap. Baker: Yes, we will have to see it. I haven’t seen yours, you haven’t seen ours. Our experts can exchange them. Shevardnadze: Let me emphasize what I said in Windhoek. On the issue of ALCMs, my bag is empty. I really have no room to maneuver on ALCM range. Other questions we can go over tomorrow and discuss them and see if we can find compromise solutions. I am hopeful that we can. On the possibility of a statement as a result of our talks, I think we ought to at least consider that. I have no objection to reflecting, in a short statement, what we have agreed to. Maybe we don’t have to have a long statement. Baker: I think that is right. I think we ought to not have to feel the need to produce a long joint communique every time we meet. If there is a very brief statement that records what we have agreed to, that is fine. Shevardnadze: I think that is right. We can ask our experts to work out a brief statement reflecting agreements only. On the basis of our previous meetings I have always had a sense that we really run out of time and don’t have enough time to review the results of our overall discussions. We have very wide-­ranging talks. We have lots of experts, including experts on bilateral relations. And somehow 90 minutes for a concluding session doesn’t seem to leave enough time.
