430  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
97.	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, October 23, 1978
SUBJECT
The Triad and Its Alternatives
At our meeting on September 29th, you asked why—­since Min-
uteman is becoming vulnerable, and since MAP involves thorny ques-
tions of its own—­we should not simply abandon the ICBM leg of the 
triad, and strengthen the remaining two legs as necessary.2 You were 
also interested in other possible basing systems. This memorandum is 
to give you my thoughts on those issues.
In simplest terms, we could indeed abandon the ICBM leg and 
move to a dyad of SLBMs and bombers. Or we might retain a triad—­or 
something like a triad—­by replacing silo- or MAP-­based ICBMs with 
one of the newer concepts (air-­mobile ICBMs, land-­mobile ICBMs, air-­
launched ICBMs, or perhaps even SLBMs carried in coastal submers-
ibles). With any of those alternatives, we could probably maintain an 
overall balance with the Soviet Union in terms of static indicators and 
in terms of dynamic exchange calculations. In addition, though it’s too 
early to estimate costs for the novel basing schemes, we can say that 
at least the SLBM/Bomber dyad need not be more expensive than an 
SLBM/Bomber/MX–MAP triad of generally equivalent capability as 
measured by most (though probably not all) criteria. But on the other 
hand, with the dyad alternative, and to a lesser extent with the tri-
ads involving the alternatives to MAP, we would give up features of 
both perceptual and military value that we have enjoyed in the past, 
and—­if one puts aside some of the political and possible verification 
questions about MAP—­would continue to enjoy with the MX in a MAP 
deployment.
The effect of the US giving up, under successful Soviet pressure, a 
military capability of considerable value which the Soviet Union retains 
would, in my view, have disastrous consequences both internationally 
and domestically.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject 
File, Box 43, Missiles: 11/78–4/79. Top Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of 
the memorandum. Brown’s handwritten covering memorandum to Carter, October 23, 
reads: “This is the first of a series of memos on issues that have arisen in past discussions 
on the Defense program. They are deliberately structured as information rather than 
decision papers, because I will want to make specific recommendations separately at a 
later time. Though they may seem lengthy, they are worth reading in full.”
2 See footnote 2, Document 90.
