118 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. AWACS. Secretary Brown and General Jones will prepare a recommendation for the President concerning the possible location of an AWACS aircraft in the region, possibly at Aswan, with overflight rights for Saudi Arabia.2 (S) 2. Presidential Views. The President talked to Dr. Brzezinski just prior to the meeting. He wants the group to consider how to prepare for the next stage. Should we try to deter trials? Should we communicate privately with Khomeini or those around him, informing them how we would react in the event of trials, including the possibility of military action? The SCC should review our options, including possible restriction of Iranian diplomatic activities in this country. The President felt that a break in diplomatic relations would be premature at this point. It had been suggested to the President that he might consider making an address to the UN General Assembly. He asked for the views of the SCC. If this seems appropriate, he would suggest a small drafting group under Hedley Donovan. (S) 3. United Nations. Secretary Vance believed that we should begin work on a draft Presidential speech, but he thought it was too early to go to the UN. He expects the Security Council to meet on Monday or Tuesday3 as part of the negotiating effort being conducted through the Secretary General. He felt that a Security Council resolution should precede any Presidential address. He recommended that the negotiations through the UN channel be permitted to play out for a bit more. After the SC resolution, we can consider a possible Presidential address calling for Security Council sanctions. Three of the four points in the present negotiating package seem to be negotiable. He was uncertain about the fourth.4 We should know by mid-week if this approach has worked and if the Secretary General could go to Tehran to bring back the hostages. It was agreed that Hedley Donovan would begin drafting a statement in cooperation with State. (S) 4. Trials. The group agreed that we wished to deter the holding of trials and, if trials were held, to deter any executions. We could privately inform Khomeini or those close to him that holding trials would bring 2 Carter wrote “proceed” in the left margin beside Item 1. 3 November 26 or 27. 4 See Document 33. Waldheim outlined his negotiating proposal to McHenry in a November 16 meeting. The package would include 1) release of the hostages, 2) “some kind of investigation of Iranian grievances with regard to the Shah,” 3) departure of the Shah “only in connection with a scenario which includes or coincides with the release of the hostages, and 4) “any other steps which Khomeini and those within Iran who wished to bring the impasse to an end might use to persuade the students to go along.” (Telegram 5321 from USUN, November 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840137–2439)
