3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
827
ploiting the hostage issue more and more against the USSR and con-
demned the U.S. rescue attempt and any use of force in Iran. On Cuban
refugees, he basically said that Cuba was free to choose its own policies
and the U.S. was exploiting the issue for hostile purposes against Cuba.
On Soviet media and official attacks against President Carter, Gromyko
deflected the issue by stating that if a comparison was made, U.S. offi-
cials and media accounts would win “first place” in the intensity of crit-
icism against Soviet officials.
At the end of Gromyko’s long presentation I said it would be
useless to comment on each of the points he made and singled out some
of his key statements for rebuttal. I made clear that since the beginning
of our relationship with the Soviet Union there has not been anything
to parallel their military invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized
as a nonaligned state. The Soviet action has jeopardized the interna-
tional situation to such an extent that the Soviet Union must live up to
its responsibilities and a way must be found to make some forward
movement, lest the situation become even more dangerous. I stressed
that it was the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan which forced the post-
ponement of SALT II ratification, that the U.S. intent to pass SALT II at
the appropriate time was real, and that our interest in preliminary ne-
gotiations of LRTNF within the SALT III framework was serious and
could help relieve tensions. I pointed out the unilateral Soviet deploy-
ment of SS–20’s is the cause of the unbalance in European theater
systems. Finally, I concluded that Gromyko’s allegations of the U.S.
seeking unilateral strategic advantage were patently false. End
summary.
3. I called on Foreign Minister Gromyko on May 25, at our request,
and made a basic presentation based on Department’s instructions
contained in reftels, which included U.S.-Soviet relations post-
Afghanistan, arms control negotiations, Iran, Cuban refugees and at-
tacks on President Carter by the Soviet media and officials. I also
handed over our representation list of divided families and a shorter
list of U.S. citizens and their families who wish to depart the Soviet
Union. Gromyko asked that I proceed with my talking points and that
he would respond after I had finished. He took notes on specific issues
throughout the course of our meeting. I preceded my presentation by
informing Gromyko that I would be leaving this week for the United
States to testify before the SFRC on the state of our relations and ex-
pressed my appreciation for his meeting with me on such short notice.
Gromyko was cordial and relaxed throughout the course of the
meeting and made his remarks in a calm and reflective manner inter-
spersed with instances of his well-known barbed wit.
4. Gromyko prefaced his remarks by stating that his government
would reserve the right to make any additional response or comments,
