Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
593
Three Presidents have now spent more than 6 years negotiating
the next step in this process—SALT II. We have all negotiated carefully
and deliberately. Every step of the way, we’ve worked with our mili-
tary leaders and other experts, and we’ve sought the advice and coun-
sel of the Members of Congress.
An overwhelming majority of the American people recognize the
need for SALT II. Our people want and our people expect continued,
step-by-step progress toward bringing nuclear weapons under control.
Americans will support a reasoned increase in our defense effort,
but we do not want a wholly unnecessary return to the Cold War and
an all-out arms race, with its vastly greater risks and costs. Through
strength, we want world peace.
Let me turn to the second question—how is SALT II related to our
overall defense strategy?
The strategic forces of the United States and the Soviet Union
today are essentially equivalent. They have larger and more numerous
land-based missiles. We have a larger number of warheads and, as you
know, significant technological and geographical advantages.
Each side has the will and the means to prevent the other from
achieving superiority. Neither side is in a position to exploit its nuclear
weapons for political purposes, nor to use strategic weapons without
facing almost certain suicide.
What causes us concern is not the current balance but the mo-
mentum of the Soviet strategic buildup. Over the past decade, the So-
viets have steadily increased their real defense spending, year by year,
while our own defense spending over that decade has had a net
decrease.
In areas not limited by SALT, SALT I, they have launched ambi-
tious programs to strengthen their strategic forces. At some future
point, the Soviet Union could achieve a strategic advantage, unless we
alter these trends. That is exactly what I want to do—with the support
of the American people and the bipartisan support of Congress.
We must move on two fronts at the same time. First, within mutu-
ally accepted limits, we must modernize our own strategic forces.
Along with the strengthening of NATO, that is a central purpose of the
increased defense budget that I’ve submitted to Congress—improve-
ments which are necessary even in a time of fiscal restraint. And
second, we must place more stringent limits on the arms race than are
presently imposed by SALT I. That is the purpose of the SALT II treaty.
The defense budget I’ve submitted will ensure that our nuclear
force continues to be essentially equivalent to that of the Soviet Union.
This year, we’ve begun to equip our submarines with new, more
powerful, and longer range Trident I missiles. Next year, the first of our
