National Security Policy 667 REASON: The phrase recommended for deletion is redundant. At the same time it can be interpreted to mean that political and military factors are not all examined and weighed in every decision to commit United States forces to war. The proposed JCS Alternative is the only one of the three proposals that is consistent with the remainder of the paragraph. The danger of general war being initiated by the USSR is present in any conflict in which the United States or its Free World allies are involved. Therefore, this risk must have been assessed and accepted before any U.S. forces are committed to war in support of U.S. national objectives. It is impossible to know what U.S. action would cause the USSR to enter the conflict and thus broaden it into general war. Since a policy to provide guidance to the departments and agencies of the Government of the United States must have a reasonably finite founda­ tion, it cannot be based upon an unknown. Further, including in a policy statement the thought that the United States, to avoid a general war with the USSR, would revise downward or would abandon part or all of the political and/or military objectives for which it was then engaged in a war with a country other than the USSR could lead to fatal consequences in terms of the U.S. national existence, since it would: a. Foster indecision in the planning of political and military actions and in the utilization of the U.S. armed forces in war in support of these plans; b. Place the decision of war or peace completely in the hands of the USSR regardless of the importance of that decision to the United States; c. Open the way to a series of political-­military defeats like Korea and Vietnam; d. Seriously, if not fatally, weaken the U.S. position as leader of the Free World; and, as a consequence, e. Destroy the world-­wide systems of military alliances so pain­ fully erected by the United States. Appendix B Talking Points Prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff Washington, undated Policy Guidance Recognizing that the prompt and resolute application of the degree of force necessary to defeat local aggression is the best means to keep such hostilities from broadening into general war and that any decision to commit U.S. forces to war would be taken only after consideration of all factors, including probable Soviet reaction, the United States should
