Chapter 6, June–December 1990  861
RVs. (In contrast, the Soviet position calls for the elimination of mis-
siles, RVs, ALCMs and other bomber weapons.) We need to decide 
what kind of RV elimination proposal, if any, to adopt in START.
The USG has developed a specific limited proposal for eliminat-
ing ballistic missile RVs in a way that is consistent with U.S. programs. 
This proposal envisions the destruction of most of the RV shell, after 
the warhead and other internal components have been removed. The 
proposal would require the destruction of a number of RVs equal to the 
net number of warheads on missiles retired under START. The actual 
RVs destroyed could be older RVs that are currently in storage. This 
flexibility would permit us to reuse warheads and RVs from retired 
Trident C–4s on the D–5s now entering service. An elimination regime 
that required the destruction of the actual RVs removed from service 
would be much more costly to the SLBM modernization program. An 
elimination proposal that required the destruction of warheads in addi-
tion to RV shells would be even more expensive and could deny us the 
ability to deploy future Trident submarines so long as Rocky Flats is 
not operational.
RV elimination is largely a political and perceptual issue. START 
will be compared to the standard set by the INF Treaty and improve-
ments over SALT II. The U.S. has claimed from the beginning of 
START negotiations that it must address a major flaw of SALT II by 
limiting missiles as well as their launchers. During INF ratification, the 
Administration was criticized because INF did not require the elimina-
tion of warheads.
In START we already have agreed to eliminate submarines, heavy 
bombers, and ICBM launchers. The question is whether we need addi-
tional destruction requirements and, if so, whether the RV elimination 
proposal outlined above is better or worse than no proposal.
On one hand, an RV elimination requirement could mitigate pres-
sure during ratification for more extensive—­and expensive—­destruction. 
On the other hand, it is not clear that the draft U.S. proposal would suc-
ceed in this regard. First, RV elimination would have much less visual 
impact than the pictures of missiles being destroyed in INF. Second, the 
draft U.S. proposal would be criticized by some as an expensive sham 
because it would permit everything except the RV shell to be salvaged 
before destruction, would permit the elimination of older RVs in storage, 
would not require the elimination of RVs on missiles actually retired, and 
would not prohibit the construction of new RV shells.
Soviet statements in Geneva suggest that their motivation in pro-
posing RV and weapon elimination is primarily a matter of their domes-
tic politics. If so, the Soviets may be flexible on the details. On the other 
hand, a limited U.S initiative might make it more difficult to resist Soviet 
(or Senate) pressure to adopt additional elimination requirements that 
would be much more disruptive and expensive to implement.
