24 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Tab 1 Paper Prepared in the Department of State8 Washington, undated START Our first task is to decide how to ensure the survivability of our land-­based ICBM force. Without consensus on this, there is danger of a START impasse in the Administration and on the Hill. Once this decision is reached, how we should move on key START issues will become clearer. For example, we will certainly require provision in START for mobile missiles (our present position bans mobiles), but the specific measures we introduce will depend on and be designed to support the ICBM program we choose (while taking account of ongoing Soviet mobile programs). Properly done, the START reductions in the Soviet strategic force should ease substantially the task of deploying a survivable and affordable ICBM force. Other problems will remain, especially SLCMs. Our position has been to avoid SLCM limitations in START; the Soviets say this is a Treaty buster. They have pushed verification proposals we have rejected (because they could be readily circumvented, would inhibit Navy operations and would compromise our strict policy to neither confirm nor deny the presence of nuclear weapons). In sum, priority issues for the review should be: — How the U.S. ICBM program should be structured. — How mobile ICBMs should be dealt with, and how such systems should be verified. — What our position should be on the remaining issues such as SLCMs. Conclusion: Our basic approach to START is sound and will stand up to review. In particular, backing away from support for 50% reductions in fast flyers is both unwise and unnecessary—­provided we come to grips with the survivability issue. As to SLCMs, we are convinced they will have to be limited if we are to reach a START agreement, unless we decide we do not need nuclear SLCMs, and agree with the Soviets to ban them. Accordingly, a key element of the review must be to consider verification options. While SLCMs may be 8 Secret; Exdis.
