352 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX almost constantly, poisoning the atmosphere. Seemingly pointless harassment, bureaucratic delay, and general obstruction of American tourists by Czechoslovak authorities led the Embassy in July of this year to request the Department to issue an advisory warning travelers of possible difficulties. On the positive side, however, the Czechoslovaks have worked steadily to resolve divided family cases, reducing the Embassy’s list of immediate (nuclear) families awaiting reunification in the West to two cases involving three individuals. 10. While the Czechoslovak side must bear the brunt of the blame for the propaganda atmosphere, the US side is not blameless. Czechoslovak officials perceive statements by US officials as part of a discriminatory policy, which makes a scapegoat of this country to further US policy goals with other countries whose human rights practices seem no less worthy of criticism. Quite clearly at the Belgrade CSCE Review Czechoslovakia served as a surrogate for the Soviet Union in receiving criticism from US delegates. With some justice GOC officials point out that positive factors, such as family reunification progress, tend to be ignored. 11. The outlook for bilateral relations is not bright. We are attempting to negotiate a claims/gold settlement before pending legislation requires us to seize the gold we hold and invest it to pay the claims, but can have no great assurance of success.2 Should that issue be resolved, some modest progress would be possible: The dormant Consular Convention would take effect, an exchanges agreement might be signed, permitting a modest increase in our information programs. As long as the Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act remain law, we foresee no early possibility of giving Czechoslovakia MFN and, failing that, no likely surge in agricultural trade. Our interests in Czechoslovakia are simply too few to provide an impetus for much improvement in bilateral relations. 12. The outlook is not, however, completely dark. In spite of 35 years of Soviet hegemony and an ever-increasing integration of the economy into the Soviet sphere, the Czechoslovak people remain Western oriented. The ties of emigration remain strong, with hundreds of thousands of Americans claiming Czech and Slovak ancestry. VOA and other Western radios, plus Austrian and West German TV, have large, regular audiences and any Western cultural attraction has a real sell out. In fact, this is a basic problem the regime faces—35 years of 2 The agreement on Czechoslovak payment of claims for expropriated U.S. citizens was initialed on November 6, 1981, in Prague Congress passed a resolution approving the deal on December 15 and President Reagan signed it on December 29. As part of the deal, the Czechoslovak Government agreed to pay $81.5 million to the claimants.
