Yugoslavia 821 —On MBFR (if Tito raises), we and our allies want to see progress toward reducing the opposing forces in Central Europe; any agreement should enhance political and military stability in Europe, and should be equitable; we will continue to keep Yugoslavia informed about the progress of the Vienna Talks. —On Eurocommunism, as we have said many times, we will not interfere in the domestic electoral processes in this matter. We do have certain concerns, however, about the possibility that communist participation in Western governments could weaken Western unity and harm the European balance. 5. Multilateral Political Issues: Nonalignment, UN Special Session on Disarmament, Puerto Rico U.S. Objectives: To voice understanding and respect for Yugoslavia’s policy of nonalignment; to encourage the Yugoslavs to take U.S. views into account as they develop their own positions on multilateral issues; to avoid unnecessary irritations on matters of importance to us (e.g., Puerto Rico); to endorse the UN Special Session on Disarmament. Yugoslav Objectives: To convince us that nonalignment makes sense for Yugoslavia and many other countries; that the success of the movement does not harm U.S. interests; to urge that we consult more actively with the nonaligned in our own policy deliberations. Essential Factors: Nonalignment is a fundamental component of Yugoslav foreign policy and is regarded as indispensable to preserving Yugoslavia’s independence and world status. The Yugoslavs feel that the U.S. has previously been either indifferent or hostile to the movement, but they see in your Administration’s approach to Third World issues a welcome shift toward greater understanding for nonaligned views. Meanwhile the movement itself is showing signs of strain under the pressure of radicals within the movement and open conflicts between member nations. Yugoslavia seeks to maintain internal cohesion within the movement and to remain in the mainstream. Belgrade is hosting the Nonaligned Foreign Ministers meeting this summer in preparation for the 1979 Nonaligned Summit in Havana, and is apparently working with others to maintain the relatively constructive and non-confrontational stance adopted at the Colombo summit in 1976. The UN Special Session on Disarmament next June was largely a Yugoslav initiative which we supported. As President of the last regular General Assembly, the Yugoslav Deputy Foreign Minister will preside at the Special Session. On Puerto Rico, we sought an affirmative Yugoslav vote on the most recent motion in the UN Decolonization Committee to defer the question of Puerto Rico for another year, but the Yugoslavs abstained, as they did in the previous two years.
