1158 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to get around that point by listing the powers of the SGA. We are back to “transfer of authority.” We need not get into that issue, if the Heads of Agreement just list powers. It will not advance the discussion to go back to “transfer of authority.” On paragraph four, again: Israel will react to “legislative authority” and “laws,” if described as such under powers and responsibilities, as leading to authority for an independent Palestinian state. Therefore we framed our language to get around this problem. The Egyptian redraft is all right, but we must recognize that it does not remove the problem. It is all right now. On the rest of the paragraph. . . . The President asked: paragraph 4? Ambassador Linowitz said: the second part. We are trying to reflect the Israeli position. They are trying to keep defense and foreign affairs for themselves. There is no question that Israel will agree to the SGA’s having diplomatic or consular relations or armed forces. Maybe this formulation (in the Egyptian draft) is all right, but Israel will assert that defense is with them. What does “defense” mean: it is just of Israel or of the West Bank, too? Israel insists on the latter. Second, on foreign affairs and relations with other countries, these would not be exercised by the SGA. Israel demands the right to handle communications and other types of international relations matters. We have no quarrel with the Egyptian language, but there is a problem of ambiguity. Paragraph five10 is fine, but why did the Egyptians change our language? The Egyptian language is all right. On the language on “coordinating,” the powers will not be unilateral if they are coordinated. Implicit in the Egyptian language is a practical change that will not be acceptable. Israel will say that both have to agree. The next paragraph11 focuses on what would happen if there is no agreement. Therefore, we said that existing arrangements would apply. Why has this been changed? The Egyptian draft does not deal with an important aspect of the problem. Also, this paragraph deals with coordination; not dispute settlement or whether the Continuing Committee has some agreed full powers. Most troubling, from our point of view, is that there is no alternative provided if there is no unanimity. There is a need for a way to go if there is no resolution of disagreements. We thought our proposal was good. Khalil understood it; Burg and Shamir accepted it tentatively, as pro- 10 The text of point five of the Egyptian paper reads: “The document will stipulate that the SGA will exercise its powers in such a way as to promote good neighborly relations between the West Bank and Gaza and all their neighbors, including Israel. To this end, coordinating arrangements will be made.” 11 The text of point six of the Egyptian paper reads: “It is agreed that certain areas that require coordination between the SGA and Israel will be referred to the Continuing Committee provided for in the Camp David Accords and consisting of Egypt, Israel, the United States, SGA, and Jordan. The Continuing Committee will operate on the basis of unanimity.”
