524
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Success in these renegotiations—and the context of the Review
Conference—will be strongly affected by the results of the INFCE,
scheduled for completion in February, 1980; by progress in arms con-
trol negotiations among the nuclear powers; by the confidence poten-
tial proliferators like Korea and Taiwan have in their security and our
assurances; and by attitudes toward the U.S. as a reliable nuclear fuel
and technology supplier.
If the INFCE results are inconclusive, and we do not have a good
case to make on arms control among the nuclear powers, we could
easily see a backlash against the NPT at the Review Conference. A
number of the more than 100 nations which have ratified the Treaty
could renounce it.
Particularly important, both for the Review Conference and the In-
dian renegotiation, will be agreement on a CTB. Yet a CTB treaty would
have rough sledding on the Hill. I would recommend that we seek to
reach a CTB agreement after SALT II ratification, toward the end of
1979 or early 1980, and then consider whether, rather than moving
promptly for ratification, we should send it to the UN Committee
on Disarmament for its review.28 This would please the Indians
and others, and could defer contentious Senate debate until after our
elections.
F. Other Arms Control Initiatives:
A SALT II agreement might make it possible to gain the political
level decisions necessary to make progress at the MBFR talks. The pri-
mary focus will remain on the Soviet position on data; we must remain
firm here.29
We might wish to look at ways of bringing the French into the
discussions, perhaps by adding a few new participants and thus
moving part way towards their proposed European Disarmament
Conference.30
With regard to conventional arms sales limitations, we will want
seriously to review progress on multilateral restraint when looking this
spring at our unilateral policies.31 But even if progress is minimal, we
should avoid so dramatic a change in our own policies of restraint that
28 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “We can wait
on ratification.”
29 The President underlined “must remain firm” and added “agree” in the left-hand
margin next to this sentence.
30 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “Guadeloupe
item.”
31 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “I’ll be [un-
clear—reluctant?] to change.”
