Human Rights
47
tions as a forum to speak out on human rights because of our quite ap-
propriate fear of being embarrassed by the charge of hypocrisy. Thus
the President’s intention to take these actions is not only a major step in
itself, but opens the door for many other U.S. actions on human rights.
—With his appointment of Andy Young, Carter has signaled that
he intends to make the United Nations a more important force in U.S.
foreign policy. No other national or international organ has the same
potential as the UN to advance the cause of human rights. (I stress po-
tential—how much depends on the changes proposed below.)
—There is a lot of debate about the value of words on this issue. On
the one hand, we hear lots of comment about when is the President
going to stop talking about human rights and actually do something.
On the other hand, Intelligence reports from various countries show
that Carter’s words—particularly in his Inaugural Address4—have al-
ready had a significant, positive effect on the policies of some other na-
tions. However too many words (particularly when addressed to indi-
vidual cases) carry the potential for all kinds of trouble: too many of
them rob each one of its force; individuals abroad may be provoked
into actions designed to elicit American response; damage to bilateral
relations, etc. This speech would allow the President to enunciate
strong U.S. principles on human rights, but in a manner completely di-
vorced from any individual case or nation. It would set the context in
which other American statements and actions could follow. A speech at
the UN would demonstrate that the U.S. is willing to say these things
on the record, and in a forum where we may take some heat as a result.
In his speech I would propose that the President—in addition to
announcing the four treaty actions—make the following points and
proposals:
—We reject the policy of remaining silent in the face of terrible
abuses of human rights because of a fear of embarrasing our friends or
ourselves because of our own lesser violations of human rights. All na-
tions, including the U.S. have been guilty of this. We all sin but that
need not silence us about the worst sinners.
—A gentle but moving call to try to create in the UN a political
forum to respond to human sufferings.
—There are many in this country as there are in other nations who
have become disillusioned with the United Nations. But it is still im-
portant—vital—to building and maintaining a peaceful world order.
The way to disarm that disillusionment is to make the UN work better.
—Therefore I propose some major steps to strengthen the UN
mechanisms on human rights. Specifically, urge the creation of an of-
4 See footnote 3, Document 8.
