3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
743
259.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
Posts, the Embassy in Pakistan, and the Embassy in Libya1
Washington, January 20, 1980, 0503Z
15459. Subject: Presidential Message on Olympics.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Embassy is requested to deliver ASAP to chief of state following
message from President Carter. Recipients should be asked to hold the
message in confidence until 1 pm Washington time January 20. FYI.
President will announce his decision at that time in the course of his ap-
pearance on “Meet the Press.” End FYI.
3. Begin text. On January 20, I am sending the attached letter to the
President of the United States Olympic Committee informing him that I
cannot support United States participation in the Summer Olympic
Games in Moscow, the capital city of a nation whose invading military
forces are occupying Afghanistan. I am requesting that the committee
work with other National Olympic Committees to seek the transfer or
cancellation of the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games unless the Soviet
Union withdraws its troops from Afghanistan within the next month. If
the Soviets do not withdraw and the Games are not transferred or can-
celled, I am asking that the United States Olympic Committee not par-
ticipate in the Games in Moscow, and, instead, work with other nations
to organize alternative Games.
4. I hope that you will urge your own Olympic Committee to take
similar action. I believe that such action is necessary to support the po-
sition of the United Nations General Assembly, to convince the Soviet
Government and people of the world’s outrage at Soviet aggression in
Afghanistan and to deter future aggression.
5. Please hold my action in confidence until after 1:00 pm, Wash-
ington time, January 20.
6. Begin text of letter. To Robert Kane;
7. As President of this nation and as honorary President of the
United States Olympic Committee, I write to advise you of my views
concerning the Games of the XXII Olympiad scheduled to be held in
Moscow this summer.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870143–1334. Con-
fidential; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by the White House; cleared by Vest, William
Harrop (AF), Morris Draper (NEA), Roger Sullivan (EA), William Bowdler (ARA),
Nelson Ledsky (H), Raymond Seitz (S/S), and Seton Stapleton (S/S-O); approved by
Vance. Sent for information Immediate to Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, USINT Havana,
Moscow, the White House, Prague, Sofia, Rangoon, Vientiane, USUN, USNATO, Kabul,
U.S. delegation to MBFR talks in Vienna.
