Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1171 aircraft for nuclear armaments; or deploy such an aircraft with nuclear armaments; (b) flight-test with nuclear armaments an airplane that was not initially constructed as a bomber, but that has a range of 8000 kilometers or more, or an integrated planform area in excess of 310 square meters; equip such an airplane for nuclear armaments; or deploy such an airplane with nuclear armaments; (c) flight-test with long-range nuclear ALCMs an aircraft that is not an airplane, or an airplane that was not initially constructed as a bomber; equip such an aircraft or such an airplane for long-range nuclear ALCMs; or deploy such an aircraft or such an airplane with long-range nuclear ALCMs. 20. The United States of America undertakes not to equip existing or future heavy bombers for more than 20 long-range nuclear ALCMs. 21. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics undertakes not to equip existing or future heavy bombers for more than 16 long-range nuclear ALCMs. 22. Each Party undertakes not to locate long-range nuclear ALCMs at air bases for heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs, air bases for heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, air bases for former heavy bombers, or training facilities for heavy bombers. 23. Each Party undertakes not to base heavy bombers equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs, heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs, or heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments at air bases at which heavy bombers of either of the other two categories are based. 24. Each Party undertakes not to convert: (a) heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs into heavy bombers equipped for longrange nuclear ALCMs, if such heavy bombers were previously equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs; (b) heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments into heavy bombers equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs or into heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs; (c) training heavy bombers into heavy bombers of another category; (d) former heavy bombers into heavy bombers. 25. Each Party undertakes not to have underground facilities accessible to ballistic missile submarines. 26. Each Party undertakes not to locate railcars at the site of a rail garrison that has been eliminated in accordance with Section IX of the Conversion or Elimination Protocol, unless such railcars have differences, observable by national technical means of verification, in
