North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
757
(c) Multilateral hard lending can shore up the international credit
position of the developing countries in the face of pressures from the
world recession and the oil price increase, while automatically distrib-
uting the credit risk among all industrial countries. This helps to main-
tain demand and employment in the industrial countries and reduces
the risk that debt worries will cause a crisis in the international banking
system.
(d) Multilateral concessional aid is detached from controversy
about short-term U.S. foreign policy. It can thus be provided to such
countries as India, which need it and can put it to good use, regardless
of ups and downs in their day-to-day relations with the United States.
5. A Possible Model. A specific program to shift U.S. development
aid to multilateral channels was recommended in 1970 by a task force
of prominent private citizens chaired by Rudolph Peterson, former
head of the Bank of America.4 These proposals were endorsed by many
thoughtful students of development aid; they got nowhere during the
Nixon administration but seem even more relevant today:
(a) Capital development aid should increasingly be provided
through the World Bank group and the regional development banks
(Asian Development Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and
African Development Bank).
(b) The U.S. bilateral program should consist essentially of tech-
nical assistance, redesigned to seek technological breakthroughs in a
few major fields (e.g., population, agriculture, and education), or to ex-
periment with new forms of development cooperation (for example,
the financing of rural development banks). This bilateral program
would be carried out by a new U.S. Development Institute, which
would supplant AID (although it could selectively draw on its per-
sonnel), be supervised by a mixed public/private board of directors
and, like a foundation, have sufficient continuity to support promising
projects on a long-term basis.
(c) Supporting and military assistance should be provided sepa-
rately from development assistance, and might be included in the De-
fense Department’s appropriation; this would clarify the trade-off be-
tween funds for security assistance and for U.S. armed forces. The
security assistance program should be under the close policy guidance
of the Department of State, since it is directed to political/security
rather than development purposes—even though some or all of it
might be administered by the Department of Defense.
Since U.S. capital development aid would be provided multilater-
ally, this approach would make it easier to move toward the concept of
a world development budget, such as you suggested in your speech to
4 On March 8, 1970, the Presidential Task Force on International Development (also
known as the Peterson Task Force) submitted its report, entitled “U.S. Foreign Assistance
in the 1970s: A New Approach,” to Nixon. For the text of the report, as well as Nixon’s
remarks upon receiving it, see the Department of State Bulletin, April 6, 1970, pp. 447–467.
