1204
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
will be assigned to an advisory group, and this committee will make
recommendations to the plenary and the heads of state.
Prime Minister Begin suggested that we go by stages—he is not pre-
judging the issues. The President may tell Sadat that we discussed this
subject. He (Prime Minister Begin) wishes the President would accept
his proposal: Issues of security will be discussed after Israel puts to-
gether its maps for the Egyptians. Then the main negotiating terms can
take up the issues, as the Camp David Accords provide, with military
experts taking part. Then what the plenary decides, he will accept.
Today he can’t accept the words “security committee.”
The President said that this causes a problem. Sadat did not make
this a proviso in regard to having continuous discussions, but Prime
Minister Begin should not underestimate Sadat’s concerns on this
issue. Prime Minister Begin should be flexible—which is natural for
him (the Prime Minister) and help him (the President). If the plenary
just states that the advisors will discuss these issues, then there will be
ten days to get the maps, and then report back—this will delay the en-
tire process for 10 days, which is bad.
Prime Minister Begin said that the President had said he (Prime
Minister Begin) is flexible: he is used to hearing different compliments!
The negotiating teams will consider this approach.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Israel had said publicly that a secu-
rity committee could be set up.
Prime Minister Begin asked who said it.
Ambassador Linowitz said Minister Burg.
Minister Burg said yes, provided he was quoted exactly!
Prime Minister Begin said he could always say that they had made a
mistake in saying that. It had happened before, on Khalil’s part, as well.
It happened at Camp David and elsewhere. Minister Burg shouldn’t be
put on the spot!
Minister Burg said he liked to be quoted.
Ambassador Linowitz said: “primo.”
Minister Burg said he had said that at some stage there would need
to be talk about security issues. He had not excluded that there could be
a security committee at some point.
Secretary Vance said that Minister Burg had said . . .
The President said that he hoped the Israelis would think it over.
This is crucial to Sadat; and he has said so to his own people, in the As-
sembly, and to the Palestinians. Sadat and he (the President) see this as
part of the Camp David process. What it is called is of secondary im-
portance. If we continue the plenary without discussing security, there
will be serious and unnecessary problems. We need cooperation to
avoid problems.
