Human Rights
555
“Last year has seen some tangible progress in the human condi-
tion. There are different ways of assessing that progress. There are dif-
ferent groups which, from time to time, make estimates. Collating some
of these reports together, we do have the impression that not because of
our efforts, either alone or at all, but because of this increasing rele-
vance of the human rights condition which we have helped to stimu-
late, there has been progress in a number of countries.
“It is difficult to measure it but as a rough approximate estimate I
would say in at least 40 countries around the world in which two and a
half billion people live there has been tangible progress—in some cases
more, in some cases less, in some cases certainly not enough, but
progress nonetheless. And it has expressed itself in even greater respect
for rights or less oppression of political opposition or in the release of
victims or in a generally more sensitive attitude toward established
procedures.
“This is something of which we can be proud, though of which we
should not take credit. We are part of the process. We are part of a polit-
ical and historical process, and we live in a time which is often short in
hopeful perspectives in the future. I would submit to you that this is
one of the more important reassuring ones because it tells us something
about what a human being is. It tells us that ultimately the human
being in whatever the social, economic, or cultural conditions, yearns
for something transcendental, yearns for some self-definition with re-
spect to his uniqueness, yearns for something which dignifies him as a
spiritual being. And if that, in fact, is increasingly the human condition,
it ought to be a source of tremendous pride and reassurance to us as
Americans.” (Department of State Bulletin, January 1979, pages 5–6)
Derian attempted to address four major questions associated with
human rights policy, including the rationale for policy, means of imple-
mentation, achievements, and sincerity of conviction. In discussing the
question of policy implementation, Derian sketched out the various
mechanisms employed by the United States, noting:
“Our approach has not been limited to quiet diplomacy. We have
practiced vigorous diplomacy in which all available instruments are
used. They include symbolic affirmations of our concern. The President
says something, the Secretary says something, it is in a speech, it is in a
press conference, it is in a press release, it is in a casual comment, it is in
a letter, it is whatever way you can find at some point when it seems
like the right instrument to have a strong public gesture. When there is
no response to quiet expression of human rights concerns and when
there is no response to a symbolic speaking out, our law and our policy
demand that we examine our assistance relationships, both economic
and military.
