National Security Policy  229
Action No. 1881–c was “to be regarded only as a working assumption 
for the purposes of this study.”
e. The study is not a complete and final analysis of limited military 
operations upon which the size and nature of United States forces required 
for limited military operations can be determined for future years. Estimates 
of enemy action were, of necessity, hypothetical and thus are not a basis for 
military planning. None of the situations studied have been war-­gamed. 
The conclusions and recommendations, based as they are on hypothetical 
but possible situations, should not be considered as definitive.
3. We consider the significant findings of the study to be as follows:
a. U.S. Capabilities
(1) Within the limitations set forth in paragraph 2 and if the use 
of nuclear weapons as required to achieve military objectives is autho­
rized, United States capabilities for limited military operations are 
adequate to undertake and carry out limited operations of the nature 
examined.
(2) In many such limited military operations, the use of nuclear 
weapons would be required only as an unlikely last resort.
(3) In the Far East, however, the United States does not now have 
a ready non-­nuclear capability which alone could cope satisfactorily 
with limited military operations against overtly engaged substantial 
Communist forces. The selective use of nuclear weapons against such 
forces and the facilities supporting them would be necessary.
(4) The withholding of authorization to use nuclear weapons for lim­
ited military operations against overtly engaged substantial Communist 
forces in the Far East would be likely to entail requirements for addi­
tional overseas deployment of United States forces, the construction of 
bases and other facilities overseas, augmentation of sea/airlift in being 
and expanded logistic support capabilities and “pipelines” both overseas 
and in the United States.
(5) The burden of the initial military response will fall on the U.S. 
forces deployed in or near the area involved, regardless of Service. 
Prompt and vigorous response by these forces may obviate a require­
ment for major reinforcements.
(6) The effectiveness of United States limited military operations 
will be affected by the timely availability of sea/airlift for the provision 
of logistic support to our own and friendly forces and particularly for 
the movement from the United States of ground forces committed to 
action. To the extent that the limited military operations examined in 
this study are expected to affect adversely our posture for general war, 
the temporary diversion of transport from general war tasks is usually 
cited as the principal adverse factor.
(7) Only small numbers of “clean” nuclear weapons, which will be 
in the high yield category, will be available to United States forces to 
1 July 1961.
