First Responses 129 B. Denial to the USSR 5. Even without Iran, the power balance will be exceptionally delicate in the early to mid-1980s. In this period Soviet military strength will grow substantially relative to that of the U.S., an imbalance that will only be redressed when military programs now underway or under consideration come to fruition in the later years of the decade. On the other side of the scale, the USSR will be subject in roughly the same time-frame to increasing economic difficulty, most notably in the energy field. Petroleum production has peaked and will apparently begin to decline sharply. The Soviet economy, lacking the West’s cushion of unnecessary consumption that can be conserved, can only maintain its present position by a combination of drastically reduced exports and purchases in the Western market. In fact, the Soviet leadership may be able to maintain its military power advantage only by accepting even greater economic and ideological disadvantages—sacrifice of technology imports for imports of grain and petroleum, political turmoil in Eastern Europe, a reduced standard of living at home, all adding to a demonstration that the Soviet model for a modern state is a failure. 6. Moreover, the Soviet leadership itself is in a state of interregnum. The introverted cluster of old men surrounding the fading Brezhnev are jockeying among themselves to succeed him, but appear united in resistance to the admittance of younger and more vigorous men to their circle. Their behavior as a group, with or without Brezhnev, is likely to become increasingly erratic and unpredictable until power passes to the next generation, although it could lapse into paralysis. We know little of the policy views of the younger men, although some analysts have suggested that they are impatient with the caution of their elders: the Soviet state has too long tolerated the pretensions of a declining West; it should take advantage of the power it has achieved and press more aggressively toward its national goals. 7. We are not sure how fully the Politburo yet understands its predicament. If the power balance is delicate without Iran, however, it will become even more so when the Soviet leaders recognize their situation and the possible role that Iran might play in it. To an old Soviet leadership that sees its achievements of decades past gravely threatened by a lack of petroleum, or to a younger one that sees its opportunities for the future equally threatened, the prospect of a chaotic Iran, its armed forces shattered and its allies alienated, may become tempting in the early 80s. Not only could Soviet energy shortages be alleviated, but the supply of foreign exchange could be assured. Moreover, in geo-political terms the Soviets would be in a position from Iran to dominate the Middle East and South Asia, and ultimately to deny Gulf oil to the West. 8. Either leadership would of course calculate the risks. They would be relatively small if a Marxist, preferably controlled Communist,
