Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —It would provide for the possibility of greater State Department control over the activities of the Institute and diminish the likelihood of conflicts with U.S. foreign policy concerns. Con —The value of the Institute is in part its independence which will avoid the appearance of being an instrument of U.S. policy thus permitting activities to be undertaken that the State Department could not fund and making it more acceptable internationally. —Since it is unlikely we would get more than one State Department board member, we would never have complete control and yet we would be held far more responsible for all of its activities by others. 3. Support establishment of an Institute but propose limiting its functions to holding of conferences and conducting of research on human rights issues, but not providing funding or grants for individuals or organizations, or sponsoring any activity in foreign countries. Pro —It would provide a basis for individuals concerned with human rights to meet regularly and exchange views and information. —It would meet a need for clarifying some basic concepts in the human rights field, particularly economic and social human rights. —It would eliminate the chance of serious foreign policy embarrassment as a result of disbursement of funds to groups or individuals whose activities could be strongly resented and objected to by foreign governments. Con —Would not meet the interest of the sponsors in providing funding for responsible human rights groups. —May be criticized by some NGOs which look to the funding aspect of the Bill. —Could be criticized as an Administration attempt to “gut” the Bill and eliminate an independent voice in the human rights field, and thus “undercut” our human rights policy position. 4. Oppose the legislation and argue that all of its proposed activities can be undertaken by existing agencies. Pro —Clearly places the Department in opposition to the creation of another agency, one whose ultimate activities through NGOs would affect conditions in other countries and U.S. bilateral interests.
