1955  291
223.	 Letter 9 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 9
Geneva, September 22, 1955
Dear Walter:
First, let me thank you and all the others concerned for the instruc­
tions contained in Deptel 745. They were a model of clarity and gave 
me enough latitude and alternative positions so that, on entering the 
meeting, I felt completely confident of being able to meet any situation 
that might arise.
Next, I refer to the suggestion contained in your letter of Septem­
ber 16 that individual letters signed by Mr. Robertson be sent to each 
of the remaining Americans. I have serious doubts of the wisdom of 
this, largely for the reason set forth in your letter. If I thought that by so 
doing we might advance even by a single day the release of any of the 
individuals, it would a somewhat different matter. However, I do not 
see how it would do so and the only value might be in whatever lift it 
would give to their morale. I intend to keep hammering at Wang on this 
subject and we will see what the results will be. In the meantime my 
alternative thought is that we suggest to each of the relatives who write 
to the prisoners that they send them a copy of the Agreed Announce­
ment with one of their letters if they have not already done so. We 
might send to each of them a mimeographed text for the purpose, but, 
in order not to prejudice its delivery, would suggest that the relative not 
mention this was being done at the Department’s instigation.
The code clerk problem is now very satisfactorily resolved through 
your help as well as that of Mr. Carpenter with whom I raised the prob­
lem when he was through here last week. Please thank Bob Stufflebeam 
for me. I know the problem that he faces.
I agree with the analysis that Wang’s unilateral public move on the 
14th probably means that the Communists have made the decision that 
further talks at this level have little or no value to them, and it will, there­
fore, become increasingly difficult to keep the ball rolling unless I am in a 
position to introduce something that has even a slight substantive value 
from their standpoint. All of this, of course, is related as well to the speed 
with which we obtain the release of the remaining Americans.
I noted the policy information statement to USIA (Department’s 
CA–2241, September 16) cautioned against the use of the term “agenda”. 
Although this is a new thought to me, I see the Department’s point. 
However, at least Wang and I have talked so much about agenda item 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates 
it was received on September 26.
