366  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the amount of anticipated damage to the United States resulting from 
different kinds of U.S. retaliatory attacks on the USSR.
3. It is not now feasible to state U.S. policy for the period following 
a nuclear exchange between the USSR and the U.S. Decisions will have 
to be made at the time as to the post attack missions of U.S. military 
forces then existing. Consequently, the U.S. must refrain from public 
discussion of political actions it might take during the second phase of 
a general nuclear war with the USSR but must make clear its determi­
nation to prevail if general nuclear war is forced upon it.
4. If Communist China joins the USSR in a general nuclear war, 
the U.S. will seek to reduce by military and other measures the capa­
bility of Communist China to the point where it has lost its will or abil­
ity to wage war against the United States. The active participation of 
Communist China on the USSR side should be prevented by all means 
consistent with other U.S. objectives.
5. In the event that Communist China initiates all-­out war against 
the United States or its allies, the U.S. will carry out its treaty com­
mitments and seek to destroy the will and ability of the Chinese 
Communists to wage war against the U.S. or its allies. In conducting 
the war against Communist China, the U.S. will make a major effort to 
keep the USSR from actively engaging in the conflict.
6. Basic national security policy calls for U.S. military strength 
adequate to present a deterrent to limited aggression. In the event the 
deterrent fails, and if U.S. forces are to be employed, a decision will be 
made at the time (a) whether vital U.S. interests require the defeat of 
the limited aggression by using whatever degree of force is necessary, 
or (b) whether U.S. interests would be served by using force to achieve 
the objectives of restoring the status quo ante and of limiting the area 
and scope of hostilities.
a. The United States should take the necessary steps to convince its 
allies that it is committed to carry out its treaty obligations, including 
the UN Charter, and possesses the capability to fulfill its commitments, 
using nuclear weapons as necessary to defend Free World interests.
b. The U.S. should make clear that it will not use force to impose a 
particular political or economic system upon the world, but will take all 
actions necessary to defend against Communist use of force to impose 
its system upon the non-Communist world.
