893.5045/88: Telegram
[Document 513]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 12, 1925—6 p.m.
[Received June 13—3:42 a.m.]91
217. My 211, June 8, 7 p.m.
1. Following résumé of note of June 11 from Wai Chiao Pu to senior minister.
Note criticises action of Settlement authorities, again condemns killing of
Chinese and in view of nation-wide grief and indignation considers
Settlement police should be disarmed and all troops withdrawn in order to
facilitate negotiations. Requests issuance of urgent instructions to consular
body, Shanghai, to this effect.
2. To which reply drafted at meeting of Heads of Legation this morning in
substance as follows: Desiring to clear up as soon as possible distressing and
dangerous situation, diplomatic representatives have instructed their
delegation at Shanghai to consider with consular body and Chinese
Government delegates, Shanghai, best means of finding remedy therefor.
Diplomatic representatives recall to the attention of the Chinese Government
its grave responsibility for maintaining order at Shanghai, Peking, and
throughout China.
3. In presenting this note to Minister for Foreign Affairs, Monsieur Cerruti
was authorized by Heads of Legation to call the attention of Chinese
Government to advisability of its taking appropriate steps to put stop to
further student agitation and demonstrations with particular reference to
inflammatory handbills and placards depicting Chinese murdered by
foreigners and advocating death to foreigners and the like.
4. President under date 10th instant stated officially Chang Tsolin92 and Feng
Yu-hsiang93 with their principal generals have telegraphed Chief Executive
regarding Shanghai disturbances. Chang upholds innocence of Shanghai
student demonstrators, presents entirely inaccurate facts, refers to strikes and
national excitement and predicts damage to international relations through
British disregard of principles of justice. Places blame entirely on British.
Promises full support to the Chief Executive and urges firm stand in
protection of the people. Feng telegram also entirely exculpates Shanghai
