Nov. (324) To the Minister in China (tel.) Department’s surprise that Johnson took up matters outside the scope of the inquiry. Request for information as to whether matters of the same general nature are also dealt with in reports of the other judges. [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 567] Nov. (498) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the British and Japanese judges in their reports keep within the limits of the terms of reference. [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569] Nov. (500) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram to Shanghai (text printed) quoting message of the U. S., British, and Japanese Ministers to their respective consuls in Shanghai which outlined the differences in the findings of the judicial commission and suggested the desirability of certain action by the Municipal Council, including the offer of generous compensation to the victims of the Shanghai incident, and the devising of ways of dispensing with the services of the police commissioner and the officers actually involved in the incident. [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569] Dec. (355) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Résumé of information contained in telegram No. 500, November 27, from the Minister in China. Authorization to state to the Foreign Office that, while it is regrettable that the commission should have disagreed in its findings, the U. S. Government feels that it would be disastrous at present to suppress, edit, or delay the publication of the findings of the judicial commission. (Footnote: Authorization to Ambassador in Japan to repeat substantially the same views to the Japanese Foreign Office.) [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 570] Dec. (525) From the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization by the diplomatic body for certain Ministers to suggest to the Municipal Council the adoption of measures to settle the affair of May 30, namely, the resignation of the responsible police officers and the offer of reasonable amounts to the Chinese victims. [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 571] Dec. (538) From the Minister in China (tel.) Withdrawal of objections by Japan to the publication of the reports. Adoption by the Municipal Council of the suggestions outlined by the diplomatic body. [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc.
