The Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim (Mufid Bey Libohova) to the American Chargé (Kodding)
No. C IV 964
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates to the Legation of the United States of
America its assurances as to the favorable reception of American requests in the
economic and financial field. The Principle of the Open Door, according to the
Albanian Government, has never ceased to be respected. The grant of the petroleum
concession to the Railway Administration of the Italian State is combined with the
institution of a State Bank in Albania and with the contracting of a loan of two million
pounds sterling on the Italian market. It concerns, consequently, the existence of an
indivisible economic whole. The American companies can without injury to the rights
acquired by the Italians obtain other oil concessions on the same terms.
As to the concession granted to the Anglo-Persian the Albanian Government was
engaged with regard to that company previous to the recognition of Albania by the
Government of the United States.
In the note transmitted by the Legation of the United States to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs mention is made of profits which Albania should have derived from the
geological work of American companies. The Albanian Government, as far as this
Ministry knows, has not derived to date any profit from these works. As to the expenses
incurred by the American companies it is evident that all these were made at their risk
and peril.
As for the murder of the two Americans the Albanian Government, strongly moved by
that regrettable incident, immediately took all the measures that the situation permitted.
In the interval there has been the revolution of last June but for which the Judicial
proceedings which resulted would have been finished at the present time. The legal
cabinet on its return to the country undertook again with more care the acceleration of
the judicial proceedings in question and according to the progress of the trial the
expected judgement will shortly be given. Furthermore several of the alleged murderers
have been killed not having wished to surrender alive.
Consequently the Albanian Government can not accept any responsibility of either a
moral or material order; in a word, justice follows its course without any obstacle from
any side. The courts will judge in full independence.
The Albanian Government warmly and sincerely desires the continuation of cordial
relations between the United States of America and Albania.
TIRANA, March 23, 1925.
