1214 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement para of the draft memo was presented or of what it consisted. My only point is that before terming it “in large part fictitious” I would want to be sure that it is not in fact based upon names originating with the UNC. 8. My memory on our exchanges of lists of names of POWs with the Communists is also very hazy. Not that it is likely to come in any detail here, but to avoid possible mistakes I would appreciate a short summary of the facts in this regard. I have a feeling we gave them some list early in the armistice negotiations, and that they gave us one but I am just not sure whether this is correct or of what they consisted. Were there also not lists given the NNRC which were passed on to the Communists? I do not want anyone to go to any great trouble on this but perhaps there is a pertinent summary already made up. Perhaps HD would have it available or could readily make it up. 9. Whether the subject is raised here or Panmunjon it will be important that the information with respect to individuals reflect the “accounting” set forth in CINCUNC’s message of March 2, 1956. That is, in our best documented cases of their at one time being alive in Communist hands, the March accounting attempted to dispose of them by saying they had “escaped”. Thus in these “escaped” cases the issue is no longer whether they were at one time alive in Communist hands, by saying they “escaped” they have admitted this, but rather being able to demonstrate that such an accounting is false. This is very well set forth in detail in the memo enclosed with Dave’s letter of August 23. My rea­ son for mentioning it is that while the Memo to the Service Secretaries enclosed with your letter encloses what I presume is the substance of Dave’s memo, the attached “Suggestions” do not appear to take account of this important point of which I would have to take account before again raising individual cases here. For our purposes here I would not need any large number of cases, a half dozen or so would probably serve my purposes, although, of course, the more I have in my pocket the better. My suggestion would be to have Ralph and Col. Monroe pick out a few of the most promising cases and exhaustively run them down with the services rather than spreading the effort too thin. 10. My 362 did not imply that I had changed my estimate that they are most likely to make a major move shortly after the elections and the opening of the UNGA. With two weeks between meetings, the “next few meetings” mentioned in my 362 brings us up to that point. What I have been and continue to say is that they are very obviously putting themsleves in a position to carry out such a move at about that time. Whether they do so, of course, remains to be seen. I simply want to be sure that the Department understands and is prepared for the con­ tingency and does not desire to take any further action to forestall it. Incidentally, while our position through the Suez crisis has been very
