842 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Assistant for National Security Affairs, wrote: “Tell Precht to do what the President ordered! DA 7/7/80.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65, Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 4/80–11/80) In the July 11 Middle East/ North Africa Cluster evening report to Brzezinski, the Cluster noted that Precht had been nominated as the new U.S. Ambassador to Mauritania. In the margin Brzezinski wrote: “good riddance.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80) The NSC Staff and Department of State then prepared different statements to be issued by the Department on the event of the Shah’s death. The NSC’s undated draft statement referred to the Shah as a “strong leader of Iran and a good friend of the United States,” whose “place in history will not be determined by the impassioned judgment of his contemporaries,” but “for guiding Iran’s emergence as a modern state,” an Iran that was a “powerful, stabilizing, and progressive force in a vital region.” Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Newsom informed Muskie, July 13, that the Department had “serious problems” with this statement. Newsom thought the “tone of defense of the Shah” and “efforts to mention precise accomplishments of the former ruler” were unhelpful. Newsom’s undated alternative statement referred to the Shah as “the leader of Iran for 38 years” of “profound changes,” and “acknowledged” the “friendship and cooperation” between Iran and the United States during this period. After discussion with Sick, the final draft statement, which closely followed Newsom’s version, with the added statement that the Shah’s death “marks the end of an era in Iran, which all hope will be followed by peace and stability,” was approved. (All drafts in Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Files, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah Panama Jan–March 180, Egypt Jan–July 1980, Vol. V) The final official statement, issued on July 27 after the Shah’s death that day, is in Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, page 55. See Document 326.
