648 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement succeeded in “trimming” the Communist inroads, but that the problem would now have to be attacked at its roots. The President-Elect referred to the role of the Archbishop of the Catholic Church,3 in the last election when Church support allegedly had been given to the Christian Democratic Party. The President- Elect opined that in spite of Church support, which would have been expected to give the women’s vote to Cruz-Salazar who had the support of the Christian Democratic Party, a large number of his approximately 190,000 votes had been from the women. He paid particular respect to the women market workers who had supported him and conveyed their message of greetings to the Vice President and to Mrs. Nixon whom they recalled from their visit to the market in 1954 while in Guatemala. The Vice President alluded to the fine movement of solidarity against communism effected by President-Elect Ydígoras Fuentes and one of the defeated candidates for President, former Ambassador Luis Cruz-Salazar. The President-Elect acknowledged the compliment and said that while they had been bitter enemies in the campaign, he had “tried to shoot either over Cruz’ head or short of his feet in order not to destroy him and his party since he recognized that he needed their support”. The President-Elect referred to the difficulty of having his own supporters accept the solidarity move by Cruz-Salazar, but hoped that this would be accomplished. The Vice President said that President Eisenhower was looking forward to meeting the President-Elect at breakfast tomorrow morning. He commented that, since both of them had military backgrounds, they would undoubtedly find much in common, especially in their approach to political problems. The Vice President observed that our President had become great in office after an outstanding military background and he felt sure that the Guatemalan President- Elect would have the same experience. General Ydígoras said that he intended to drop his uniform and hoped to have the Guatemalan military act only as defenders of the country, thereby removing them from politics. Vice President Nixon and General Ydieoras then departed from the office to the Capitol steps where photographs were taken with the Capitol dome in the background. 3 Mario Rossell y Arellano.
