United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 69 States was asked to provide the countries with an outline embodying the United States Government’s suggestions as to the form this organization might take. We have agreed to provide this outline. 4. At the close of the State Visit of the President of the El Salvador on March 23, 1959, a joint statement of President Lemus and President Eisenhower was made that they agreed that a Central American common market “costs make a significant contribution to the stimulation of capital investment in these nations and to the steady improvement of the welfare of the people. This subject will receive continued study by the two Governments with a view to taking approximate action to carry on these sound plans already contemplated.”6 The discussion between the two Presidents was even more enthusiastic than [illegible in the original] from the press release.7 Our immediate difficulty in carrying out the policy thus enunciated is in obtaining Treasury’s concurrence in the paper we are preparing for distribution to the five Central American countries, outlining in very general terms to steps that should be taken to form a common market. One of the principal issues with Treasury was whether we would recommend the formation of a new Central American economic development institution. To get a present to have agreed on a “Community Fund” whose job it would be to facilitate the adjustment of the economies of the member states to the new common market conditions. This fund would derive resources from a fraction of the [illegible in the original] revenues of the member states, but these will obviously be inadequate to cope with the need for economic development. We consider it essential that a [illegible in the original] of basic economic development projects proceed concurrently with the transition to an integrated economy. Moreover, we feel that it will be necessary to give the governments concerned [illegible in the original] definite advance indication that U.S. financial assistance will be available for this purpose; otherwise, the current integration effort will never get off the ground. Treasury has suggested that we tell our embassies that if any of the governments concerned express disappointment over the absence of
