United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  69
States was asked to provide the countries with an outline embodying 
the United States Government’s suggestions as to the form this orga-
nization might take. We have agreed to provide this outline.
4. At the close of the State Visit of the President of the El Salvador 
on March 23, 1959, a joint statement of President Lemus and President 
Eisenhower was made that they agreed that a Central American com-
mon market “costs make a significant contribution to the stimulation 
of capital investment in these nations and to the steady improvement 
of the welfare of the people. This subject will receive continued study 
by the two Governments with a view to taking approximate action to 
carry on these sound plans already contemplated.”6
The discussion between the two Presidents was even more enthu-
siastic than [illegible in the original] from the press release.7
Our immediate difficulty in carrying out the policy thus enunciated 
is in obtaining Treasury’s concurrence in the paper we are preparing for 
distribution to the five Central American countries, outlining in very 
general terms to steps that should be taken to form a common mar-
ket. One of the principal issues with Treasury was whether we would 
recommend the formation of a new Central American economic devel-
opment institution. To get a present to have agreed on a “Community 
Fund” whose job it would be to facilitate the adjustment of the econo-
mies of the member states to the new common market conditions. This 
fund would derive resources from a fraction of the [illegible in the orig-
inal] revenues of the member states, but these will obviously be inade-
quate to cope with the need for economic development.
We consider it essential that a [illegible in the original] of basic eco-
nomic development projects proceed concurrently with the transition 
to an integrated economy. Moreover, we feel that it will be necessary 
to give the governments concerned [illegible in the original] definite 
advance indication that U.S. financial assistance will be available for 
this purpose; otherwise, the current integration effort will never get off 
the ground.
Treasury has suggested that we tell our embassies that if any of the 
governments concerned express disappointment over the absence of 
6 President Lemus visited the United States, March 10–21, 1959. For the text of his 
joint statement with President Eisenhower issued at the end of his stay in Washington, 
see Department of State Bulletin, April 6, 1959, pp. 478–479. For additional documentation 
on his visit, see Documents ES–4–5.
7 The referenced conversation took place at the White House on March 11; a mem-
orandum of that conversation, drafted by Assistant Secretary Rubottom is printed as 
Document ES–6.
