Romania 673 213. Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department of State1 Bucharest, June 8, 1979, 0827Z 3629. Subject: Vulnerability of Ceausescu Regime to Destabilizing Forces or Events. Ref: State 38873.2 1. (S-entire text). 2. Summary: We conclude that Ceausescu administration in Romania is facing no challenge so severe as to threaten regime stability now or in immediate future and that so far it has demonstrated the requisite flexibility to defuse successfully those pressing problems that require response. Principal internal stains stem from total centralization of party/state power and forced-draft program of rapid industrialization, but to date (except in isolated instances) economic discontent has not been translated into overt protest or other political action, and we do not expect that it will do so. Conflict could arise if, in 1985 when Romania is supposed to attain “medium-developed” status thereby vitiating regime demands for continued sacrifice, relaxation of tight controls and provision of visible and significant material benefits does not ensue. Groups with ability to cause most significant internal disruption are the sizeable ethnic Hungarian minority and an increasingly class-conscious industrial proletariat, followed by a sullen internal security apparatus. Several social problems may also force themselves into forefront, including redefinition of tradeoff between personal competency and political reliability for rising professional/technical group and resolution of centuries-old abysmal situation of gypsies. Finally, we see no significant external forces or actors which presently affect Romanian internal affairs, although Hungary and Soviet Union could exert destabilizing influences. In unlikely event of outright Soviet military invasion, all bets are off. End summary. Internal Political and Social Strains 3. Principal internal strains faced by Ceausescu regime stem from centralization of state and party power and forced-draft program of rapid industrialization which GOR has been pursuing for at least fifteen years and which is designed to make Romania a “medium-developed” nation by 1985. Willful political decision was made to forego any rapid increase in living standards and material consumption in favor of accumulation and reinvestment (approximately one-third of national 1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Box 11, Bucharest. Secret; Roger Channel. 2 Not found.
