100 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 (printed as Document 40). Vice President Walter Mondale, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold Saunders, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Graham Claytor from the Department of Defense, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General David Jones, General John Pustay from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner, Frank Carlucci from the Central Intelligence Agency, Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, Press Secretary Jody Powell, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs David Aaron, and William Odom and Gary Sick from the National Security Council Staff attended the meeting. (Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional File (H–Files), Box 106, SCC 206 Iran 11/20/79) President Jimmy Carter, who was at Camp David for the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday, called Powell at 11:19 a.m. and told him to join with Vance and others in an emergency SCC meeting to draft a statement in response to a speech Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would give that day. (President’s Personal Notes, November 20; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 1) Khomeini’s speech was reported by FBIS at 12:30 p.m. that afternoon. In the speech, Khomeini characterized President Carter and likeminded leaders as a “clique” of oppressors given to the “disease of self-glorification.” He said that Mohammed Reza Shah had “the illness only to see himself and a few flatterers and a number of clowns around him, to see only these people and not to have any consideration for the nation” and that this illness had caused his destruction. Carter, he said, “is afflicted with the same disease, except in a more severe form—the more the power, the more severe the disease.” According to Khomeini, the hostages were spies, and unless the Shah was returned to Iran, the hostages might be tried and then “Carter knows what will happen.” (FBIS 91, 12:30 p.m., November 20; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 11/17/79–11/20/79) That afternoon, several meetings occurred to address the issues of the potential trial and execution of the hostages and Khomeini’s speech. From 1:30 to 2 p.m. in Washington, Aaron chaired a brief meeting of the Interagency Group. Policy Planning Staff Director Anthony Lake, Saunders, Robert Komer and Robert Murray from the Department of Defense, Carlucci, and Sick attended the meeting. The Interagency Group reviewed a contingency paper prepared by the Iran Working Group that delineated U.S. options should a trial occur and/or the hostages be moved to an Iranian prison under Pasdaran Guard control. The last option (Item 31) in the draft plan was to carry out a military rescue operation to save any hostages not
