Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 633 D. Mexico: Matt and Pete should continue to stay closely involved as Krueger takes over.26 However, you or Chris may have to step in if, as is possible, domestic political considerations continue to be a key element in determining our policies toward Mexico.27 E. Korea: We need to think through alternatives for improving the hostile political climate on the Peninsula if the tripartite talk idea28 flounders. Holbrooke to manage.29 F. Japan: Ohira is a strong and well-disposed leader, and we should find ways to keep up our consultations with the Japanese on a wide variety of issues. We must also convince the suspicious Japanese that our policies and attention are not Sinocentric. Holbrooke to manage.30 G. Africa North of the Zambezi: You might ask Dick Moose and S/P to oversee analyses of our policy towards the Horn and Zaire. We are treading water in both areas, but we can foresee a dangerous drift, especially in Zaire, unless we and others increase the pressure for reform.31 We also need to keep an eye on relations with Nigeria, where we should plan to concentrate progress and resources in order to develop closer relations with the new civilian government.32 H. Human Rights: Chris continues to manage this issue well although we still advocate a system which would give his committee oversight responsibility for both military and economic assistance pro- 26 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “yes” in the margin. References are to Nimetz and Vaky. On June 22, the President announced that he would nominate former Representative Robert Krueger (D–Texas) as Ambassador at Large and Coordinator for Mexican Affairs. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 1134–1135) 27 Vance underlined most of this sentence, placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to it, and wrote “yes.” 28 Presumable reference to the tripartite talks on the eventual reunification of the Korean peninsula discussed by the President and Park during Carter’s June 29–July 1 State visit to South Korea. (William Chapman and Edward Walsh, “U.S., Park to Propose Talks With North,” The Washington Post, July 1, 1979, pp. A–1, A–29) Documentation on the State visit is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XIV, Korea; Japan. 29 Vance underlined this sentence. In the left-hand margin next to it, he wrote “6 party talks.” 30 Vance underlined this sentence and placed a checkmark next to it. In the lefthand margin next to this and the previous sentence, he wrote “we have built a good base & we must continue development.” 31 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this and the previous sentence. Next to it, he wrote “ok” and “Zaire is dangerous & difficult.” 32 In mid-August, Shehu Shagari was elected Nigeria’s first civilian President, marking the end of military rule.
