International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 217 Tab A Report Prepared by the International Summit Preparatory Group6 undated Report on Summit Follow-Up by International Preparatory Group This report deals with actions taken since the Downing Street Summit under the five main headings of the Annex to the Summit Declaration.7 Some of these issues have been effectively addressed; in other cases there have been lags. The central follow-up issues requiring attention of Heads of State and Government appear to us to be (i) macroeconomic policy—particularly achievement of non-inflationary growth targets by the stronger economies and a better distribution of payments imbalances; and (ii) trade—particularly early and substantial progress in the multilateral trade negotiations. I. World Economic Prospects The countries that pledged themselves at London to continue effective stabilization policies have done so. Taken together, they have made progress in reducing inflation; balances of payments have improved; reserves have increased; currencies have been strengthened. Unemployment remains very high and continues to increase, particularly among young people. Growth is low in the UK and Italy; in France it may be 3% in 1977. Recent limited steps by these countries to increase employment have been consistent with the agreed strategy, which gives first priority to the control of inflation in order to set the stage for later expansion. Although these countries’ ability to fulfill that strategy depends mainly on their internal policies, it also depends on the external economic environment. That environment is shaped, in some degree, by the actions of the economies with greater freedom of maneuver. Germany, Japan, and the United States pledged at the Summit to achieve their growth targets—4.5%–5%, 6.7%, and 5.8%, respectively. They also promised to contribute to the adjustment of payments imbalances. In September, the German and Japanese governments decided to undertake substantial programs to help fulfill their growth targets. 6 Confidential. 7 For the text of the London G–7 Summit Declaration and the accompanying appendix, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 819–824.
