1152
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
355.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 9, 1980, 10:10–10:55 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Prince Bandar
Zbigniew Brzezinski
President Carter: I read the message to President Sadat from Prince
Fahd.2 I am concerned that there be an improvement in relations. Presi-
dent Sadat wrote a good letter to Prince Fahd which was conveyed
through Ambassador Eilts.3 There was no response to it from your side,
which was a mistake.
Prince Bandar: I was just with Crown Prince Fahd and Prince
Sultan. They have asked me to convey their highest esteem for Presi-
dent Sadat and for the Egyptian people. They strongly believe that the
Arabs are successful whenever Egypt and Saudi Arabia work together.
We have never disagreed with the strategic objectives of President
Sadat. We are not convinced that the tactics are right. We do not think
the Israelis will deliver. We would be happy to be wrong. If things
don’t go right, we will throw our weight into the balance, but we want
to keep the Arabs together. We want to support both Presidents Carter
and Sadat. The area cannot afford a failure.
President Sadat should not believe anything that is said to him
about the views of Crown Prince Fahd or Prince Sultan. (Bandar adds
that President Sadat’s late brother was his flying student.) If things fail,
we will use our “single bullet.”
Dr. Brzezinski: How would you use it?
Prince Bandar: The time will come to support the American posi-
tion. We will do whatever it takes to support it. We would be prepared
to recognize Israel’s right to exist within approximately the borders of
1967.
President Carter: What President Sadat has done to move things
forward other Arab nations, including Saudi Arabia, failed to support.
This increases Israeli doubts that Saudi Arabia would eventually accept
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 38, Memcons: President, 3–4/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. In
the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “OK. J.” Brzezinski also
initialed “ZB” in the upper right-hand corner.
2 Not further identified.
3 Not further identified.
