Comprehensive Test Ban
537
round. From the preceding consultative phase, we would gain a better
understanding of how strongly others felt about taking the treaty to
this multilateral body and how much difficulty we might have in pro-
tecting our interests there. We would make our decision based on
gaining maximum international support, consistent with our own re-
quirement for a realistic CTB.
The principal advantage of this approach is that it would enable us
to nail down agreement with the Soviets soon without having either to
proceed directly with ratification or to delay the process artificially. We
would have the flexibility to decide how best to maximize other na-
tions’ support, and to adjust CTB timing to the SALT schedule.
215.
Message From the White House Situation Room to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 14, 1978, 1203Z
FM The White House Situation Room. Sitto 124. To Dr. Brzezinski
for the President. WH81232. Message to President Carter from Prime
Minister Callaghan.
Dear Jimmy,
I believe you will be making important decisions about the Com-
prehensive Test Ban before the tripartite negotiations resume in Ge-
neva on 28 September.
I know that your people have been giving a great deal of thought
over the past weeks to some of the outstanding issues in the negotia-
tions. I recognise that these raise difficult military and technical prob-
lems. But I am sure that, like me, you continue to believe that we must
do all we can to bring the negotiations to a positive and satisfactory
conclusion. The political benefits of a successful treaty could be
enormous. The Wests’ relations with the Soviet Union are not in good
shape at present and a CTB treaty in the near future would do much to
improve them. It would also be seen by the world at large as a major
step forward in arms control. I am particularly anxious that it should be
a treaty that will win the support of leaders of non-nuclear states like
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presidential
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister James
Callaghan, 6–9/78. Secret.
