Non-Proliferation 921 361. Memorandum of Conversation1 January 5, 1978, 2:00–4:30 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting with French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Secretary of State Cyrus Vance Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France (Notetaker) President Valery Giscard d’Estaing Foreign Minister Louis de Guiringaud Secretary General Jean Francois-Poncet Ambassador Francois de Laboulaye, French Ambassador to the United States [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] Non-Proliferation President Giscard said that he was making progress in the development of his views on this subject and he hoped that we could exchange views from time to time on the problem. He welcomed the INFCE study and hoped that there would be no modification of supply policies by the United States and Canada during the period of the study. The President commented that, in his discussions with the Indians, Desai had said that he could not accept full scope safeguards.2 The President explained to him that Congress might soon pass a law which would prevent us from shipping any nuclear material to any country which does not accept such safeguards. The President said he asked Desai that, if we and the Soviets should sign a CTB agreement, could India then accept the same kind of safeguards as non-nuclear powers such as Germany, Canada and Japan have accepted? Desai thought that this would be reasonable. The President went on to say that, while he understood there were some technical problems, he was anxious for France to accede to the Protocol to the Treaty of Tlatelolco which provides for a nuclear free zone in Latin America. He said that Argentina now agrees to accede. He said that we understand that France has a problem because certain of the French Departments are in the area and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 35, Presidential MemCons, 1/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place entrained between Bayeux and Paris. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe. 2 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
