Chemical and Biological Weapons
303
3. The Secretary told Dobrynin he thought his talk with Gromyko
in New York on September 25 had been very useful and that he had ap-
preciated Gromyko’s frankness and relaxed tone. Despite the fact that
the meeting had been extended beyond the agreed time, however,
there were several subjects we had not had time to cover. He thought
the best way to treat these was to set out our position on each of them in
a Non-Paper, briefly and without any polemics, which Dobrynin could
transmit to Gromyko. If there were additional subjects which Gromyko
would like to bring to the Secretary’s attention in a similar manner he
would be glad to consider them.
4. The Secretary then summarized each of the issues orally and at
the end of his presentation handed Dobrynin the following Non-Paper:
Begin text:
Follow-up to September 25 meeting.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
On arms control matters, we wish to reaffirm the U.S. commitment
to SALT II ratification and to the achievement of progress in CTB,
MBFR, CW, and ASAT. We would also like to raise two matters which
could have far reaching implications for the future of arms control ne-
gotiations in general and, in the near term, for SALT II ratification.
First, the inability to find a suitable means of resolving the concerns ex-
pressed by the United States regarding the April 1979 outbreak of an-
thrax in Sverdlovsk raises serious questions concerning Soviet compli-
ance with the Biological Weapons Convention. This is a problem that
will not simply go away with the passage of time. We continue to be-
lieve that the best way to resolve our legitimate concerns in this matter
would be to arrange for technical discussions among experts. Although
we prefer to resolve this matter on a bilateral basis, the U.S. Govern-
ment will also consider other ways to resolve our concerns in accord-
ance with the terms of the Biological Weapons Convention—including
possible multilateral action. Soviet cooperation in resolving this matter
would be a very positive step.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
5. Dobrynin said he would of course report the Secretary’ remarks
to Gromyko. Overall, however, his impression was that they, quite
frankly, were not very encouraging. He then commented briefly on the
individual issues raised as follows:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Sverdlovsk incident.]
—The U.S. knows the Soviet position on arms control very well:
The Soviets favor a continuation. But we have discussed Sverdlovsk
“hundreds of times” and he doesn’t see anything useful in discussing it
