Dominican Republic 509 some people—­definitely in a minority—in the Dominican Republic. The President said their idea is that a group of political scientists, about four in number, of recognized reputation could come into the Dominican Republic and supervise an election. They think that Trujillo should promptly announce the holding of free elections. These men could invite the UN in to observe. The idea is that Trujillo is ready to do this, but first he must be left alone for a while in order to bring it up. The President went on to say that Mr. Pawley had charged that the U.S. Government is trying to bring about a breaking of relations of Peru, Colombia, and Venezuela with Trujillo. They claim it must be recognized that Trujillo has brought stability and progress to the Dominican Republic. The President said that Pawley seems to have a pathological hatred for Castro. Senator Smathers is genuinely concerned over the whole situation. The critical thing seems to be their idea that Trujillo must announce elections and govern until a new group comes in, with the UN or the OAS supervising these elections. The President thought the State Department should keep this matter under the closest attention, and should definitely not engage in trying to stir up other Governments against Trujillo. Mr. Dillon said one of the primary questions is whether in fact Trujillo is ready to step aside. He told the President of a report [text not declassified] Trujillo, [text not declassified] would not step aside, and in fact did not plan to retire “before the year 2000.” Trujillo had said that when Senator Smathers was there he talked only in a very rambling way about elections, which Trujillo had planned long ago. Mr. Dillon said the point is that we are fearful that Trujillo will not hold fair elections and we do not want our Government associated with some farce. He went on to say that we had nothing to do with the breaking off of relations with Trujillo by Latin American countries. Colombia and Venezuela have done it because he fostered the invasion of Venezuela. Mr. Rubottom stated also that we had nothing to do with the breaking off of relations. He added that the Colombians make the point that having done this they are in a better position to break off relations with Cuba later. Ambassador Farland then said that Mr. Pawley is not disinterested in this matter. He had disposed of his holdings, but retains a right to reacquire them. In addition, a brother continues to retain major holdings there. Mr. Farland said that he had tried to get Trujillo to step aside some time ago and that, after agreeing, Trujillo simply did not and would not do this. The main point about elections is that the dissidents, who would run in these elections, cannot raise their heads. If they were to try to campaign or to raise issues, Trujillo would not allow this to be done. If Trujillo is associated in any way with elections, the man in the street would have no faith in them. The President said he had been
