966
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter5
Washington, June 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Legislative Constraints on Foreign Assistance
This is a report on our review of legislative constraints on au-
thority to carry on military and economic assistance programs. It in-
cludes recommendations of short-range and long-range efforts to head
off further constraints and revise the existing laws.
I. Existing Legislation
The authority to conduct programs of military and economic
assistance is derived primarily from two basic statutes, the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act (originally
enacted in 1968). The Foreign Assistance Act governs bilateral eco-
nomic assistance programs and grants of military equipment and
training. The Arms Export Control Act governs foreign military sales
and financing, as well as the licensing of commercial arms exports.
Both of these statutes originally were drafted in broad terms. In re-
cent years, Congress has perceived that there has been abuses of the au-
thority granted under those broad statutes. That, coupled with a Con-
gressional desire for more active involvement in foreign policy matters,
has spawned a gradually increasing array of statutory prohibitions,
conditions, reporting requirements and complex procedures. The cu-
mulative effect of these constraints has been to make assistance pro-
grams more cumbersome and inflexible, and less effective as foreign
policy instruments.
At Tab 1 is a compilation of existing restraints. While it does not
purport to include every provision that might be characterized as a
constraint, it does illustrate graphically the extent to which and the
ways in which the conduct of foreign relations of the United States can
be regulated and controlled by legislation. While constraints imposed
by other laws have been included, most of the restrictions enumerated
relate to the Foreign Assistance and Arms Export Control Acts.
5 No classification marking. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Cy—Consult &
minimize restrictions as much as you can. No time for me to decide now on each item.
Consult with Baker and Rhodes also. J.” Senator Howard Baker (R–Tennessee) was
Senate Minority Leader and Congressman John Rhodes (R–Arizona) was House Mi-
nority Leader.
