Chapter 4, February–April 1990  633
provide them. He noted that the principal U.S. ALCM carrier, the B–52, 
was a very old aircraft against which Soviet defense capabilities had 
increased significantly in recent decades.
Peresypkin countered that “old” aircraft such as the B–52 or the 
TU–95 would be carrying new types of ALCMs. Moreover, these air-
craft would not be operating within the range of Soviet air defenses. 
Since the ALCM had a 4000-­km. range, the U.S. should not be con-
cerned; stealth designs would render air defenses useless in any case. 
Peresypkin said the Soviet side was willing to accept certain disadvan-
tages as long as its real concern—­the 600—­km. range—­was met.
ALCM Range
Wheeler said he didn’t see how range was relevant to this issue, 
since nuclear ALCMs would be able to fly more than 600 km. Curtin 
asked why 600 km. was such a magical number for the Soviet side. 
Peresypkin replied that, as had already been explained to Gen. Powell, 
higher ranges rendered Soviet air defenses useless because they would 
have to fight not the carriers, but the ALCMs themselves. This was a 
longstanding situation dating back to the SALT II Treaty. Air defense 
capability could not be upgraded quickly, and improvements would 
be very costly.
Wheeler appealed to Peresypkin to see Soviet air defenses from the 
U.S. point of view; the U.S. side had very few air defenses. Marshal 
Akhromeyev had asserted that current Soviet heavy bombers could 
reach the U.S. with difficulty, but this might not be the case for future 
heavy bombers.
Sliding Ceiling on Number of LRNHBs
Peresypkin said Bartholomew and Akhromeyev had agreed that 
a numerical ceiling on LRNHBs would have to be set, but an actual 
number had not yet been agreed. (Comment: The U.S. record of the 
Bartholomew–Akhromeyev meeting indicates that the U.S. side did not 
agree in principle to such a ceiling. End comment.)
Former Heavy Bombers
Peresypkin said the Soviet side had accepted the U.S. right to 
deploy, outside the 1600 ceiling, 100 heavy bombers (HBs) converted 
for non-­nuclear armaments; he acknowledged that the U.S. side had 
proposed 115. Curtin corrected this formulation, saying the U.S. posi-
tion was that this represented a combined total of aircraft converted 
to carry conventional arms plus former heavy bombers. Peresypkin 
acknowledged that this was the U.S. position, but said that under the 
Soviet position an aircraft converted for reconnaissance, tanker or 
jamming purposes which was not capable of delivering any kind of
