178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Frank Carlucci
Justice
Attorney General Benj. Civiletti**
John Shenefield**
** Present only for discussion of domestic issues.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Domestic Issues:
1. Update. The Secretary General plans to continue with the sched-
uled Security Council meeting on Saturday2 night whether or not the
Foreign Minister comes from Iran. The U.S. filed its case with the
International Court of Justice this morning and we anticipate that the
ICJ will meet next week. We have two low level reports that indicate
the Soviets will not interfere if we should intervene in Iran. This appears
to be a signal and is quite unexpected. (S)
2. Economic Actions. Treasury presented a paper outlining options
available to us to increase the financial squeeze on Iran (attached).
Option 4 would be felt immediately upon adoption by foreign central
banks and would have a significant impact. Options 5 and 6 would
not have any noticeable impact for months. There will be considerable
resistance from the British and others to option 4, and it will be neces-
sary to twist their arms rather hard to insure their cooperation.3 Our
best argument will be that this action is preferable to the more severe
military actions necessary to pressure Iran, which would damage allied
interests in Iran far more. All agreed it would not be desirable to
approach the allies on this issue until we are ready to make a strong
case at the highest level. That point is most likely to occur after Iran
has rejected a Security Council resolution. State and Treasury will
prepare Presidential messages to be available by Saturday for consider-
ation and decision by the President. In the meantime, Secretary Vance
believes strongly that we should take no additional actions toward
Iran until after Ashura and the meeting of the Security Council.4 (S)
3. Iranian Assets. A number of court cases are building up, especially
in London, challenging the legality of the freeze of Iranian assets in
foreign branches of U.S. banks. The principal case, involving the Bank
of America, will probably be heard in London next week. We are likely
2 December 1.
3 In the left margin next to the first three sentences, Carter wrote: “Take the maximum
possible positions.”
4 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and wrote in the left margin: “Be
ready to move on Art 7 and calls for sanctions by individual nations.”
