1086  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
have depended on APRA’s support in Congress to give them a working 
majority and on APRA’s strong influence in organized labor to give the 
administration an advantage in dealing with this force.
15. The military are more reluctant than formerly to intervene in 
political affairs but remain the ultimate arbiter of political power.7 As 
elsewhere in Latin America, they are increasingly inclined to concern 
themselves only with professional interests and with the maintenance 
of constitutional order. Military leaders have been generally critical of 
the Prado administration’s vacillating policies, but they have them-
selves little desire to assume the responsibilities of government. They 
have pressed Prado to take a stronger stand against labor disorders 
and Communist agitation. Prado’s political modus vivendi with APRA 
has restrained the military from taking a strongly antagonistic position 
toward that party. Some of them may appreciate its utility as a counter-
force against communism and a check on labor unrest. Nevertheless, the 
military leaders probably remain fundamentally apprehensive about 
the government’s dependence on APRA, which many still consider to 
be a greater threat than the Communists. Moreover, APRA’s sympathy 
with Castro’s Cuban revolution has disturbed military as well as civil-
ian officials and has hampered APRA’s efforts to convince the military 
of its new moderation. In circumstances of great political tension it is 
conceivable that military rule would be established to maintain order 
and to suppress radicalism.
16. [text not declassified]
17. In the climate of political toleration of recent years, the influ-
ence of the Communist Party (PCP), which was outlawed in 1948, has 
been growing. Its membership is now upwards of 6,000 and may be as 
high as 12,000, with a considerably greater number of sympathizers.8 
Its strength is concentrated in the cities, principally in the Lima-Callao 
area and in southern Peru, where there is normally discontent with the 
central government. At the important San Marcos University in Lima, 
the Communists in combination with independents recently broke 
APRA’s control of the student federation. Communists have been most 
successful with disaffected mestizos and migrant Indians in urban areas, 
particularly in Arequipa and Cuzco, where the party controls the depart-
mental labor federations. In these two cities the Communists also con-
trol university student federations. With these assets the Communists 
are capable of taking over one or two southern urban areas for a day or 
7 For a description of armed forces capabilities, see Appendix B. [Footnote is in the 
source text.]
8 The Partido Obrero Revolucionario (POR), a Trotskyite Communist Party, has about 
2,500 members. While it adheres to a more radical line than the PCP, it and other small 
Communist splinter groups on occasion provide support for the PCP. [Footnote is in the 
source text.]
