910
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
as a silver lining, few Israeli politicians would wish to publicize such
perspicacity. Few would be persuaded that we have enhanced the
chances for a comprehensive peace. Our going along with a resolution
which would be seen as “amending” 242 by specifying Palestinian
rights—either “national” or just “legitimate”—would create a vocal na-
tional consensus which the GOI, carried along by its most hawkish ele-
ments, would manipulate to the hilt.
13. There are steps which we should take to reduce Israeli suspi-
cions over the period ahead as we grapple with a Palestinian rights res-
olution and the difficult choices involved, regardless of our final deci-
sion on U.S. policy.
—It is in our interest to maintain a dialogue9 on this question with
the Israelis as intensively as possible over the days ahead in order to
achieve the dual purpose of allaying as much as possible Israeli fears
that we are up to a double game, and pre-empting charges that we are
violating our commitments.
—Should we begin negotiations on the text of a Palestinian rights
resolution, we should provide drafts to the Israelis on a timely basis
and brief them in as much detail as practicable on the signals we are re-
ceiving and on the American position as it emerges.
—Such steps, however, will in no way avert the inevitable storm of
vituperation, possibly backed by provocative actions destructive of the
peace process, which adoption by the Security Council of such a resolu-
tion would bring on.
Viets
9 On August 8, Carter held a luncheon meeting with Evron. The meeting, Brze-
zinski wrote in a August 7 memorandum to Carter, was designed to “clear the air” be-
tween the United States and Israel. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Country File, Box 36, Israel: 5–11/79) According to the President’s Daily Diary,
the meeting took place from 12:30 to 1:55 p.m. in the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Pres-
ident’s Daily Diary) Although no memorandum of conversation for this meeting has
been found, Carter’s personal handwritten notes related to it are in the Carter Library,
Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 4/79–11/81.
281.
Editorial Note
On August 15, 1979, Ambassador to the United Nations Andrew
Young announced his resignation during a press conference at the De-
partment of State in the wake of revelations that he had met with the
