accept the reservations regarding such products as scrap metals and synthetic dye stuffs at the time of the convention. While the American delegation should take its stand against all such economic restrictions on the fundamental principle involved, the following are of particular concern to its trade and those on which it is desired that every effort be made to prevent their acceptance by the convention: Import Restrictions: On automobiles (presented by Czechoslovakia and Portugal); agricultural food products (presented in varying degrees by Italy, Japan, Norway and Portugal); and motion picture films. The question of films has been brought forward since last November by the action of France, although similar restrictions are found in Great Britain, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Italy. The fact that the restrictions on films are operated through rationing at time of the granting of licenses for exhibition, rather than at the customhouse, does not essentially change their nature nor exempt them from the application of the convention on any ground that they are internal measures. To refuse to grant licenses for the exhibition of foreign films or the films of a given foreign country is tantamount in practice to refusing their importation into the country. Your stand in opposition to the film quota restrictions should find support from the representatives of the German Government which, despite repeated requests from its domestic film industry, declared that it would not ask a reservation for films because of its inconsistency with the general objective of the convention. The grounds for objecting to the acceptance of import restrictions on automobiles or staple food products are obvious and need no particular elaboration. The fact that particular countries desire to maintain such essentially economic restrictions, the purpose of which is fully served in other countries by import duties, as important bargaining considerations in forthcoming treaty negotiations, does not make them any less objectionable in the light of the ends sought by the convention. Export Restrictions. The permanent restrictions on the exportation of crude oil desired by Poland and Rumania, and on metal ores by Italy and Rumania have already been dealt with. The problem of export restrictions on hides and skins appears to be on its way to solution through the special agreement
