636 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ES–37. Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, November 11, 1960. SUBJECT Considerations of Intelligence Community Regarding Recognition of El Salvador. I have been informed that a decision has been made to extend recognition to the government which has been formed in El Salvador following the overthrow of President Lemus on October 26. While this decision is beyond my scope, I do feel very strongly that it is our duty to put forth our considered judgment of the results that may flow from such recognition. Since there is no time for a National Intelligence Estimate in this case, Mr. Dulles, The Director of Central Intelligence, suggests that we incorporate in one paper the view of representatives of the intelligence components of the Department of State, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. The government formed in El Salvador following the overthrow of President Lemus on October 26 continues to exhibit an increasing trend toward the left. A growing proportion of the Junta appointments to the cabinet and other important government posts are going to confirmed or suspected Communists. The individual responsible for engineering the coup was former President Osorio who had enlisted the support of military and wealthy civilian elements in addition to many leftists. It now appears that Osorio is unable, or perhaps unwilling to contain the growing power of the leftists who are becoming entrenched in the new regime. Although there are Junta and Cabinet members who show signs of concern over the situation, they have not demonstrated the capability of coping with their more politically skilled leftist colleagues. A counter-­coup by disgruntled but disunited military elements remains a possibility. The leftist trend of the Junta in El Salvador has been indicated more by the nature of government appointments than by actions or declarations. Also a considered danger is that several more important Communist and leftist appointments and removals of moderate elements are pending the receipt of recognition by the United States Government. Although the Junta has lifted the state of siege, the dissolution of Congress and the elimination of pro-Lemus elements, friendly to the 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.00/11–1160. Secret.
