1388 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 814. Letter 57 from Johnson to Clough1 Letter No. 57 Geneva, July 11, 1957 Dear Ralph: I want to thank you most heartily for your letter of July 5 and the very full enclosures which, together with your most welcome telegram on Tseng enabled me to be fully armed for today’s meeting. As you will see I was able to smother him with detail on Tseng and he had no comeback whatever at today’s meeting. As far as comment on today’s meeting is concerned, I have nothing to add to my telegram. I, of course, did not expect he would in any way overtly react to my effort to put across the point we would not necessar­ ily stop the Talks if the Americans were released, and it is hard for me to tell whether it went across. It may not have, and I will work on this as opportunity arises. Tell the Secretary I greatly appreciated his personal message on this and will continue to play it as best I can. While it is only a factor in their failure to let them go, it is perhaps one that I will be able to remove. It was good to have Ed here but was sorry to learn after his arrival that it meant again busting up his vacation. With Ekvall now staying in Paris between meetings there will be no one here to receive messages, handle correspondence or sort out incom­ ing material. (Incidentally, I told Wang that Popper would be the con­ tact here for any messages between meetings.) Therefore, I have several suggestions for handling material along the lines of our conversation. First, on the understanding that CA will screen and transmit to me all pertinent material from the FBIS, I suggest that FBIS be told no longer to transmit its file to me. I would suggest that insofar as is practical a copy of such material be sent directly to me as well as to Ed as it appears without waiting for the now monthly letter. I would suggest that press statements on our part, records of MAC meetings, speeches and similar unclassified material be similarly handled. In general, it would be best that classified material such as the FBI reports on Dr. Lin or other classified material for which I may have a need in meetings continue to be sent to me here. This obviates the problem of my having to carry classified material with me on the plane. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
