Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 —ratify and implement an MTN agreement (an effort that Bob Strauss says will make the Panama Canal look like a picnic);4 (C) —allow the US oil price gradually to rise to world levels, as pledged at Bonn; (U) —press your export promotion program, even when this conflicts with other US objectives; (C) —make our exports more competitive, by increasing US investment and productivity—even if this means tax changes and cutting back on otherwise desirable government regulations. (C) More important than any of these will be how we prosecute the fight on inflation, which is treated under (4) below. (U) 3. North-South. You said in the campaign that you would restore morality to US foreign policy. This means different things to different people. To me, it means helping the one billion people in the world who live in desperate poverty. (U) Most of these people are not in the middle-income developing countries; these countries, moreover, do not need concessional aid. What they need is a good MTN agreement, and strong multilateral financial institutions from which they can borrow on hard terms. We have moved actively to achieve both. This Administration’s lead in creating the new IMF facility5 and our progress in making up our World Bank arrearages is in refreshing contrast to past US neglect of these two institutions. The case for thus helping middle-income countries is clear in terms of US self interest: They are increasingly important economic partners. (U) The case for helping poor developed countries rests on a longer term consideration, our interest in meeting global problems, and on moral grounds: When Bob Lipshutz swore in members of the Hunger Commission,6 he referred to a quotation from Matthew; when I had looked it up, it seemed to me the best justification of aid to poor countries that I had read: “In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”7 We’re not ashamed to take moral considerations into account in our private lives; there’s no reason we shouldn’t do so as a nation, as well. (U) 4 The President underlined the phrase “make this look like a picnic.” In the left-hand margin next to this point, he wrote: “nothing could do this.”
