22 Chapter 2, January–June 1989 6. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Ross) to Secretary of State Baker1 Washington, February 8, 1989 SUBJECT Arms Control Memos from PM and Paul Nitze The striking aspect of these memos is the degree of consensus found in them. Clearly, there are solid opportunities for department-­wide agreement; some of the positions on which the department appears to agree, however, are likely to be fought by other elements of the national security communitythough there is definite room for compromise. The points of agreement include: • ICBM Survivability: Both Nitze and PM make the case for mobile missiles.2 Nitze remains skeptical about rail-­garrison MX because of the warning time it requires. Moreover, in order to improve survivability, he argues we may want to reconsider the 1600 launcher limit provisionally agreed to in START.3 • Verification: The verification regime will have to be reviewed and possibly modified as we near an agreement and delineate positions on mobile missiles and SLCMs.4 • SLCMs: Each argues that the Soviets will demand some sort of agreement on SLCMs before agreeing to START.5 • Defense & Space: They argue that our D&S approach has become wrong-­headed. We are trying to get the Soviets to agree to an interpretation of the ABM Treaty which may be a moot issuegiven the present structure and objectives of SDI. Nitze and PM feel these negotiations should focus on specific space-­based tests or physical parameters instead of the more general issue of “narrow” versus “broad.” This area is one where DOD opposition is likely to be greatest.6 1 Source: Department of State, STARS, Document Number 89075018. Secret; Exdis. Baker wrote a checkmark at the top of the memorandum. 2 Baker underlined “mobile missiles.” 3 Baker wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this bullet point. 4 Baker wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this bullet point. 5 Baker wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this bullet point. 6 Baker wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this bullet point.
