Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III the other, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal, with the understanding that Justice will provide helpful language for the export announcement. 11. Export Assistance Programs. We recommend that you approve Commerce’s de minimis request for an additional $20 million to provide better assistance to U.S. exporters. 12. Interagency Committee on Export Expansion. Commerce proposes that you create an interagency Committee on Export Expansion, chaired by Commerce, to oversee the Administration’s export effort. The Committee would publish an annual, public report for the President on the progress made. Our experience over the past several months has made us very skeptical about the wisdom of, in effect, making the Export Task Force a permanent Administration body, complete with annual report. We would suggest instead that the export expansion effort be monitored by the Commerce Department and/or the EPG. Consideration should also be given to reviving the President’s Export Council, a private sector advisory group which has been dormant in recent years. Businessmen continue to be interested in the Council and would probably appreciate its revitalization. Accordingly, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal. 13. Agricultural Financing and Assistance. Part A of this proposal represents existing Administration policy and, accordingly, you need not make a new decision on this issue. Part B calls for Administration support of legislation setting up agricultural assistance offices abroad. The Department of Agriculture is already moving to provide this assistance under existing authority. We believe there is merit in providing such assistance but that it should be provided on a case-by-case basis as it can be justified rather than legislatively mandated. Accordingly, we recommend that you disapprove proposal (B). 14. Multilateral Discussion of Compensatory Defense Agreements. We recommend that you approve this proposal. 153. Editorial Note In early August 1978, Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss wrote to European Communities (EC) Vice President Wilhelm Haferkamp, EC Commission Director General for External Affairs Sir Roy Denman, and EC Vice President Finn Gundelach on the issue of the countervailing duty waiver. Strauss, citing recent discussions with members of Congress, expressed doubt as to whether
