486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the other, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal, with the
understanding that Justice will provide helpful language for the export
announcement.
11. Export Assistance Programs. We recommend that you approve
Commerce’s de minimis request for an additional $20 million to pro-
vide better assistance to U.S. exporters.
12. Interagency Committee on Export Expansion. Commerce proposes
that you create an interagency Committee on Export Expansion,
chaired by Commerce, to oversee the Administration’s export effort.
The Committee would publish an annual, public report for the Presi-
dent on the progress made. Our experience over the past several
months has made us very skeptical about the wisdom of, in effect,
making the Export Task Force a permanent Administration body, com-
plete with annual report. We would suggest instead that the export ex-
pansion effort be monitored by the Commerce Department and/or the
EPG. Consideration should also be given to reviving the President’s Ex-
port Council, a private sector advisory group which has been dormant
in recent years. Businessmen continue to be interested in the Council
and would probably appreciate its revitalization. Accordingly, we rec-
ommend that you disapprove this proposal.
13. Agricultural Financing and Assistance. Part A of this proposal
represents existing Administration policy and, accordingly, you need
not make a new decision on this issue. Part B calls for Administration
support of legislation setting up agricultural assistance offices abroad.
The Department of Agriculture is already moving to provide this
assistance under existing authority. We believe there is merit in pro-
viding such assistance but that it should be provided on a case-by-case
basis as it can be justified rather than legislatively mandated. Accord-
ingly, we recommend that you disapprove proposal (B).
14. Multilateral Discussion of Compensatory Defense Agreements. We
recommend that you approve this proposal.
153.
Editorial Note
In early August 1978, Special Representative for Trade Negotia-
tions Robert Strauss wrote to European Communities (EC) Vice Presi-
dent Wilhelm Haferkamp, EC Commission Director General for Ex-
ternal Affairs Sir Roy Denman, and EC Vice President Finn Gundelach
on the issue of the countervailing duty waiver. Strauss, citing recent
discussions with members of Congress, expressed doubt as to whether
