the future, and I pointed out that the position of my colleagues was intended for that contingency whenever it might occur. He declared that the other signatories of the protocol had no right to lay down conditions for him and that he would not accept them either now or at any other time. 3. I went on to say that my colleagues were, in view of his published utterances, apprehensive as to his attitude with respect to their rights and prerogatives under the protocol. He admitted that he had expressed disapproval of the protocol provisions but assured me that he desired on entering the quarter to maintain good neighborly relations and observe municipal regulations. He added that if his Government should renounce its rights under the protocol they would notify the other powers in accordance with international usage. He also made and reiterated the statement that his Government would not bring any Red troops into the Legation Quarter. 4. I inquired whether I might communicate to my colleagues the statements he had just made. He consented on the express understanding however that they were not to be regarded as the fulfillment of preliminary conditions laid down by others but the voluntary expression of his own sentiments. He agreed to send me a written record of these observations. He will also make a formal demand of the powers for the transfer of the Legation premises. 5. Karakhan will never assent to conditions to get back the property. On the other hand most if not all of my colleagues insist on some stipulations. My hope is that Karakhan’s voluntary statement, unless he minimizes it in the note he is to send me, can be used to satisfy my colleagues. It is on this I base my hope of an early settlement of the difficulty. 6. I had a conference this morning with my British colleague who has just returned to Peking for a few days and informed him of my instructions on the subject and reported to him fully my conversation with Karakhan. He expressed much gratification at
