Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 267 SALT agreement is received here in the country at large. This is a point which, before long, we ought to convey quietly to the Soviets.5 Please indicate if the above approach makes sense. If it does, it might be useful for you to spell it out to Cy, and perhaps some key Congressional leaders (e.g. at one of the breakfasts)—with the added benefit of conveying to all that you have a deliberate and staged strategy on this vital issue. [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 5 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “I agree.” 58. Address by the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake)1 Houston, Texas, November 5, 1977 The United States and the Third World I will speak for a while first on the approach of a new Administration to the crucial economic issues we are addressing with the developing nations. The phrase “new Administration” may no longer be accurate after 10 months. But I think we do have an approach to these issues that is new in some of its directions and priorities. Before getting to the specific issues themselves, let me say a few words about context. For many years during the period after World War II, American relations with Latin America, Africa, and Asia were looked at primarily through the prism of the cold war. And especially with regard to Africa and Asia, our concerns for close relations with our traditional allies cut across our inclination to support the movement toward independence by Europe’s colonies. In recent years, we have come to look at the problems of the Third World more in their own right, in terms of realities of the Third World itself. We can do so because we have come to appreciate better the limits to the influence of both the Soviet Union and the United States in the Third World. We must do so because of the growing importance of the Third World to us, politically as well as economically, and because 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, January 1978, pp. 24–27. Lake delivered his address before members of the African Studies Association (ASA) and Latin American Studies Association (LASA) at their joint meeting.
