Yugoslavia
869
264.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, May 10, 1979, 1041Z
3453. Subj: Yugoslav Earthquake: Reconstruction Assistance. Ref:
State 111949.2
1. C-entire text
2. It was not too many years ago that I too was struggling with
tight budgets and cursing Ambassadors for their inflated clientitis.
Thus, I have been uncharacteristically reluctant to weigh in on the
debate over what, if any, reconstruction assistance the USG should
provide in the wake of the Montenegrin earthquake. But further silence
only means I am not doing my job.
3. Certain facts are clear:
A. The consequences to the Yugoslav economy of the earthquake,
while not disastrous, will be severe. And this comes at a time when
the Yugoslav economy is already under heavy pressure, with a serious
trade imbalance for the year inevitable, inflationary pressures intense,
investment funds shrinking, and hard currency availabilities greatly
reduced.
B. The earthquake’s effect on Montenegro (Yugoslavia’s poorest
republic), on the other hand, is close to disastrous. Tens of thousands
are, and will remain for months, in temporary shelter; much of the
Republic’s infrastructure (highways, hospitals, schools, water systems,
etc.) has been destroyed or damaged; tourist facilities along the
Montenegrin Adriatic coast are a shambles; industrial facilities through-
out much of the republic have been put out of commission for months
to come.
C. The quick and effective emergency aid provided by the USG
was widely and gratefully noted by people throughout Montenegro
and Yugoslavia. We were compared favorably with others (particularly
the USSR) who reacted slowly or not at all during the emergency phase.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790211–1130.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis.
2 In telegram 111949 to Belgrade, May 2, the Department informed the Embassy of
Senator Pell’s introduction of the Kennedy amendment to the FY80 Aid Authorization
Bill and the discussions on the amendment that ensued including the position of the
administration that it took no position pending a review of Yugoslav needs. The Depart-
ment informed the Embassy that the SFRC concluded discussion on the amendment
with an agreement to wait for the administration’s position, and that “Committee now
considers the ball to be in the administration’s court and that although Kennedy is
prepared to propose amendment on Senate floor, he will not do so without administration
support.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790201–0097)
