Afghanistan 53 well become the eventual fate of this country.3 Our best strategy appears to be one of encouraging an independent and truly non-aligned Afghanistan. End of summary. [Omitted here is the body of the telegram.] Eliot 3 The Embassy reported in telegram 4946 from Kabul, June 19, that it recently obtained a copy of a document entitled “Constitution of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA),” which clarified the new government’s ideological foundation. The Embassy noted that “the document, if valid, would leave little doubt that the PDPA is a Marxist-Leninist body and is pro-Soviet. We believe that the ‘constitution’ is a genuine Party document, but we are unsure of its date. We are fairly certain the document predates the coup two months ago, and conceivably it is the PDPA’s founding document dating from 1965. Whatever the case, it constitutes one further indication that the organization now wielding political power in this country is a pro-Soviet Communist type political party.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program Files for Soviet-Asia Relations, 1960–1978, Lot 90D320, Afghanistan, January–June 1978) 23. Letter From President Carter to Pakistani General Zia1 Washington, June 9, 1978 Dear General Zia: Your letter of May 9 was very helpful in sharpening my understanding of Pakistan’s position in South Asia.2 I have also profited from the valuable insights that Ambassador Hummel has gained from his talks with you, and that Secretary Vance has added from his meeting with Mr. Agha Shahi.3 Both you and I view events in Afghanistan with a similar concern for the effect that they may have on the region’s security. I share your concern with the political antecedents of the new Afghan leaders, and am equally disturbed by their past statements concerning the Durand line. We agree fully that Soviet domination of Afghanistan would be 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 15, Pakistan: President Zia-ul-Haq, 2/78– 7/79. No classification marking. 2 See Document 16. 3 See Document 21.
