504 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II bility of proposing to the UNGA a procedural resolution expressing support for the action taken by the Human Rights Commission in deciding to look into the situation in Democratic Kampuchea. The outcome of the discussion of the question by the Subcommission on Discrimination and Minorities at its 1978 summer session in Geneva will be relevant to the content of any such resolution. E. Uganda In any statement to be made by the United States delegation on the human rights record under the report of ECOSOC, reference should be made to our concern over the human rights situation in Uganda,10 as well as to our strong support for measures presently under way in the Human Rights Commission to deal with the situation in that country. F. Argentina At the last session of the Commission on Human Rights, the U.S. representative, in a general statement on human rights throughout the world, included a reference to our concern over the human rights situation in Argentina.11 It is probable that a visit of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission to Argentina will be arranged and/or take place during the period when the UNGA is in session. The U.S. representative should be prepared to make appropriate reference to the Argentine human rights situation and to any developments in the OAS in his statement reviewing the human rights record under the report of ECOSOC. Should it happen that no movement will have occurred with respect to a visit of the IAHRC to Argentina during the period the UNGA is in session, the possibility of proposing some form of action by the UNGA on the Argentine question should be explored at that time. Christopher 10 Reference is to the ongoing human rights abuses perpetrated by President Idi Amin. During the summer of 1978, members of Congress sought to ban all imports from Uganda. 11 In telegram 3416 from Geneva, March 4, the Mission indicated that Mezvinsky planned to deliver a prepared statement on human rights during public debate at the HRC session and transmitted the proposed text of Mezvinsky’s statement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780099–0305)
