Yugoslavia 939 for more than a “start-up” run, yet too long for the development of completely natural relations among Tito’s successors. But this did not diminish the sense of deserved pride and increased self-confidence which prevailed in Yugoslavia during this period. This is the principal lesson to be learned from the events of the past few months: a successful precedent now exists which will give the post-Tito leaders greater confidence in the weeks and months ahead. The Economy Tito’s successors have inherited a seriously overheated economy. The rapid economic growth over the past three years has pushed the inflation rate over twenty percent, created a series of huge trade deficits, and driven up hard currency debt to over $13 billion. The Yugoslavs are now trying to implement a stabilization policy to tighten credit, slow growth, and cut imports. However, these measures are politically sensitive and will take time to have a real impact. To ease the economy over this period, the Yugoslavs have requested medium term balance of payments assistance from the U.S.4 and several other countries, including France, the FRG, and Kuwait. They also intend to approach the IMF and private Western banks which already hold much of the country’s external debt.5 We believe that Yugoslavia’s economic problems are serious but that a real crisis can still be avoided through prudent Yugoslav policies and some external financial help. We are now considering what role the U.S. can play.6 4 On April 24, Kostic met Secretary of the Treasury Robert Miller in Hamburg, West Germany, during the IMF summit and requested financial assistance for Yugoslavia’s balance of payments deficit. Kostic told Miller that Yugoslavia was implementing an economic stabilization program but that further borrowing was required. (Telegram 873 from Hamburg, April 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800204–0994) 5 David Rockefeller, President of Chase Manhattan Bank, traveled to Belgrade in June to discuss an offer to syndicate a worldwide $500 million loan for the Yugoslav Government. Belgrade rejected the offer as insufficient. (Telegram 165468 to the U.S. delegation in Venice, June 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800303–1182) In a conversation with Eagleburger on June 30, Loncar said that the Yugoslav Government was opposed to a worldwide loan syndication and that Belgrade was hoping to get separate loan agreements from several Western countries. Loncar also stressed that Belgrade was reticent to accept loans from Arab countries because of “political strings attached.” (Telegram 5192 from Belgrade, July 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800316–1265) The Rockefeller plan was finally accepted by the Yugoslav Government in September. (Telegram 7051 from Belgrade, September 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800427–0868) 6 Miller traveled to Belgrade as part of the U.S. delegation to Tito’s funeral and discussed with Kostic the way in which the U.S. Government could offer assistance. Miller stressed that the IMF must be involved in any stabilization program the Yugoslav Government undertook. (Telegram 3749 from Belgrade, May 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800235–0359)
