September 18–December 16, 1978
237
In conclusion King Hussein said it would be helpful to us with our
local people and with others in the area if we could have formal written
U.S. answers to the questions that we have raised here. Secretary Vance
agreed to do so and asked that the Jordanians send us their questions in
writing. King Hussein agreed to do so.15
King Hussein said that the Jordanians will be discussing these two
documents and will be asking many questions concerning them and
the precise meaning of their language. We will continue our discus-
sions with Secretary Vance in their regard in order to clarify these
issues.
15 On September 28, Badran formally presented Veliotes a list of 14 questions on the
Camp David Agreements in the form of a letter from Badran to Vance. The same day, the
Embassy transmitted the text of the letter in telegram 7605 from Amman. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Ath-
erton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Camp David Final)
65.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Riyadh, September 21, 1978
PARTICIPANTS
Saudi Side
HRH Crown Prince Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz
HRH Prince Sultan bin Abd al-Aziz, Minister of Defense (and Acting Foreign
Minister)
Counselor Rashid Pharaon
Abd al-Rahman Mansouri, Deputy Foreign Minister
Ismail al-Shura, Director of Western Affairs, Foreign Ministry
U.S. Side
The Secretary
Ambassador John C. West
Ambassador Roy Atherton
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8, Memcons, 2 of 2. Secret; Nodis.
Drafted by Twinam on September 23; approved by Wisner on October 3. The meeting,
held in the Al-Ma’dher Palace, followed a brief meeting between Vance and Khalid. In
this exchange, which largely focused on the King’s health and the general history of the
U.S.-Saudi relationship, Khalid told Vance that “during the Camp David summit he had
been preoccupied with his wish that President Carter would achieve success, that while
he was also concerned for Sadat’s success his thoughts were much more with President
Carter.” The record of this meeting is ibid. Vance visited Saudi Arabia September 21–24.
