3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 736 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI the U.S. then becoming bogged down in Vietnam after the respite won in Cuba, with massive Soviet investments in defense. 4. The 1970’s: detente and continued buildup of Soviet strength; 5. The 1980’s: the danger of conflict in the context of wider global turbulence. It is both symbolic and significant that Soviet action in Afghanistan occurred in the first week of the new decade of the 1980’s. To respond to that initiative, we need to generate a wider domestic consensus behind legislative and budgetary matters. Anything less will cause vacillation and accommodation by our allies and by states within the Persian Gulf region. The context for a major response is provided by the three interdependent central strategic zones of our concern: Western Europe, the Far East, and the Persian Gulf. We have an alliance system and military deployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to create a significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf. Accordingly, our response to the Soviet Union action ought to deal with the following aspects: I. Regional Security A. Unilateral U.S. Actions 1. Covert Assistance. We have in recent months authorized a number of new programs of covert assistance. David Aaron, Frank Carlucci and David Newsom will be reviewing each and recommending necessary additional steps (e.g. YAR, PDRY or Eritrea).2 2. Military Assistance to Pakistan (the subject of a separate paper to you). 3. Bases. Survey teams will depart on January 14 to assess the adequacy of existing facilities for U.S. use.3 4. Military Exercises/Deployments. We will review the planned U.S. Marine deployment scheduled for late summer and the possibility of rapidly deploying a brigade to the region in late spring or early summer as a demonstration of our ability and will to project effective military power into the region. 5. U.S.-Saudi Security Consultations. The Saudis have agreed to the deployment of AWACS through Saudi airspace. We will determine 2 Carter wrote in the left margin, “We should share more with Spain & other countries.” 3 Carter wrote in the left margin, “I’m ready to expedite & take a chance on Somalia.”
