1955 169 135. Telegram 617 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 25, 1955, 2 p.m. 617. From Johnson. 1. Following is full text agreed announcement mentioned Mytel 616. “Agreed announcement of the Ambassadors of the PRC and the USA. 2. The Ambassadors of the PRC and the USA have agreed to announce the measures which their respective governments have adopted with respect to the return of nationals of each located in the country of the other. 3. With respect to Americans in the PRC Ambassador Wang Pingnan on behalf of the Government of the PRC has informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson that: (1) The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire to return to the USA are entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can exercise as soon as possible their right to return. (2) The PRC agrees that the Government of the UK will be entrusted to assist in the return to the USA of those Americans who desire to do so as follows: A. If any American believes that contrary to the declared policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC and request it to make representations on his behalf to the Government of the PRC. If desired by the USA the Government of the UK may also investigate the facts; B. If any American in the PRC who desires to return to the USA has difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK may, on behalf of the Government of the USA, render him financial assistance needed to permit his return. (3) The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­ going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC may also do so. 4. With respect to Chinese in the US, Ambassador U. Alexis John­ son, on behalf of the Government of the USA has informed Ambassa­ dor Wang Ping-nan that: (1) The USA recognizes that Chinese in the USA who desire to return to the PRC are now entitled to do so and declares that it has 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2555. Confidential; Niact.
