626 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement further attempt to do so upon conclusion three interviews. Impact all that is happening seemed to dawn upon him for first time. Asked directly whether in face all he had heard he would, if in my position, recommend recognition this government, he replied he could not in all honesty give an answer. He was not enough of a politician or diplomat to be able to assess all pros and cons of extending or not extending recognition. One thing for certain, situation extremely critical and all help and advice U.S. could give was urgently needed. [text not declassified] If this could be done without recognition, recognition now not overriding. On my way to Embassy intercepted by emissary from Roberto Parker, He told me Parker had asked him come to see me to transmit following message: Parker had visit yesterday from Major Castro Moran, from Escuela de Guerra. Major Moran told Parker that the military was very unhappy over the current situation. He said that he was speaking for the majority and that they were thinking of doing something about it. Parker asked Moran why he had come to him. He replied that he had come because Parker could put him in touch with American Embassy. Parker replied he did not want to become involved, but that he did have a very good friend in the military, a Major Rodriguez Simo, in the Escuela Militar and that if this man would come and see him he would talk with him. Simo came to see Parker last night. He told him much the same thing that Moran had, adding that their group now had the support of every army unit with the exception of the national guard. Simo said, additionally that Colonel Yanes and Captain Rosales in the current junta were also unhappy and had expressed private regrets over the way the coup was handled and how it was turning out. The emissary said that Parker had also told him to pass on to me that when he had seen me two nights ago he had thought that the U.S. should not recognize. He said he had since talked to many responsible people plus these in the army and that all now agreed emphatically that U.S. should not recognize this junta. Parker said in addition he now sure good many people were not happy with Osorio. He was told by his military visitors that Osorio did not carry out some of the commitments that he had made with the military prior to the coup. He said he is convinced from his recent talks that when next coup comes, and which he now believes it will Osorio will not be included therein. Separate telegram with our analysis follows. Briefly put, we strongly of view that recognition should be deferred indefinitely. This may be considered joint Embassy/ARMA telegram. Downs
