Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX with those that are neither. This option widens the range of favored countries to all but Czechoslovakia, the GDR, and Bulgaria. We would seek to “reward” the more liberal and independent countries and to encourage further development of those trends. With the three retrograde regimes, our aim would be to encourage liberalization and autonomy by holding out the carrot of an advantageous relationship with us; the problem is that U.S. leverage with them is minimal. D. Abandon any implicit rank-ordering, and seek to expand contacts and relations across the board in Eastern Europe to the extent possible and feasible. This approach would seek to cut the link between certain basic US actions—e.g., the extension of most-favored-nation trade status and access to credits—and Eastern European behavior. It is based on the assumption that greater internal liberalization and foreign policy autonomy in Eastern Europe are more likely to come about as a result of increased contacts with the US than because we have made greater liberalization and/or autonomy preconditions for expanding contacts. This approach is designed to set a firm basis for increased US influence over Eastern European policies over the long term. But it is vulnerable to the criticism that we would be “rewarding” and “legitimizing” repressive regimes. On two unique cases: —Our bilateral objective with the GDR over the next few years should be to increase our presence, our contacts, and our knowledge. This should be done in a way which is consistent with our broader policy interests concerning the FRG, Berlin and European security. —Towards Yugoslavia our primary objective should remain to encourage Yugoslavia’s continued independence of the Soviet Union and to give the Soviet Union no reason to think that armed intervention or a bid for predominant political influence would not have the gravest effect on East-West and US-Soviet relations. And we should continue to reserve all our options in response to such Soviet action.2 2 Not included in the Executive Summary, but included in the larger body of the paper, is an analysis of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. The paper concluded that Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty are important to U.S. foreign policy, that their mission is consistent with the Helsinki Agreements regarding free flow of information, and that the radios have become “considerably more effective in responding to the interests of listeners in recent years.” A larger study on Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America was prepared by the Ford Administration and submitted to Congress by the Carter administration. See Document 45.
