542  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
two countries, even though frictions over a variety of questions—­
ideological issues, economic and military support by the USSR to 
China, competition for influence in other Communist parties—­may 
from time to time make the relationship a sensitive and difficult one. 
We believe that Communist China will attain over the next several 
years an increasing influence on general Bloc policy and Communist 
ideology. However, so long as the struggle against the Western Powers 
remains the principal concern of both regimes, there is unlikely to be 
any serious split between them.
Soviet Internal Political Situation
16. Khrushchev’s leadership of the Soviet regime does not seem 
likely to be seriously challenged so long as his health remains vigorous. 
In the absence of such a challenge, or of any major setback to his policies, 
he does not seem likely to attempt a return to the terroristic methods of 
dictatorship employed by Stalin. He appears to recognize that the aban­
donment of such methods has improved the political climate within the 
country. Nevertheless, the regime is now again emphasizing its vigilance 
against dissenters, and would probably not hesitate to use more severely 
repressive measures if it judged this to be necessary. We believe that, 
even though the regime continues to alienate many, especially among 
intellectuals and the youth, it has gained wider acceptance among the 
population generally. This is due mainly to the relaxation of police terror, 
to improvements in material standards, and to pride in the power, world 
position, scientific and economic achievements of the Soviet state.
17. We believe that, although there will be differences within the 
Soviet leadership over certain issues of policy, and discontents within 
some groups of the population, the regime will seldom be constrained 
in major foreign policy decisions by concern for internal political 
weaknesses. Should Khrushchev die, there would probably again be 
a period of confused jockeying for the leadership. It is unlikely that 
this would basically affect the continuity of the regime’s policies or its 
ability to carry them out, but such a period might diminish the author­
ity of the Soviet Party within the Bloc and lead to divisions within and 
among Communist Parties. Over the very long run, loss of belief in the 
ideological doctrine the regime imposes, and the increasing influence 
of professional elements who are not ideologically inclined, may mod­
erate the Soviet outlook. At present, however, we see no prospect of 
change on the Soviet domestic scene so fundamental as to diminish the 
motivation, will, or capacity of the regime to project its rapidly growing 
power externally.
Trends in the Soviet Economy
18. Soviet economic policy continues to aim primarily at a rapid 
expansion of the economic bases of national power. We believe that
