462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 8. Bartha assured me that Hungarians from all over the world would be welcome in Hungary to view the Crown. He said there were no political prisoners in Hungary so the question of a political amnesty is difficult. Bartha said that the Government of Hungary looks upon the Crown’s return and its continued presence in Budapest as a gesture to build bridges among Hungarians throughout the world. 9. Bartha stressed the importance of fixing a date. He said our timing is good and the Hungarian Government would like to effect the return before Christmas. 10. Comment: We now have all elements of our maximum position on the table and a favorable reaction to them from the Hungarian working level. We also have an official favorable response to our plans from the highest level of the Government of Hungary. 11. The last step is official approval of our specific scenario. We foresee no major problem in obtaining it after we have reviewed the details with Nagy. 12. It seems clear that the Hungarian Government is willing to do everything it can to meet our requirements, and that it would welcome a visit by a high-ranking U.S. official in connection with the Crown’s return. It would be most helpful if we could fix the date and chief U.S. delegate as soon as possible. If it becomes necessary to change the President’s travel plans, and therefore our present plans for returning the Crown, would it be possible for a major figure in the administration, such as the Secretary, to schedule a brief stop in Budapest some time before Christmas in connection with travel to Europe for some other reason, such as the NATO Ministerial? Kaiser 152. Editorial Note The decision to return the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary leaked quickly within the administration of President Jimmy Carter. On November 1, 1977, Robert R. King of the National Security Council Staff reported to Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski that employees of the United States Information Agency already knew of the decision, and that the decision was perhaps even more widely known throughout the United States Government. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 11/77) Concerned that the information would soon leak to the
