606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—They could be helpful, however, in identifying as earth-
quakes or explosions nearby seismic events detected by other
seismic stations.
—In terms of NPT and LTBT monitoring, the US and UK could
both benefit by installing (on a bilateral basis) other sensors at nearby
sites to help monitor atmospheric and underground explosions in the
Southern Hemisphere.
—Co-locating these sensors with NSS sites would permit use of
UK diplomatic leverage in areas where direct US access may be limited.
Could also take advantage of presence of UK personnel and secure
communications facilities.
—Additional costs would be involved, and detailed analysis of the
costs and benefits of such additional sensors could be investigated—
taking into account planned AEDS improvements and other alterna-
tives—after specific locations are identified by the UK.
III. UK Prototype Issue
Finally, there is the issue of whether we should offer to lend
the UK an NSS unit for joint testing at a UK site in the Southern
Hemisphere.
This would involve the loan of an NSS unit to the UK on the same
basis as the offer already made to the USSR. Offering an NSS to the UK
for joint testing would not be appropriate unless we are continuing
with our overall NSS approach in relation to the USSR. If this is the
case, some factors bearing on the decision are as follows. Setting up a
prototype test facility in the Southern Hemisphere:
—would broaden UK participation and reinforce the US prototype
test proposal made to the USSR;
—could make some limited contribution to NPT monitoring, de-
pending on location;
—could enable us, in NPT Review Conference, to point to coopera-
tive efforts at UK site as evidence of ongoing activities;
—would offer opportunity to further demonstrate utility of satel-
lite communication for NSS data transmission from remote sites;
—could involve trade-offs between providing USSR or UK an NSS
unit, due to limited number of NSS units available prior to March 1981.
Considerations will also vary somewhat depending on our deci-
sion regarding funding equipment for three additional UK NSS.
—If we decide not to fund equipment for three additional UK NSS
sites, offering the prototype could still keep a little pressure on UK to
move off its one-station position in the future.
—If we decide to defer the UK equipment funding decision, but
offer to lend the UK a prototype unit, this would give them an opportu-
nity to signal some flexibility if they wanted to do so.
—If we decide to fund the equipment, and this leads the UK to shift
to a four-station position, they might be interested in the prototype loan
as a way to gain wider participation in the NSS program at an earlier
date.
