614 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Frank Press continued by noting that like MPS, the open trench concept gives the Soviets an incentive to fractionate. If they did so, they could confront us once again with a vulnerable system. Harold Brown asked why this should be? We could build more trenches to affect their RVs. The question was what kind of a race we were interested in. He noted that no matter what we do, the Soviets could build more RVs anyway. David Aaron observed that the Soviets could but don’t have to seek to make our basic concept vulnerable through fractionation. He questioned their incentive to try to overcome this system where they will see that their efforts can be readily thwarted. Harold Brown asked whether Frank Press’ objection did not imply that all shelters should have missiles in them instead of only 1 in 20 being full. Frank Press said his point was merely that the survivability of the open trench like MPS was sensitive to a variable fully in the enemy’s hands, mainly RV levels. Harold Brown responded that we could have more aimpoints, more missiles, and more RVs if Soviet RV levels went up. Gen Jones noted that Option 5 results in our producing some 18,000 weapons. He wondered if this would cause the Soviets to go for more survivability or instead simply force further growth in their RV levels. Harold Brown noted that the multiple aimpoint systems of any kind separate survivability from force size. Stan Turner commented that MAP systems encouraged fractionation on the Soviet side. Option 5 would drive the Soviets to mobility which [whereas?] Option 2 would drive them to fractionation. Harold Brown responded by noted that fractionation (or EMT increases) can be applied against submarines and aircraft as well as multiple shelters. Our primary concern should be a survivable force—­preventing fractionation (or EMT increases) is a subordinate aim. David Aaron said if the Soviets want to try to imperil our forces they can. If we go with an option along the lines of 2 we can roll effectively, with Option 5 we cannot. Stan Turner said Option 2 means a spiraling arms race in weapons, whereas Option 5 means a race in mobility. [Adm. Turner is arguing that Option 2 would cause the Soviets to proliferate RV’s in an attempt to maintain the threat to our ICBM’s. Option 5 would present so large a threat to fixed Soviet silos that they would be forced to go mobile] Harold Brown noted that, assuming Soviet dedication to counter-­military capabilities, Option 5 could lead to heightened competition in ASW/ barrage technology. Stan Turner argued, but said that Soviet prospects in ASW are much less certain than Soviet ability to fractionate multiple aimpoints. Harold Brown said that the Soviets cannot necessarily
