1956 745 83. Wang said Liu suffered illness of mind simply because US pre­ vented his return which caused his nervous breakdown. Wang must strongly protest to US against such acts of persecution Liu. 84. Wang said in bringing up case Liu US Govt has made many false and dishonest statements about Liu. First, it was stated Liu in hospital and not fit travel. Then US stated Liu could not obtain transit visas Hong Kong. All this false. All this at variance with facts, and fabrications. 85. Wang said when Liu began journey home, state of mind was normal. However, on way home and while he on board ship, ­Americans often came to talk with him and terrorize him. This resulted in fresh nervous breakdown on part Liu. Even when ship anchored Yokohama, somebody came aboard with fake letters from family with which they tried deceive Liu and change his mind. Similar incidents also took place while Liu in refugee camp in Hong Kong. 86. Wang said US authorities and US Red Cross originally informed PRC side that Liu would be escorted or sent to border town of Shumchun on Feb 1. Chinese Red Cross specially sent doctor to accompany Mrs. Liu and other members family to proceed to border and receive Liu. 87. Wang said however soon as Liu arrived Hong Kong, fresh fabrication again made to effect Liu did not desire return China and attempts made keep him in Hong Kong. Attempts were thus made detain Liu again. If one to speak about repugnant or inhuman acts this most repugnant and inhuman act of all. Man has already been terror­ ized into becoming crazy man and still attempts being made persecute this unfortunate person. 88. Wang said experience Liu suffices show how Chinese who desire return subjected to that sort of treatment. This could not fail to add all more to increasing concern of Chinese people over vast number Chinese remaining in US. 89. Wang said Chinese had not yet seen any action taken by US to withdraw requirement for Chinese in US to secure Taiwan entry per­ mits. As indicated on list he had given me, fresh attempts been made cause Chinese in US apply for permanent residence in US. This unheard of in history international affairs, violates human rights and violates agreement between both sides. 90. Wang said from stories given by Chinese who recently returned from US, picture can be drawn of how USINS authorities gone wild in their treatment of Chinese. In eyes of Chinese nationals, INS become symbol of hell. 91. Wang said Chinese nationals have full lawful right ask for return their country. This been made provision in agreed announce­ ment of Sept 10 last year. What right had US compel these unfortunate
