726 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI we also will need a decision about whether the President will want to sign this document. It is possible that this can all be worked out in the Bartholomew-Karpov meetings, but we probably should plan on some of these questions going to the Baker-Shevardnadze, if not presidential, level after Gorbachev arrives in Washington. The second document would be a joint statement on the follow-­on negotiations. We brought our draft to Moscow. The Soviets also had theirs. There is somewhat more overlap in these drafts than I had expected, especially on topics related to “defense and space,” but also the obvious areas of disagreement. A bracketed text is being worked in Geneva. Rick reports that the Soviets have the greatest difficulty with the implicit SDI reference to “a cooperative transition” and the explicit mention of “a ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs.” He will bring back the current version when he returns to Washington this weekend for the Bartholomew–Karpov meetings. I will get it to you as soon as it is available. We also will need decisions to resolve disagreements about the substance of this document and regarding whether the two presidents should sign it. Robert Blackwill, Rich Davis, and John Gordon concur. 135. Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, May 24, 1990 Brent: Rick Burt sent me the attached backchannel which includes the text of the proposed joint statement on START follow-­on negotiations. (Since the backchannel did not go to all the interested readers in Washington, I would appreciate it if you did not acknowledge that we had it.) I will want to go over it with you in our meeting tomorrow,2 but following are a few initial observations and impressions. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01657–030, Backchannel—May 1990. Secret. Copied to Gates. 2 Not attached. Burt’s backchannel, along with Kanter’s comments, is in George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01657–023, Moscow Ministerials—May 1990 (May 15–19, 1990) [2].
