1082  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PE–29.	
National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, 13 October 1959.
NIE 97-59
THE OUTLOOK FOR PERU2
THE PROBLEM
To estimate the outlook for political and social change in Peru 
through mid-1962.3
CONCLUSIONS
1. Peru has long been ruled by an oligarchy which until recently 
has shown little regard for the welfare of the majority of the popu-
lation. This political system is being increasingly subjected to pres-
sures for change. APRA, a social revolutionary (but anti-Communist) 
mass party, has been the principal advocate of such change.4 APRA is 
feared and distrusted by the oligarchy in general; it has at times been 
driven underground and might be again if it were to seek direct con-
trol of the government. APRA, however, can deliver a decisive vote to 
that faction of the oligarchy which offers it the most favorable terms, 
and can thus exercise significant political influence. The incumbent 
president, Manuel Prado, was elected with APRA support in 1956. 
(Paras. 7–12, 14–15)
2. After Prado’s accession and until mid-1959, the Peruvian 
economy encountered increasing difficulties attributable primarily 
to worsening terms of trade. Until recently, the Prado administra-
tion’s attempts to cope with this adverse trend were vacillating and 
ineffective. Now, however, a new Prime Minister, Pedro Beltrán, has 
announced a vigorous program of fiscal reform and a long-­range pro-
gram of economic development. Barring a general worsening of Peru’s 
terms of trade, which we consider unlikely, we believe this program 
will succeed over the short run, especially if Beltrán obtains foreign 
assistance. (Paras. 24–32)
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret.
2 The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, should be classified 
“FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.” [Footnote is in the source text].
3 According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the 
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, 
and the Joint Staff participated in the preparation of this estimate.
4 Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana. [Footnote is in the source text].
