January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1097
raeli Cabinet decision7 is a backward step and will have a negative ef-
fect on the negotiations. It was also agreed to recommend that the Pres-
ident take
a
similar
line
of
disapproval
in
tomorrow’s
news
conference,8 while being up-beat on the course of the Autonomy Talks.9
7 See Document 338.
8 The text of Carter’s February 13 press conference is printed in Public Papers: Carter,
1980–81, Book I, pp. 307–315.
9 Below this sentence, Carter wrote: “This approach is ok for now, but will be inade-
quate. J.”
340.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Autonomy Talks: The Way Forward (U)
I must say I share the President’s reservations about the course
outlined at the breakfast,2 yesterday—in terms of what will be required
down the road—although it was a useful discussion that should be re-
peated frequently. (S)
Two particular ingredients seemed to be underplayed:
—the “wild card” possibilities as the final weeks approach. This
includes a very high level of anxiety in Israel, fissures in Egypt as the
lower levels press Sadat for significant pressure on Israel, a likely in-
crease of PLO activity (which could include terrorism or even a major
flare-up in Lebanon—both developments now building up steam), and
some increased pressure on us by the other Arabs; and
—increased pressure for the President to become directly in-
volved: either at the low end of the scale to provide the political excuse
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 4, Autonomy Talks: 2/13–29/80. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. Sent
for information. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote:
“You are right—we need to answer your questions. How about a 3–4 pp. paper + discus-
sion? ZB.”
2 Reference is presumably to the February 12 Senior Level Group meeting, printed
as Document 339.
