Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Attachment Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency2 Washington, undated COVERT ACTION OPTIONS AGAINST AFGHANISTAN INTRODUCTION: The communist regime of Nur Mohammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin appears to have established itself in effective control in Kabul.3 It possesses the essential mechanisms of central government and, if left to its own devices, should eventually be able to lay to rest the tribal insurrections it continues to face, principally in the eastern border area of Nuristan. No central Afghan government has ever been in total, absolute control of all parts of the country, and the center traditionally faces periodic tests of its authority from parochial interests in the more remote provincial areas. In this respect the Nuristan insurrection follows a familiar pattern, but it is taking place on an order of magnitude considerably in excess of what recent Afghan regimes have faced, and with a professed ideological content not usual to such events. The Afghan army, its leadership already debilitated by arrests and purges, is disadvantaged in Nuristan by terrain which singularly favors guerrilla activity. The admittedly limited intelligence available on the insurrection suggests that regular forces have not fared well and that word-of-mouth awareness of Nuristani success may be stimulating recalcitrant tribal elements in other areas to assume equally belligerent postures towards Kabul’s control. The latter point is largely speculative however; little reliable intelligence now exists. To the extent that current army leadership is embarrassed by its performance in this matter, turning on the political leadership which ordered the confrontation, is one possible course open to it. While tribal insurrection cannot directly bring down the central government, its continued success could spur politically uncommitted army officers to such an effort. The insurrectionists are poorly armed and lack money, medical facilities and ammunition; nor do they now appear to be receiving more than token assistance from external sources. Left to its own devices, the insurrection 2 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. No drafting information appears on the paper. 3 Inderfurth underlined the sentence and wrote: “ZB, see addendum. Rick” in the margin, a reference to the field appraisal from the Chief of Station in Kabul.
