1955  357
take issue to public and facing break if necessary. However within large 
frame of reference this is not practical.
2. Therefore, my inclination for next meeting or two is try out tactic 
of what might be termed softening our line by omitting all reference to 
implementation and concentrating on renunciation of force. I do not 
see we lose anything by this and hope we might gain something with 
respect release Americans. I have in every possible way expressed our 
dissatisfaction with implementation and have thoroughly preserved 
my ability return to it at any time. If this tactic produces no favorable 
results on release Americans during course next meeting or two I am 
in a position to return to implementation in stronger terms than ever.
3. Renunciation of force is nothing they desire discuss and it 
gives them nothing. My thought would be to open next meeting with 
prepared statement, giving Wang a copy, and see where this leads. It 
is also an excellent reply to his statement at today’s meeting to which 
I would attempt no direct reply at this time.
4. With respect to future offer for consideration thought that I 
might at some time suggest either of us could at end these talks bring 
up any procedural matters we considered appropriate and any dis­
cussion higher level meeting should be deferred until that time. This 
would be consistent our present position and still keep pot of gold 
dangling. Unless we do something this nature seems to me in spite 
our best efforts going to become increasingly clear to CHICOMS that 
there is nothing for them in item two. We must postpone as long as 
possible their coming to this conclusion, and this is becoming increas­
ingly difficult.
Gowen
266.	 Telegram 818 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 5, 1955, 6 p.m.
818. From Johnson.
NCNA correspondent here has today apparently dropped line 
imprisoned Americans not covered by agreed announcement. Is now 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–555. Confidential.
