1979 703 Harold Brown argued that Jim’s cost figures reflect add-­ons that DOD did not see as necessary, and that OMB was costing the system for a larger number of shelters than DOD believes is necessary in view of the projected threat. Jim McIntyre countered that even the basic system that DOD was talking about was priced $5 billion too low. Harold asked whether this was a “not to exceed” figure—Jim responded that it was a best estimate. (U) The President asked Jim McIntyre if OMB had developed independent estimates of shelters and road costs. Jim McIntyre responded that they had not, and that their cost estimates were based on comparing various components of M–X to similar but not identical things. The President then said that even if we assume Jim McIntyre’s figures of $41 billion is correct, what can we do about it? Jim McIntyre stated that $5 billion should be added to DOD’s figures in order to achieve a realistic figure for the Hill—$3 billion of this figure is required for mass simulators, and the rest to achieve the postulated dash capability. Harold Brown asked what advantage there was to stating such an estimate? (U) The President commented to Jim McIntyre that he presumed the Defense Department had made a detailed cost estimate and what he is hearing now is that OMB has not done this. Jim McIntyre responded that DOD cost group is the source for his estimates. (U) Harold Brown said that there may be some honest differences in judgment, but that he does not believe that the DOD figure is low. He argued that the costing has been more honest and careful than say that done for Trident, and in addition these costs are based on some testing. (U) Dr. Brzezinski noted that there is no real alternative to M–X even at $38 billion. The President agreed, and stated that the question is: “do we hurt our credibility by being either lower or higher than our best estimate”? Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should take a further look at this question. (U) Harold Brown remarked that we are going to simply have to admit to some uncertainty in our estimates of the cost of the system. The President said that perhaps we should simply say that the DOD estimate is $33 billion, and some say the cost may end up being somewhat more. General Jones remarked that the incentives of the involved bureaucracies suggest that we should start with the lowest reasonable number. He pointed out the problems inherent in discussions of costs in constant dollars, and suggested that we don’t overemphasize the confidence we have in the cost estimates. (U) The President remarked that if a low figure is used, DOD may assume that more money will be available for other types of forces,
