890 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI (If he pushes for inspections in third countries:) Inspections in third countries are not necessary or possible. I have told you that we do not base strategic forces overseas, and we are prepared to commit to leave Holy Loch by the end of 1991. So there will be nothing to inspect. National Technical Means can verify the ban on overseas basing. And we have no authority to agree to inspections in third countries. These are sovereign countries. Our agreement to ban overseas basing and pull out of Holy Loch makes inspections unnecessary. If any ambiguities arise, you can raise them in the Joint Commission. Heavy ICBMs We are working with the other agencies to get in position to accept the Soviet proposal to permit new silos for heavy ICBMs only if existing silos are destroyed, as an alternative to a ban on new silos for heavies.6 Elements of Common Ground On Wednesday at the Soviet mission Nazarkin gave Burt7 informally new language on the question of use of START missiles: “ICBMs and SLBMs subject to the Treaty which have been converted for space launch shall be used only for purposes consistent with existing international obligations undertaken by the two Parties.” Nazarkin emphasized this was personal and had not been cleared by his people. Our people all agree this is actually preferable to the US language, and Rick has told Nazarkin we can accept it. Nazarkin is still trying to work it with Moscow. The elements of common ground with the Nazarkin language at para 6 are at Tab 1. Tab 1 Paper Prepared in the Department of State8 October 4, 1990 Elements of Common Ground 1. There shall be no requirement under the START Treaty to destroy ICBMs or SLBMs when their associated launchers are eliminated. 6 Ross placed an asterisk at the end of this sentence and wrote at the bottom of the page: “(*1/3 of the SS–18 silos are in Kazakhstan, which is why the Soviets may want flexibility—­to move them to Russia!)” 7 No memorandum of conversation was found. 8 Secret.
