Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
231
member times when relations seemed especially dangerous and other
times when they seemed especially bright.
We’ve crossed those peaks and valleys before. And we can see
that, on balance, the trend in the last third of a century has been
positive.
The profound differences in what our two governments believe
about freedom and power and the inner lives of human beings, those
differences are likely to remain; and so are other elements of competi-
tion between the United States and the Soviet Union. That competition
is real and deeply rooted in the history and the values of our respective
societies. But it’s also true that our two countries share many important
overlapping interests. Our job—my job, your job—is to explore those
shared interests and use them to enlarge the areas of cooperation be-
tween us on a basis of equality and mutual respect.
As we negotiate with the Soviet Union, we will be guided by a vi-
sion of a gentler, freer, and more bountiful world. But we will have no
illusions about the nature of the world as it really is. The basis for com-
plete mutual trust between us does not yet exist. Therefore, the agree-
ments that we reach must be anchored on each side in enlightened self-
interest—what’s best for us, what’s best for the Soviet Union. That’s
why we search for areas of agreement where our real interests and
those of the Soviets coincide.
We want to see the Soviets further engaged in the growing pattern
of international activities designed to deal with human problems—not
only because they can be of real help but because we both should be
seeking for a greater stake in the creation of a constructive and peaceful
world order.
When I took office, many Americans were growing disillusioned
with de´tente—President Ford had even quit using the word, and by ex-
tension, people were concerned with the whole course of our relations
with the Soviet Union. Also, and perhaps more seriously, world respect
for the essential rightness of American foreign policy had been shaken
by the events of a decade—Vietnam, Cambodia, CIA, Watergate. At the
same time, we were beginning to regain our sense of confidence and
our purpose and unity as a nation.
In this situation, I decided that it was time for honest discussions
about international issues with the American people. I felt that it was
urgent to restore the moral bearings of American foreign policy. And I
felt that it was important to put the U.S. and Soviet relationship, in par-
ticular, on a more reciprocal, realistic, and, ultimately, more productive
basis for both nations.
It’s not a question of a “hard” policy or of a “soft” policy, but of a
clear-eyed recognition of how most effectively to protect our own secu-
