1070  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
4. The letter calls for a special meeting or meetings between Baker 
and Bessmertnykh, preceded by exchanges in Geneva including at a 
higher level, with a view to expediting solution of issues related to the 
START treaty. It closes with a reference to signing the START treaty at 
the Moscow summit.
Baker
224.	 Letter From Soviet President Gorbachev to President Bush1
Moscow, June 15, 1991
OFFICIAL STATE DEPARTMENT LANGUAGE  
SERVICES (OPR/LS) TRANSLATION
Dear George,
I fully share your point of view that, thanks to our joint efforts, it 
has been possible to reach final agreement on the issues concerning the 
CFE Treaty. The agreements achieved on conventional forces in Europe 
are not only an example of cooperation between our two countries, but 
they are also testimony to our dedication to the cause of limiting and 
reducing various types of weapons.
I agree with your idea that our next and most important task in the 
area of arms reduction should be the prompt completion of work on 
the START Treaty. Its signing at our forthcoming meeting in Moscow 
would be an event of truly historic magnitude.
Your readiness to contribute personally to finding mutually accept-
able solutions for the remaining unresolved START issues now, at the 
final stage of work in Geneva is extremely important. Like you, I am 
prepared to spare no effort in order to remove the last obstacles stand-
ing in the way of signing an agreement in the area of strategic offensive 
weapons.
I have already instructed the Minister of Foreign Affairs, A. A. 
Bessmertnykh, to do everything incumbent upon us in order to finalize 
the START Treaty as soon as possible.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs, Lot 05D259, Records of James Timbie, US-Russia BW, CTB 
Ratification, START I Baker Bessmertnykh Jul 1991. No classification marking. Printed 
from the official translation of the Department of State Language Services.
