Afghanistan 505 178. Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [cable number not declassified] Washington, January 22, 1980, 2340Z COUNTRY USSR/Afghanistan SUBJECT Comments of a Soviet Diplomat on Factors Leading to the Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan [1 line not declassified] SOURCE [3½ lines not declassified] 1. (Headquarters comment: The source made the following remarks in an informal conversation during which he said that he felt that the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was unwise and not in the best interests of the USSR. [2 lines not declassified]) 2. In early January 1980, officials of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs who, in late December 1979 and early January 1980, were involved in the support of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan said that the Soviet decision to intervene was based on the following factors: A. The Soviets were humiliated by the outcome of the August 1979 issue of Soviet combat troops in Cuba. They considered that they had backed down on this issue in deference to the right of the United States to dominate events on its borders. The Soviets also accepted an unfavorable resolution of this issue because, at the time, they still had hopes for a treaty from the second session of the Strategic Arms Limitations Talks (SALT II). B. Soviet leaders saw the decision of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to modernize its Theater Nuclear Forces (TNF) as an act requiring a response. C. The Soviet Embassy in Washington was reporting in November 1979 that there was no chance of the U.S. Senate ratifying the SALT II treaty. D. Soviet personnel in Afghanistan had been tortured to death by Afghan dissidents and retribution for these acts had become an emotional issue with Soviet leaders. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 5, Afghanistan: 1/22/80. Secret; Immediate; [handling restriction not declassified]. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
