510 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 203. Whatever their flexibility, moreover, the present Soviet lead­ ers apparently see no need to make concessions on the most important issues dividing East and West. They appear determined, for exam­ ple, not to relinquish any territory now under Communist control. Similarly, on such issues as German reunification and disarmament, we think that there will be little give in Soviet policy during the period of this estimate. 204. Techniques of “Peaceful Co-­existence.” In line with its new tacti­ cal flexibility, the USSR will continue to place heavy reliance on such conventional methods of international intercourse as high level good­ will visits, broadened diplomatic contacts, promotion of cultural and other exchanges, expanded foreign trade, long-­term credits and tech­ nical assistance, and arms aid. Non-Communist governments will con­ tinue to be cultivated in an attempt to create an identity of interests between them and the USSR and to inculcate the image of the USSR as a respectable, peace-­loving state. Following traditional Soviet prac­ tice, the USSR’s extensive propaganda apparatus as well as the network of front organizations and Free World Communist parties will also be used to this end. A particular technique of increasing significance, is the Soviet capability and intention to enter international air routes. With few reciprocal concessions the Soviets can thus demonstrate their tech­ nological prowess to Free World countries, particularly in underdevel­ oped areas. 205. By such means the USSR will continue to stress a number of already well-­established diplomatic and propaganda themes. Playing upon growing concern over avoiding nuclear war, it will contrast the USSR’s role as the foremost protagonist of peace and disarmament with the aggressive intentions of the US. Another major theme is to portray the USSR as the chief supporter of the emerging former colo­ nial countries, willing to help them “without strings attached,’’ as opposed to US efforts to force these countries into anti-Communist alliances and continued US identification with the colonial powers. The USSR, through stressing peaceful Soviet intentions, is also seeking to convey the thesis that Communist-Free World collaboration is now possible in a wide variety of fields. 206. Despite the USSR’s emphasis on “peaceful co-­existence,” its continued hostility toward the West implies the continuation in varying intensity, of more aggressive cold war tactics wherever the prospective gains appear to outweigh any damage to the over-­all “co-­existence’’ line. Savage propaganda attacks on capitalism, imperialism, and the West, especially the US, are likely to recur. The USSR will almost cer­ tainly also use subversion and infiltration to achieve local Communist goals in situations susceptible to advantageous handling along these
