340
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
113.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, February 27, 1978
SUBJECT
International Economic Policy
The public airing of differences between the United States and
Germany over economic policy is having adverse effects. This per-
sistent policy dispute has created a feeling of uncertainty and uneas-
iness about future developments. Chief Executive Officers are wary
about large investment projects. The stock market is nervous. Interna-
tional money markets are in disarray. Every time we urge Germany to
expand further and Germany refuses, the dollar falls and the stock-
market gets more jittery. Every time Germany points the accusing
finger at our huge oil imports while the energy bill remains stalled, the
mood of money managers and investors gets blacker.
We should act now to break this downward spiral. What is needed
to change the psychological climate is to give the impression that gov-
ernments are acting in harmony in pursuit of agreed objectives.
Let us stop urging the Germans to be an economic locomotive. Re-
gardless of the merits of our case, Germans of all political and economic
persuasions are united in opposing this role. They disagree with our
economics (however sound), resent our pressure (however gently ap-
plied), and cannot resist the political credit from standing up to us.
We can pursue the same objectives more indirectly. Most gov-
ernments want to increase economic growth and at the same time not
fan inflation. Differences arise mainly over means and degree, not
ends. Perhaps we could defuse the policy dispute and create a more
positive atmosphere by approaching the problem together with Ger-
many, Japan, and other OECD countries.
I realize that this matter has a long history, that many ideas have
been tried, and that by now no one’s motives are considered to be pure.
But what is needed is a new beginning.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economics/International: 1/77–7/78. Confiden-
tial. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Solomon, Bergsten, Widman, and Junz
(Treasury); Cooper, Katz, Vine, and Hormats (State); Schultze, William Nordhaus, and
J. Shafer (CEA); and Hunter (NSC).
