the plebiscite and the indemnity, and set forth his views as to the manner of holding the
plebiscite. The Peruvian Minister, Senor Seoane, declined to combine the plebiscitary
protocol with other matters. He refuted the suggestion which had been made that
“according to modern precedents the plebiscite incorporated in the history of
international law constitutes a formula for disguised cession” and presented at length
Peru’s position as to the terms of the plebiscite. Later it was agreed that the
negotiations should proceed at Lima. Thereafter occurred the so-called wreath incident.
The Chilean Minister at Lima expressed a desire to place a bronze wreath on the
mausoleum erected to the memory of the Peruvian soldiers who died in the war with
Chile. This proposal was first accepted but later this acceptance was withdrawn and the
Chilean Minister immediately returned home.
In the absence of diplomatic representation of either country at the capital of the other,
there ensued a period of direct negotiations between the Foreign Ministers of the two
countries. These negotiations began in August, 1909, with a note by the Chilean
Foreign Minister complaining of certain language used by the President of Peru in his
message to Congress in relation to the question of Tacna and Arica. The Peruvian
Minister replied in justification and in another note took up the questions connected
with Chilean administration, which will be discussed later. In October, 1909, Chile
presented certain definite proposals as to the conditions of a plebiscite, these being
founded on the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol and covering the points which by that
protocol were to be referred to arbitration. Peru replied in November, 1909, with a
memorandum of counter-proposals modifying in certain important respects the Chilean
plan. Correspondence ensued setting forth the answer of Chile to Peru’s complaints as
to the conduct of administration in the Territory of Tacna and Arica and Peru rejoined.
In a note of March 3, 1910, the Chilean Foreign Minister recurred to the idea that the
plebiscites in international law were but disguised formulas for annexation and applied
this to the case of Tacna and Arica saying that the provisions in question of the Treaty
of Ancon were devised “as the only means designated by history of satisfying the
territorial demands of Chile without deeply wounding a national sentiment of Peru.”
“Nevertheless,” the Chilean Foreign Minister added, his Government “has sought in the
holding of the plebiscite the satisfaction of its legitimate exigencies, and it only asks
that the act be essentially popular and that it be effected without violating for a single
instant, by interrupting them, its rights as a sovereign in the territories of Tacna and
Arica.” The Chilean Foreign Minister then set out in considerable detail proposed
conditions for the plebiscite,—providing that it should be held within six months after
the exchange of ratifications of the protocol, and setting forth the manner in which a
Directive Board and Registration and Receiving Committees should be appointed and
act, the qualification of voters and the canvass of the votes.
Peru did not answer these proposals. Once more, on March 19, 1910, as in 1901,
diplomatic relations were severed as a protest against the course of Chile’s
administration in Tacna and Arica. The Chilean Foreign Minister replied to the notice
