580 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II South Africa and Israel. As previously noted, the US brought up specific cases in the Soviet Union and elsewhere, as well as mentioned problems in other parts of the world. The US was in turn criticized for our treatment of the American Indians. 9. With the present atmosphere fostering political comfrontation and with the Economic and Social Council likely to expand the Commission from 32 to 43 members, we should begin early charting our course and adapting our style accordingly. Vanden Heuvel 185. Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, March 20, 1979 SUBJECT Human Rights Reports The third annual volume of public human rights reports recently was submitted to the Congress. These reports, mandated under Sections 502B and 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act, have improved each year in thoroughness and specificity. Debate over the costs and benefits of these reports has continued since the previous Administration sought to maintain them on a confidential basis and was rebuffed by the Congress. The following benefits flow from the preparation and submission of these public reports. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human Rights Country Reports and General Information, Lot 82D274, Human Rights Reports. Limited Official Use. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the memorandum. Drafted by Schneider and concurred in by Jennone Walker. Attached but not printed is a March 9 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski transmitting HA’s undated report on official country reactions to the 1978 country reports. According to the March 5 NSC Global Issues Cluster’s evening report, Tuchman Mathews had requested that the Department prepare such a report on country reactions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/ Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 1–3/79)
