February 1951–February 1952
81
I am confident that the Department will find the enclosed memo-
randum of considerable interest. The enigmatic Dr. Mosadeq is to exert
considerable influence in Iran in the immediate future. The skill with
which he conducts the affairs of the government, and the political
course which he follows will probably determine the future not only of
the vitally important oil resources of this country, but perhaps of the
country itself.
Mosadeq is a dramatic demagogue who appears to be without par-
ticular wisdom or background for government. These very factors
make his presence at the head of the government especially important.
He has qualities which, while not commending him to the world, may
establish his place firmly in the minds of the people as a popular leader.
I am inclined to doubt the statement in the memorandum that Mo-
sadeq “has the confidence of the majority of Iranians”. The majority of
the Iranians are illiterate and uninformed and are concerned only with
their daily living. Inside the principal towns the name of Mosadeq is
probably little better known than was that of Razmara, Mansour, or
Saleh. It is nevertheless true that Dr. Mosadeq does command a large
following of the more articulate in the cities and from this he derives his
strength.
For the time being we should, I believe, show a willingness posi-
tively to cooperate with the Mosadeq Government, as is suggested in
the concluding paragraphs of the memorandum. The Ambassador in-
tends to follow this policy unless the Department instructs to the con-
trary.
For the Ambassador:
Arthur L. Richards
Counselor of Embassy
Attachment
ESTIMATE OF THE POLITICAL STRENGTH OF THE
MOSADEQ GOVERNMENT
It seems appropriate at this time to make an estimate of the situa-
tion in Iran and of the political strength of the Mosadeq Government.
From this estimate it may be possible also to perceive some indications
of further developments, although this paper will not go into that as-
pect of the future.
The resignation of Prime Minister Hosein Ala and the advent of
Mohammed Mosadeq to power have been adequately described else-
where. At the present Dr. Mosadeq and his cabinet are only estab-
lishing themselves and, also for the present, the choice of the Prime
Minister and his cabinet appears to please many sections of the Iranian
