1056 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI I am proceeding on the basis of the agreements reached by our Foreign Ministers in Houston on the following issues: continuous monitoring of mobile ICBM production, the accountability and inspections of heavy bombers, limitations on throw-weight, construction of new silos for heavy ICBMs, and how to attribute warheads to new types of ballistic missiles, including the application of the so-called “40 percent” rule. If you too are prepared to proceed on this basis, then I believe our hopes of resolving the remaining START issues quickly can be realized. The remaining issues are few in number but central to the effectiveness of the treaty. To achieve a meaningful agreement, I propose that we be guided by the following principle: rather than attempting to maximize our respective advantages, we should aim to strengthen the agreement itself—its soundness, confidence in its integrity, and the stability it provides. In this spirit, I suggest we find a way to solve the stubborn problems of identifying “new types” of ballistic missiles, missile “downloading,” and data denial. The issue of “new types” arises because the treaty applies different sets of rules to the types of missiles that each side now has in its arsenal and those types that may be fielded in the future. Thus, the boundary between “existing” and “new” is important. If we make it easy merely to declare a missile to be “new,” we will have left open a clear path to evade START limits. Moreover, if the boundary between “existing” and “new” cannot be verified with confidence, disagreements about whether a missile is “new” will become a constant and potentially serious source of friction in our relationship. I believe we can deal with this problem by agreeing on the following simple principle: for a missile to be considered a “new type” in START, it must be genuinely new and verifiably different from any existing ballistic missile. If the missile is not such a “new type,” then the START rules for existing ballistic missiles would apply. I believe that the criteria to which the two sides already have agreed faithfully reflect this principle, but there may be other ways to achieve the same objective. The key point is that the criteria support the principle and the spirit behind it, rather than be designed to accommodate missiles under development which one side or the other would prefer not be treated as existing ballistic missiles. Following agreement between the two sides on the criteria for identifying new types of missiles, the Soviet side argued forcefully for making increases in throw-weight an additional criterion. We have explained in detail to the Soviet side our concerns that such an approach would not be a useful way to identify missiles that are genuinely new and verifiably different. Nevertheless, in the spirit of working together to overcome obstacles to prompt completion of START, I am prepared to agree that a missile whose throw-weight is at least 30 percent greater than the throw-weight of its predecessor missile and whose first stage
