Panama  893
evident, he added, that the various United States Government agencies 
concerned were giving the most serious consideration to the matter.
The Foreign Minister spoke again briefly, making particular men-
tion of imports of such luxury items as diamonds, French perfumes, 
and Persian rugs for resale in the Zone, from which Panama derived no 
financial advantage. The Ambassador commented on the vast contrast 
in the standard of living in the Zone and that in the Republic and the 
impression this contrast made on the people of Panama. The preferred 
position in supplying the Canal Zone market, together with other ben-
efits being sought, should be financed, in the Ambassador’s opinion, 
from the revenue derived from the operation of the Canal. He pointed 
out that Canal tolls had not been raised since 1914, despite increases in 
freight rates, wages, and so forth in the interim, although he admitted 
that any increase in the tolls which we might decide to make would 
become a major international problem.
The Secretary concluded the discussion by pointing out that the 
Department and the White House had been much concerned over the 
delay in the passage of legislation implementing the 1955 Treaty. Now, 
he said, it appeared that the problems posed by the Foreign Minister 
concerning interpretation of the provisions of that Treaty were not of 
a legal character, but dealt rather with the manner in which the Treaty 
provisions were applied in detail. No immediate reply could be given, 
he added, but he said that he and Mr. Rubottom would undertake a 
serious study of the points the Foreign Minister had raised and would 
ascertain if something could not be done.
On his departure, the Foreign Minister handed the Secretary an 
envelope which, he stated, contained an Aide Memoire7 on the subjects 
discussed.
7 Not printed; 611.1913/10–858.
PM–9.	
Editorial Note
On December 18, 1958, the National Assembly of Panama enacted 
Law No. 58 which extended to twelve miles the breadth of the terri-
torial waters of the Republic of Panama. Responding on January 9, 
1959, the Department of State, through the Embassy at Panama City, 
protested this action and informed the Ministry of Foreign Relations 
that the United States Government was under no obligation to recog-
nize a territorial sea limit of more than three miles and hoped that the
