710 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI II. The FY 1978 Plan A major part of new sales commitments in FY 1978 will be a package of aircraft sales to the Middle East. The value of LOAs signed this year for that package could range from $1.3 to $3.5 billion, but will most probably be in the range of $1.5 to $2.0 billion. The listing at Tab A7 represents priority groupings of other major requests—sales within groups are listed alphabetically—excluding the Middle East aircraft package. Based on the allocations in the table on the previous page, we should be able to conclude agreements on the requests contained in the first two groups in the listing at Tab A. However, the plan is not static; it will be updated monthly to reflect new requests and those which have been withdrawn. The importance of the plan is that it offers a comprehensive listing and facilitates the necessary trade-offs. It does not replace your review of individual cases before they are notified to Congress. (S) Recommendation I recommend that you establish the listing at Tab A as the FY 1978 Sales Plan.8 III. Planned Reductions During the past week there has been considerable negative reaction in the press to the $13.2 billion forecast for total overall sales in FY 1978. Sales are expected to increase because of an increase in NATO sales and construction activities in Saudi Arabia, both of which are not included in the ceiling. The press stories argue that the Administration has either abandoned restraint or is practicing “slight of hand” with the numbers. In this context, there was disagreement on the appropriate size of the reduction in sales under the ceiling to be achieved in FY 1978. Opinion was divided among three possible options, all in constant (1977) dollars: 1. A five percent reduction this year. Although it may be viewed by some as insufficient to show restraint, this is attractive in that we can meet and probably exceed this target (i.e., promise five percent and deliver six–eight percent). Moreover, we can probably maintain that goal in the future as well. I support this option along with the JCS. 2. An eight percent reduction this year. Those who support this option believe that in light of the current political climate and the forecast for the high overall sales total, eight percent is the minimum politically credible figure. Because inflation is expected to run at approximately seven percent, a reduction of eight percent will show an absolute de- 7 Tab A was not attached. 8 Carter checked the “Approve” option.
