3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
829
Afghan Proposal is aimed at normalizing the situation around Afghan-
istan, including Pakistan. It is a good basis for normalizing the
situation.
6. Arms control
The U.S. alleges that the events in Afghanistan and Soviet activities
had provoked some negative effect on negotiations that had taken
place on arms control before Afghanistan. Indeed, there were negotia-
tions in both the bilateral and multilateral fields but it was the U.S. that
terminated them before that. Why did you do this? You must know the
number of times the American side terminated negotiations because it
did not want them. And all this before Afghanistan could have ever
been thought up. That approach should be rejected.
7. As for SALT II, you are aware of our position. The entire burden
of blocking the entry into force is on the U.S. side. The U.S. has made
very many statements on SALT ratification. We have had promises,
half-promises and quarter-promises. Therefore we don’t attach much
weight to these promises. What comes out of these statements are
nothing—zero. There have been hints given of positive developments.
We will now see how the U.S. administration acts from now on. To be
optimistic would be hasty on our part. Nevertheless, the entry into
force of SALT II would be a major event and would contribute to
U.S.-Soviet relations and the international situation as a whole.
8. On SALT III, it seems the U.S. administration believes it is pos-
sible to exchange views on medium-range systems. When the question
arose lately on an exchange of views on SALT III, it was understood we
could do so if SALT II was ratified. This is not contrary to our under-
standing. There are ways to resolve the question of medium-range
systems in Europe and it is possible, but the way to do it is on the basis
we have proposed. In order to resolve the problem without any long
delay what is needed is to cancel the NATO decision or to officially sus-
pend its implementation. Concerning preliminary negotiations, how
can one separate preliminary and non-preliminary negotiations? What
will be decided in these negotiations will be the same subject. Nothing
will change if you call these negotiations preliminary. But you have re-
moved the basis for these negotiations. Washington did not want those
negotiations and the West has sought unilateral advantage. We want to
work on the basis of the principle of equality. Leonid Brezhnev said
that to Carter in the Vienna meeting and I repeated this to Muskie in
Vienna. We cannot accept a situation where the U.S. seeks unilateral
advantage. The idea of preliminary negotiations does not remove the
barricades surrounding this problem.
9. U.S.-Soviet relations
Concerning actions which have allegedly harmed the fabric of
U.S.-Soviet relations, this is a distortion of the situation. The responsi-
