National Security Policy 1127 B. Tactics employed will be those proven for the weapon system involved. Delivery and penetration tactics for a specific sortie and target will be as deter­ mined by the force application team. No tactics will be planned for the SIOP that have not been accepted by the commander concerned as a reliable and effective tactic. The team which examines the target defensive struc­ ture and is responsible for applying the force will determine the penetra­ tion and weapon delivery tactic for each sortie and target. (S) C. Weapon Separation Criteria for each delivery vehicle will be deter­ mined by the command providing that vehicle. The time and distance crite­ ria used to insure safe separation from nuclear blast and radioactivity will be used in resolving TOT conflicts. Separate criteria must be pro­ vided for each type of delivery vehicle (except missiles) from each type weapon being employed. (S) D. Range capability will consider the fuel requirements for tactics, wind factors and recovery. Target coverage for a given weapon carrier must be conservative enough to allow for predictable degradation to range caused by adverse winds or tactics which cause a deviation from opti­ mum range, i.e., low level penetration and/or delivery. Also consid­ ered is the point of intended recovery as it affects the area of target coverage. (S) 6. OPERATIONAL ASSUMPTIONS. A. All SIOP Forces will be timed relative to a common reference; Designated as “E” hour. This is required to insure proper timing of the force to take maximum advantage of mass, ECM, roll back, TOT reso­ lution and corridor development. All weapon carriers must launch at a predetermined E/time or on an alternate launch schedule with refer­ ence to “E” hour. (S) B. All SIOP Forces must be launched on a [illegible in the original]. Conditions of Readiness should be standardized for all SIOP Forces to pro­ vide common time for generation purposes. (A-­Hour). The JCS will direct advanced conditions of readiness for all SIOP Forces. All CINC Headquarters of SIOP committed forces will be tied to a common alerting system. All of the above operational assumptions are made to permit initialization of the time for execution purposes. All forces must begin preparation under conditions of strategic warning to permit selection of the best option for execution, the one that takes maximum advantage of forces available for launch at any given time. This can only be done effec­ tively when reliable fast reaction alerting and execution facilities are available. (S)
