3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
375
Human Rights
Turning to the question of human rights, Gromyko wanted to tell
the President quite frankly that no matter how close to the President’s
heart were his feelings about these matters, he would ask him to realize
that these were internal affairs of the Soviet Union, and that they would
be decided in accordance with Soviet laws. No one else could tell the
Soviet Union how to resolve these matters. Gromyko asked the Presi-
dent not to regard this statement of his as being directed at the Presi-
dent personally or at his concept of human rights. Human rights was a
general concept, while what the President had been talking about in-
volved domestic affairs. Throughout the entire world international
law, as well as the Helsinki Final Act recognized that internal matters
were resolved in each country internally, on the basis of its own do-
mestic laws. With all due respect for the President, Gromyko felt he
would be wrong if he failed to tell him this. No one in the Soviet Union
was now being condemned or would be condemned in the future for
something that he was not guilty of. That was not part of Soviet
practice.61
The President thought that the exchange he and Gromyko had
today had been constructive in that he now understood the Soviet posi-
tion better, and that Gromyko understood the concerns on our side. He
knew that there were serious62 differences between us, but firmly63 be-
lieved that we had every opportunity to resolve them.64 Both our coun-
tries stood for peace and for reducing the level65 of66 destruction and
loss of life throughout the world. We both wanted to have better trade
relations with each other and greater friendship between our peoples.
The President’s total commitment as President was to realize these ob-
jectives. He would ask Gromyko to convey his best wishes to President
Brezhnev and express the hope that within the next few weeks we
would be able to resolve the remaining issues at SALT and perhaps
those concerning the test ban, leading to a personal meeting between
Brezhnev and the President. He wanted to express the good will of the
American people to the people of Gromyko’s country. Their hope was
61 Bartholomew added this sentence: “He wanted to thank the President once again
for his time.”
62 Bartholomew put brackets around “serious” and wrote “still” in the margin
above it.
63 Bartholomew put brackets around “firmly.”
64 Bartholomew added “in the future” after “resolve them.”
65 Bartholomew put brackets around “level” and wrote “chance” in the margin
above it.
66 Bartholomew added “nuclear” before “destruction.”
