Chapter 5, May–June 1990 791 change the assignment of Backfire aircraft from the air force to Naval Aviation at will, further undermining the number. We would face criticism that we have no assurance at all regarding the number of Backfire with intercontinental potential against the US. 2. We propose that all Backfire in the Atlantic-­to-­the-Urals zone be included in CFE, including land-­based naval Backfire. The Soviet Union has rejected this point. How to resolve these two differences? By more than one and one-­ half American concessions. On the number, as we proposed last night to Mr. Karpov, the Soviet Union would undertake not to exceed a certain number of air force Backfire, and also undertake not to go beyond the current number of navy Backfire as of the end of this year. This would recognize the distinction you want to draw, but would assure us that all Backfire—­air force and naval—­were limited. We had proposed the air force number be 250, because we believe there are about 150 naval Backfire. 250 is more than we believe you have in the air force. This is why we proposed 400 originally, it is above the number you have. Shevardnadze: The Foreign Ministry has another 150. Bartholomew: We have some flexibility on 250, although not that much. On CFE, if we can reach agreement on what I have outlined on the first point of difference, we can drop the second point of difference on CFE without prejudice to your position or our position. We would continue to discuss this in CFE but not in START. Shevardnadze: My feeling is that the issue the Secretary of State raised during his visit to Moscow is a justified concern that we share. We are prepared to issue a statement. Mr. Karpov has informed you on the content of that statement. Specifically, that the TU–22M is a medium range bomber, not part of strategic offensive arms. We will also announce it is not our intention to give any intercontinental capability to that aircraft, including through in-­air refueling. That would encompass the entire number of that type of aircraft. And if we treat this aircraft in the way just described, it also becomes part of the subject under discussion at Vienna. As to the subject under discussion at Vienna, it’s mandate is set. I have been saying all this to indicate the main issue you voiced requiring a response concerning range capability and including in-­air refueling capability. By treating this aircraft in the way I have described, we have removed the concerns. Baker: The only difference between us is what number we are going to use. We have already crossed the bridge of dealing separately with the navy Backfire. All we ask is a freeze. Shevardnadze: Why do you want to have a freeze on the number of Backfire if they are medium range bombers? If they are on the agenda in Vienna, why have a ceiling in START?
