698
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
That is why our support for human rights in other countries is in our
own national interest as well as part of our own national character.
Peace—a peace that preserves freedom—remains America’s first
goal. In the coming years, as a mighty nation we will continue to
pursue peace. But to be strong abroad we must be strong at home. And
in order to be strong, we must continue to face up to the difficult issues
that confront us as a nation today.
The crises in Iran and Afghanistan have dramatized a very impor-
tant lesson: Our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a clear and
present danger to our Nation’s security. The need has never been more
urgent. At long last, we must have a clear, comprehensive energy pol-
icy for the United States.
As you well know, I have been working with the Congress in a
concentrated and persistent way over the past 3 years to meet this need.
We have made progress together. But Congress must act promptly now
to complete final action on this vital energy legislation.11 Our Nation
will then have a major conservation effort, important initiatives to de-
velop solar power, realistic pricing based on the true value of oil, strong
incentives for the production of coal and other fossil fuels in the United
States, and our Nation’s most massive peacetime investment in the de-
velopment of synthetic fuels.
The American people are making progress in energy conservation.
Last year we reduced overall petroleum consumption by 8 percent and
gasoline consumption by 5 percent below what it was the year before.
Now we must do more.
After consultation with the Governors, we will set gasoline conser-
vation goals for each of the 50 States, and I will make them mandatory
if these goals are not met.
I’ve established an import ceiling for 1980 of 8.2 million barrels a
day—well below the level of foreign oil purchases in 1977. I expect our
imports to be much lower than this, but the ceiling will be enforced by
an oil import fee if necessary. I’m prepared to lower these imports still
further if the other oil-consuming countries will join us in a fair and
mutual reduction. If we have a serious shortage, I will not hesitate to
impose mandatory gasoline rationing immediately.
The single biggest factor in the inflation rate last year, the increase
in the inflation rate last year, was from one cause: the skyrocketing
prices of OPEC oil. We must take whatever actions are necessary to
reduce our dependence on foreign oil—and at the same time reduce
inflation.
11 Reference is to the Energy Security Act (P.L. 96–294), introduced in the Senate on
April 9, 1979, which the President signed on June 30.
