Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII of talking to Babrak while obscuring the fact of recognition. If this were to reduce tensions in the region, would we see such a development as in our interest or not? 8. If we think it very important to avoid such a development, then we should be taking concrete steps to bolster Pakistan in ways which the Pakistanis consider meaningful. With the exception of debt relief, we have so far been unable to deliver on our rhetoric of support for Pakistan. We have in fact cheered on from a comfortable distance while the Pakistanis themselves bear the real costs of standing up to the Soviets. True, we have provided generous humanitarian assistance to the Afghan refugees but that is not likely to count for very much among Pakistani decision-makers who may believe they are faced with their country’s very survival. 9. We realize that any discussion of support for Pakistan on a scale which would produce measurable results here automatically raises the prospect of strong Indian reactions. But we must question how much good will we have won in India by our recent policies of providing almost nothing (in relative terms) to Pakistan. We suggest there is a middle ground between minimal support and maximal support for Pakistan which would solidify our position and strengthen Pakistan. Naturally, whatever we do will have an impact on relations with New Delhi, but thirty years of threading policy course among the irrelevant (to us) enmities of the region should long ago have accustomed us to the fact that we cannot satisfy ourselves and everyone else in South Asia at the same time. 10. Another set of issues revolves around the question of military assistance to the Afghan resistance groups. The problems in providing such aid, including the multitude of competing groups and the desirability of maintaining a diplomatic mission in Kabul, have been discussed before in other forums. We would submit, however, that we cannot realistically expect the Mujahideen to go on fighting the Russians forever without increased support and we should be thinking how we would adjust our policy to deal with such a development.3 Or we should take another hard look at what we can do to sustain and promote the resistance cause. 11. Finally, we need to do some serious long-range planning on our role in providing relief to growing numbers of Afghan refugees in Pakistan. Not only should we be taking steps to ensure adequate funds are available for a generous contribution of our own over the 3 It is not clear if Hummel was aware of the recently authorized increase in expenditures to support the Afghan insurgency; or if he was, whether he viewed such incremental steps as sufficient.
