3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
524
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tion issue has been resolved.) I am anxious to resolve SALT, and we
should try to wrap it up and pursue other issues at the summit. With
regard to the summit, it is not appropriate for me to go to Moscow. If
Brezhnev’s health does not permit a visit here, we would consider a
neutral place. I would plan four to five days for discussions. You
should be aware that the longer SALT is delayed the greater the ratifi-
cation problem.
Additionally, we have been legitimately concerned about some re-
cent Soviet statements. We have no secret agreements with China; we
have had no private information on Vietnam; we cautioned Deng when
he made his public statements; and our actions at the United Nations
are consistent with the foregoing. We have used our influence to get
China to live up to its statement that the operation will be limited in
time and scope. At the same time, we do not agree with the Soviet
Union, nor do most nations in the world, regarding Vietnamese actions
against Cambodia.2
Most recently I am especially concerned about the South Yemeni
attack on North Yemen.3 South Yemen is a friend of the Soviet Union,
and we believe the Soviet Union has encouraged this altercation. We
hope the Soviet Union will use its influence to end the penetration of
North Yemen’s borders. (Vance: It is an opportunity for the Soviet
Union and the U.S. to cooperate in ending a conflict.)
We would like Soviet help in Namibia and Rhodesia.4 We would
like to have a constructive partnership on these issues and we would
like to enhance our trade with you. (Reference to Governors com-
mittee) Rapid conclusion of SALT would help to resolve these con-
cerns. We hope to achieve in harmony with the Soviet Union the ho-
noring of international borders.
I hope you will relay this and that the Soviet government will re-
spond favorably. Particularly, tell President Brezhnev that I want to
meet with him so that we can prove that we are as friendly with the So-
viet Union as with China. I want you to extend to President Brezhnev
my deep friendship and my commitment to better relations. I hope we
can resolve past differences and prevent future differences.
(Dobrynin made some comments on the above, including a brief
effort to push for a visit to Moscow, but the President pointed out that
he would be glad to consider this after Brezhnev has been here.)
2 See Document 175.
3 For an overview of South Yemen’s attack on North Yemen and Yemen’s subse-
quent unification, see Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1980, pp. 30197–30201.
4 Reference is to Namibia and Rhodesia’s internal conflicts and struggles for inde-
pendence. For information on the situation in Namibia, see Keesing’s Contemporary Ar-
chives, 1979, pp. 29461–29467. For information on the situation in Rhodesia, see Keesing’s
Contemporary Archives, 1979, pp. 29576–29579 and 29760–29762.
