September 18–December 16, 1978
487
gotiations in one month, and this is not in the Camp David agreement.
They will go this far. If they were to violate this agreement or to act in
bad faith, the whole world would see it.
Secretary Vance: The Israelis have now agreed to “continuous nego-
tiations”, and to negotiate in good faith with the objective of holding
elections by the end of 1979. This will lead to an end of the military gov-
ernment, and they will repeat their agreement to a withdrawal of Israeli
forces as called for in Camp David.
Vice President Mubarak: The question is when.
The President: It says within a year. President Sadat is concerned by
world reaction and especially reaction in the Arab world. He can either
describe the language that we now have as establishing linkage, and he
can point to this and remind people that at Camp David we had a
solemn agreement on this. This will convince people around the world
that there is linkage. If he takes the same language and says that it is not
adequate, world opinion will be negative. It is important how we inter-
pret the words. Many facets of Camp David were not entirely accept-
able to either Egypt or Israel, but all of us could point to the benefits of
the agreements. Lately, both sides have begun to emphasize the differ-
ences rather than the advantages.
Vice President Mubarak: Camp David already achieved ninety per-
cent of what is needed.
The President: Now we have solved ninety-five percent of the re-
maining ten percent! But we still have obstacles.
Vice President Mubarak: We are anxious about when the full au-
tonomy will begin. We want something tangible, even if we have to
postpone withdrawal. That would be better in the Arab world. No one
now believes that Israel will give full autonomy. If full autonomy and
withdrawal of the military government can take place by January 1980,
this will give us satisfaction.
The President: Suppose you sign an agreement and then Arafat and
his supporters might try to prevent the holding of the elections which
would then put an end to the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. They could mount
tremendous pressures to block the elections. The United States, Israel,
and Egypt might not be able to do anything about that. I can assure you
that Dayan and Weizman are completely committed to rapid move-
ment toward self-government and autonomy, and they will agree to
the withdrawal of Israeli forces to designated areas. I can’t speak as
clearly for Begin.
Vice President Mubarak: The point is that we want to show the
world that we are just not taking Sinai without something in the West
Bank and Gaza. We know the West Bank will be more difficult. This is
the reason we want Gaza to be a model. We have connections to the
