820
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Praise the spirit of cooperation shown by the Yugoslav side
during the recent negotiations.
—Indicate that our negotiations appear to be close to mutually
satisfactory resolution which should provide more than adequate time
for the first shipment of fuel to be exported this autumn.
4. East-West Relations and Europe: CSCE, U.S.-Soviet Relations,
SALT, Eurocommunism, (MBFR)
U.S. Objectives: To assure Tito that we continue to pursue detente
and meaningful arms restraints with the Soviet Union; that we support
the CSCE process and the improvement of East-West relations; to
explain our policy on Eurocommunism.
Yugoslav Objectives: To argue for more understanding and accom-
modation between the U.S. and USSR, particularly on disarmament
issues, with the goal of reducing bloc confrontation in Europe; to urge
greater U.S. tolerance for West European communist parties.
Essential Factors: Politically and strategically balanced between East
and West, Yugoslavia is a potential victim of any great-power confron-
tation, and therefore seeks to keep both superpowers at arms length.
But it sees itself as a potential bridge of understanding and its impor-
tance grows in times of lower tension. In the longer view, the Yugoslavs
may envisage for themselves a pace-setting role in a restructured
Europe without “blocs,” in which communists have a more prominent
role in the West and dissent and diversity are more broadly tolerated
in the East.
Points to be Made:
—We recognize and appreciate the great efforts which Yugoslavia,
and Tito personally, made in hosting the Belgrade CSCE meeting. We
understand Yugoslavia’s disappointment at the outcome, and regret
that the consistent efforts by both of our delegations could not produce
a substantive concluding document. We believe, however, that the
Belgrade meeting has been a success and that its results will benefit
detente.
—While we do not seek confrontation with the Soviets or others,
we feel that all aspects of the Helsinki Final Act, including human
rights questions, are legitimate subjects for international discussion.
We are pleased that our two delegations were able to work so closely
together in Belgrade.
—U.S.-Soviet relations continue to represent a mixture of competi-
tion and cooperation. We seek a SALT II Agreement which is fair to
both sides, and are pleased with the progress on other arms control
questions (e.g., Comprehensive Test Ban). Our goal is the actual reduc-
tion of nuclear weapons and their eventual abolition.
