National Security Policy 1179 2. The defense of the United States is an integrated complex of offensive and defensive elements and of military and non-­military measures. Each of these has its proper role in deterring an attack or in the defense of the United States should an attack occur. An effective continental defense system will constitute one of the key deterrents to an attack on the North American Continent. 3. Current national intelligence estimates indicate that Soviet delivery systems are changing importantly in character, and imply the following periods:2 a. The period is drawing to an end when the primary element in the threat to the United States is manned bombers. b. The period of the early 1960’s will represent a transition from a largely bomber threat to one mainly composed of ICBM’s. In the early 1960’s the estimated Soviet ICBM force will present an extremely dan­ gerous threat to SAC bomber bases, unhardened ICBM sites and com­ mand installations. c. In a few years, therefore, the principal element of the threat to the United States will be ICBM’s supplemented by BISON heavy bomb­ ers and possibly by some refueled or one-­way medium bombers, by increased numbers of submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, and possi­ bly by cruise-­type missiles. 4. The changing character of the Soviet threat and our current assessment of the relative effectiveness of various active and passive defense measures3 have made it necessary that the United States re-­ examine its military and non-military programs for continental defense. [In particular, national planning must recognize that, barring a techno­ logical breakthrough, the development and deployment of an adequate AICBM system during the 1960’s is questionable.]4 OBJECTIVES 5. a. To protect and preserve a retaliatory capability of such force and certainty as to constitute a strong and credible deterrent against attack on the North American Continent. b. To limit the damage to our civil and military strength which would occur in the event of attack, in order to ensure the survival of 2 NIE 11–8–60, July 28, 1960, including relevant revisions to NIE 11–5–59 of May 3, 1960. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 In accordance with accepted practice, the term “active defense” is used in reference to those measures that involve an attempt to physically incapacitate or destroy a threat­ ening object; e.g., interceptor aircraft, surface-­to-­air missiles, anti-­missile missile systems. The term “passive defense” embraces all other means of defense; e.g., airborne and ground alert, warning and response to warning (including the launch of recallable aircraft), disper­ sal, mobility, hardening, protection against radiation and BW and CW agents. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 JCS reserves. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
