292
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Iranian communications were “interfering in the processes we have in
motion to free the hostages.” Royo decided Salamin would wait in an
intermediate location until after the upcoming visit of Secretary-
General Waldheim to Iran. (Telegram 13 from Panama, January 2;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870108–1068)
For information on Waldheim’s trip, see Document 128.
110.
Record of a Special Coordination Committee (Intelligence)
Meeting1
Washington, undated
The following discussion by the SCC(I) on December 202 was
approved by the President. The SCC(I) considered a proposed new
finding regarding intelligence operations regarding Iran. Discussion
centered on the operative description of our objectives in contacts with
groups opposing Khomeini’s regime. It was agreed, that these contacts
were intended “to encourage interactions that could lead to a broad,
pro-Western front capable of forming an alternative government.” This
wording was considered to be consistent with the decisions taken at
the NSC meeting the previous day.3 The DCI noted that he needed a
finding which would permit him to respond to the kinds of questions
we are getting from Bakhtiar, viz: What does the U.S. think of General
Oveissi? Should Bakhtiar link up with him or not? Is the Shah in contact
with Oveissi? What does the U.S. think of General Ansari? Are we
prepared to assist Bakhtiar in getting funding from the Saudis via
Egypt? All agreed that the Congress would support a finding such as
that proposed, although there was a risk that it would leak at some
point. Dr. Brzezinski noted that this group should be kept informed
of any actual expenditures of funds and what they were intended for.
The DCI will draft general guidance on the use of funds. [2 lines not
declassified] Secretary Vance pointed out that the finding represents a
major step. It indicates that this group has made a decision to bring
groups together to bring down Khomeini. Secretary Brown pointed
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Subject File, Box I026,
Iran Finding 27 Dec 1979. Top Secret; Sensitive. Brzezinski sent a copy to Turner under
a December 27 covering memorandum.
2 The Summary of Conclusions is in Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC
Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 107.
3 See Document 107.
