320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI NEGOTIATING FACTOR (7) The actual PNE plans of the USSR are not reliably known to the US Government. More importantly, the depth of political support for PNE plans is very unclear. We certainly do not know how far the USSR would go in order to retain a PNE allowance against US negotiating opposition. While we surely should display a complete willingness to consider any proposals of the Soviet side, it would be very disadvantageous to provide them at an early stage with any reason to believe that a PNE allowance has been accepted by the US as necessary or tolerable in a CTB. THE LIMITED TEST BAN TREATY OF 1963 (8) Discussions in the open literature of Soviet PNE interest include canal building and river diversion projects (primarily the Kama- Pechora river project3 which, if undertaken, might be an effort of 5 to 10 years). The kinds of nuclear explosions necessarily involved in riverdiversion or canal building would, with virtual certainty, violate the LTBT. The USSR has played fairly loose with LTBT compliance in their nuclear weapon test program but has always retained the “out” of claiming accident or technical deficiencies if need be. A planned, announced and described PNE excavation project (perhaps with US observers present) would stand naked of any supportable defense in violating the LTBT. The Soviets have labored under this burden for many years, and have not gone forward with any river-diversion or canalbuilding project. What they have tried to do is co-opt the US into sharing this problem with them—e.g., by advocating international agreement on “acceptable” levels of radioactivity, which could then be “interpreted” as an adequate index of compliance with the LTBT. Such a relaxation of the radioactivity prohibition would both loosen the present inhibitions on underground weapons testing and weaken the protection which the treaty affords to the environments of neighboring states and international waters. 3 In a February 8 news conference, Carter said that he had “called upon the Soviet Union to join us in a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an extended period of time, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years. The Soviets are interested in using nuclear explosives to divert the course of a river in Northern Russia. I don’t think they need to test any more. If they want to put that as a proviso in the agreement that they would like to go ahead and divert that river, I think that would be something that we could negotiate and let us have observers there to learn from them and vice versa. But I think that the initiation of proposals that might be mutually acceptable of the kind is very, very important.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 92–100)
