320
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
NEGOTIATING FACTOR
(7) The actual PNE plans of the USSR are not reliably known to the
US Government. More importantly, the depth of political support for
PNE plans is very unclear. We certainly do not know how far the USSR
would go in order to retain a PNE allowance against US negotiating op-
position. While we surely should display a complete willingness to
consider any proposals of the Soviet side, it would be very disadvanta-
geous to provide them at an early stage with any reason to believe that
a PNE allowance has been accepted by the US as necessary or tolerable
in a CTB.
THE LIMITED TEST BAN TREATY OF 1963
(8) Discussions in the open literature of Soviet PNE interest in-
clude canal building and river diversion projects (primarily the Kama-
Pechora river project3 which, if undertaken, might be an effort of 5 to 10
years). The kinds of nuclear explosions necessarily involved in river-
diversion or canal building would, with virtual certainty, violate the
LTBT. The USSR has played fairly loose with LTBT compliance in their
nuclear weapon test program but has always retained the “out” of
claiming accident or technical deficiencies if need be. A planned, an-
nounced and described PNE excavation project (perhaps with US ob-
servers present) would stand naked of any supportable defense in vio-
lating the LTBT. The Soviets have labored under this burden for many
years, and have not gone forward with any river-diversion or canal-
building project. What they have tried to do is co-opt the US into
sharing this problem with them—e.g., by advocating international
agreement on “acceptable” levels of radioactivity, which could then be
“interpreted” as an adequate index of compliance with the LTBT. Such
a relaxation of the radioactivity prohibition would both loosen the
present inhibitions on underground weapons testing and weaken the
protection which the treaty affords to the environments of neighboring
states and international waters.
3 In a February 8 news conference, Carter said that he had “called upon the Soviet
Union to join us in a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an ex-
tended period of time, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years. The Soviets are interested in using nuclear
explosives to divert the course of a river in Northern Russia. I don’t think they need to
test any more. If they want to put that as a proviso in the agreement that they would like
to go ahead and divert that river, I think that would be something that we could negotiate
and let us have observers there to learn from them and vice versa. But I think that the ini-
tiation of proposals that might be mutually acceptable of the kind is very, very impor-
tant.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 92–100)
