National Security Policy 547 30. Although he is in a sense Stalin’s heir, Khrushchev will almost certainly not rule as Stalin ruled. The style of his leadership is charac­ teristic of his own personality, and is reflected in a suitable myth: the new leader is a gregarious man of the people, and remains “close to the masses;” he is a rough and practical-­minded man, but his political judgment is unerring, and like Lenin he commands the Party by the persuasive force of his arguments rather than by the fear he inspires. This image probably reflects the manner in which Khrushchev prefers to rule; he fancies himself as the popular boss-­persuader. His method of leadership is also consistent with the needs of the post-Stalin period. Consequently, he will be disposed to avoid the use of terror as a main instrument of rule, though the police will be kept strong and employed as necessary. Errors in judgment, even opposition on some issues, will not generally be treated as political crimes. The Central Committee and Party Congresses will probably continue to meet regularly. There will be greater representation of outlying regions at the center, and more concern displayed for local interests. In short, the consolidation of Khrushchev’s power will probably not mean a return to dictatorship of the Stalinist type. 31. Moreover, there will continue to be pressures on Khrushchev which will work to limit his exercise of dictatorial power. Since his authority, unlike Stalin’s, does not rest on the use of terror, Khrushchev must to a far greater degree seek to win and hold the support of groups within the Party apparatus. Inner Party maneuverings are complicated by the fact that greater account must be taken of popular sentiment than was true under Stalin; Khrushchev’s position in particular is exposed because he is identified with economic and social programs which have stimulated popular desires for further material improvement and he is thus personally accountable for maintaining a good record of perfor­ mance in relation to promises. At some point within the period of this estimate Khrushchev may face the dilemma either of tolerating radi­ cally opposing views within the leadership, thus imperiling his con­ trol, or of attempting to suppress opposition tendencies, at the cost of a return to terror. If, although we think it unlikely, a serious challenge to Khrushchev’s personal position should arise, not all of the allies and associates who supported him during his rise to power would neces­ sarily remain loyal to him. 32. The ebullient personality of Khrushchev has been considered by some observers as likely to give Soviet foreign and domestic pol­ icy an erratic and unstable course. We think this is unlikely. His public manner is probably in large part that of the conscious actor-­politician, intended to confound his opponents and to impart vigor to the execu­ tion of his policies. His advocacy of certain unexpected departures in Soviet policies in recent years was probably not unrelated to efforts to
