January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1347
The President: I’m very happy about it and we are very eager to see
it move forward. Commensurate with the desires of you and President
Sadat, we will do anything you all want us to.
Prime Minister Begin: I want to tell you, Mr. President, Sol Linowitz
did a marvelous job. I did a little to help him.
The President: Yes, I know you did. I’m looking forward to getting a
personal report when he returns.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, he did a marvelous job.
The President: Well that’s good news.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, that’s good for him, and we are very
grateful that you sent him over. He was pessimistic in the beginning,
but then it developed. Mr. President, as far as the possible Summit
meeting, I just want to tell you that I don’t mind whether it takes place
before or after the 4th of November. It is up to you to decide. I can come
at any moment that you decide is convenient, but if it should happen
after the 4th of November then I would suggest to start at the end of
November or the beginning of December. I will be in your country on
November 9–15.3
The President: Well good.
Prime Minister Begin: For the Centenary of the (indistinct) Institute,
I will make several speeches and because of that I still have to be careful
by doctor’s orders.
The President: Yes I know, I want you to be careful.
Prime Minister Begin: Combining together the Summit with my
other responsibilities would be difficult.
The President: I understand, we’ll certainly accommodate your in-
clinations on the timing, as well as President Sadat’s, and you need not
be concerned about that at all.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, thank you very much.
The President: How’s your wife?
Prime Minister Begin: She’s all right. She will come with me.
The President: Oh, we look forward to seeing you then.
Prime Minister Begin: Our love to Mrs. Rosalynn.
The President: I’ll tell her in a few minutes. When you come over
even for your unofficial visit concerning the centenary, I hope that you
will have a chance to come by and see me, either unofficially or
officially.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll come over to Washington. I’ll instruct my
friends to put the day in the itinerary.
3 See Document 411.
