plebiscite would have to be held without her cooperation; when that
becomes evident it is possible that there may be disposition in Peru to make
settlement outside plebiscite.
I want you, for foregoing reasons, to follow matter very closely with
President Leguía and others, and to report as soon as you have any
intimation of their probable attitude. Of course, you will appreciate
necessity of keeping Arbitrator’s position clear in matter.
As references which follow to statements in cables from Ambassador
Collier in Chile and my reply will show, it is possible that some of Latin
American diplomats in Lima may broach subject to Government of Peru,
perhaps after consultation with you. Should any such steps be taken, they
should not be discouraged. You will guide yourself by my telegram to
Collier, December 22, 1 p.m., which is summarized hereafter.
On December 15 Collier reported62 that the Bolivian Chargé d’Affaires had
discussed the situation with him at length, and had expressed the view that
President Figueroa of Chile would be willing to make settlement with
Bolivia and Peru. Chargé thought that it would be more difficult to obtain
consent of Peru, but he believes that sufficient pressure may be brought to
obtain it, and he suggested possibility that some of the South American
nations suggest to Chile and Peru that they request President of the United
States to settle matter by diplomacy. Chargé thought that Brazil or Uruguay
might be in position to ascertain President Figueroa’s views on matter, and
that their Ministers in Peru should be instructed to urge Peruvian
Government to consent to make settlement.
The Uruguayan Minister to Chile also spoke to Collier and stated belief that
partition of the territory was only way to settle question, and that if the
Government of the United States did not wish to suggest this to the parties
to the controversy and would not deem it offensive for Uruguay to suggest
to both Chile and Peru that they agree upon some such settlement and to ask
Arbitrator to accept it instead of holding plebiscite, the Minister said he
believed that Uruguayan Government would be willing to take the step. He
was emphatic on point that there would be no interference with the United
States, as both he and his country fully approve course we have taken.
