723.2515/2263: Telegram
[Document 280]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 11, 1926—3 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram May 7, 6 p.m. … Peru has not abstained from
the registration in compliance with any suggestion from the Government of
the United States; instead, she has abstained in face of most emphatic
statements that plebiscitary process, even after acceptance of good offices,
could not be suspended save by agreement of both the parties. There is no
room left for misunderstanding on that subject. Record is clear and I am
anxious that you yourself should not remain under any misapprehension.
Offer of good offices was made in identical terms to both Chile and Peru;
nothing was said about suspension and, therefore, acceptance could not
operate as a suspension. On March 25, after Peru’s acceptance and two days
before registration had begun, I suggested to Governments of both Chile
and Peru that in view of acceptance of good offices they take appropriate
steps to bring about a suspension; obviously no useful purpose would have
been served in asking Chile and Peru to cooperate in this matter if
suspension had already been arranged. On March 261 advised you that it
was impossible to get word from Governments of Chile and Peru in time to
advise you finally about suspension on that day, and suggested that you
arrange for adjournments from day to day.86 In reply to your telegrams
insisting upon termination of the plebiscite I cabled you on March 27, 4
p.m., that only question open for determination was over suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings while the negotiations were going on. I stated that
there was no choice but to continue with the registration, even though, for
the time being, Peru declined to participate. On March 29 I again explained
the situation to both parties and quoted my telegram to Ambassador Collier
to you in my telegram of that date, 7 p.m., and stated that similar analysis
had been sent to Peru. On April 1 (see my telegram that date, 10 a.m.) I
called attention to press reports that Peruvian voters were being removed
