1488 Foreign Relations, 1958ﻗ°±1960, Volume III, Supplement founder states of the Control Organization. In the event of disputes, the Commission shall inform the governments of the states parties to the treaty and the Security Council of the United Nations. The technical system of the Commission referred to above in paraﺁﺝ graph 2 shall comprise appropriate departments for processing and analyzing data received and for providing the Control Organization with the logistic and technical facilities and personnel. The personﺁﺝ nel of the various departments shall be selected and approved by the Commission on the basis of an equal representation of the two sides of founder states of the Control Organization. 5. The technical system of the Commission shall provide, in accordﺁﺝ ance with instructions from the Commission, for carrying out the folﺁﺝ lowing basic functions by the Control Organization: (A) The carrying out at control posts and on aircraft designated for collecting radioactive debris of continuous and effective observation of events which make it possible to detect nuclear explosions through methods recommended by the Geneva Conference of Technical Experts. (B) The arranging for the timely analysis and processing of obserﺁﺝ vation data from control posts for the purpose of rapid detection of signs of possible nuclear explosions. (C) The obtaining if necessary, through requests for observation information, of data from the existing network of seismic and meteoroﺁﺝ logical stations for the identification of natural events which, according to readings at control posts, could be taken for nuclear explosions. (D) The arranging for, by decision of the Commission, an inspecﺁﺝ tion on the site of a suspected nuclear explosion. (E) The arranging for the development, testing, and acceptance of measuring instruments and equipment used by the control post network. (F) The arranging for reliable communications with control posts as well as with the bases from which regular flights by specially desﺁﺝ ignated aircraft for air sampling of radioactive debris are carried out, through the means of communication existing in the territories of the states where control posts are located. (G) The arranging for trips to and from the control posts for perﺁﺝ sonnel thereof as well as for visits by the Commission personnel to conﺁﺝ trol posts when the latter are considered necessary by the Commission, using the existing means of transportation. (H) The utilization of results of new scientific achievements for the purpose of raising the effectiveness and the scientific level of the Conﺁﺝ trol Organization. 6. The administrative, logistic and representation expenses of the Control Organization shall be financed with funds allocated by the states parties to the treaty, in accordance with an estimate to be
