Afghanistan 17. At 1140, a police security officer asked Flatin to accompany him upstairs. On the second floor, Flatin met Azizi, a plainclothes police official that he had by chance once met in Badghis Province in 1977. (This police official, who speaks perfect English, had at that time told Flatin that he served one and a half years as a special police bodyguard for Ambassador Newmann when he was under a PLO terrorist threat in Kabul in the 1960s. He gave the impression of being a secret police official at that time.) Azizi, who also spoke apparently perfect Russian with the Soviet advisors, asked Flatin if he could do a favor for the police. He asked whether he would mind talking to the Ambassador in German so that the kidnappers would not understand. The police seemed to think that the kidnappers knew English.) Flatin asked whether this would endanger the Ambassador in any way, and was assured that the police had already made arrangements with the terrorists. (They were talking with the terrorist named “Najib” through the keyhole.) 18. The police asked Flatin to ask the Ambassador what type of weapons the terrorists had. Speaking through the door, Flatin identified himself in German and asked the Ambassador how he was. The Ambassador replied that he was all right. His voice sounded strained, but strong. Flatin, upon the repeated requests of the police, then asked the Ambassador what types of weapons his kidnappers had. The Ambassador began to reply, but after saying the word “revolvers”, he was silenced by the people in the room, who by that time were probably aware that a language other than one they understood was being used. The police requested the captors to permit the conversation to continue, explaining that the Ambassador should be permitted to speak to his own Embassy officials. The kidnappers retort was, “We are in charge here and it isn’t necessary.” 19. Flatin was then asked to tell the Ambassador that ten minutes from that moment he was to try to go to the bathroom or drop to the floor. Flatin requested an immediate conference elsewhere with the police. Flatin commented that such an instruction to the Ambassador obviously meant that the police were poised to strike, and, as the police already knew, the Americans had officially requested a delay. Flatin explained that DCM Amstutz was trying to discuss the situation at the very moment with police commandant Taroon, and requested that nothing be done until the American Embassy had had a chance to discuss onward tactics further with the police. Meanwhile, Amstutz talked again twice with Deputy Foreign Minister Dost, and attempted desperately to reach Foreign Minister Amin by phone (and dispatched Woertz to try to enter Palace.) 20. The Afghan police officer, who at this stage had apparently taken over charge of the operation, a youthful and tough-looking plain-
