Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 393. Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1 Washington, October 16, 1980 SUBJECT After the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference I know you are aware of the inconclusive results of the recent NPT Review Conference in Geneva, despite our best efforts to achieve a last minute compromise. I would like to give you my views on its broader significance and the prospects for non-proliferation. The Meaning of the Review Conference Because the Review Conference ended on a discordant note, we will face tougher sledding on arms control issues and in pressing our non-proliferation objectives. In addition to continual criticism by the non-aligned, it will be harder to hold the support of many of our Allies, to whom progress in arms control is important both in terms of NPT obligations and for perceptions of their own security. Furthermore, the Soviets will be highly critical of our own arms control efforts (Gromyko’s recent UNGA speech is a good example of this).2 However, I do not believe there is a real danger of withdrawal or abrogation by Treaty parties in the near term. There was strong support for the Treaty itself at the Conference. Many non-aligned leaders (such as Yugoslavia and Mexico) have been instrumental in endorsing the NPT through the years and have substantial self interest in seeing the Treaty preserved. While generally based on a real concern over the lack of forward movement on arms control, non-aligned demands for accelerated progress and a significantly greater multilateral role in negotiations also reflect a desire by some Third World leaders to prove their credentials by engaging in public confrontation with key Western countries. The Preservation of Non-Proliferation The NPT is essential for the preservation of non-proliferation and it is vital to prevent its unravelling. However, the Treaty itself is not 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues, Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
