998
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
393.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, October 16, 1980
SUBJECT
After the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
I know you are aware of the inconclusive results of the recent NPT
Review Conference in Geneva, despite our best efforts to achieve a last
minute compromise. I would like to give you my views on its broader
significance and the prospects for non-proliferation.
The Meaning of the Review Conference
Because the Review Conference ended on a discordant note, we
will face tougher sledding on arms control issues and in pressing our
non-proliferation objectives. In addition to continual criticism by the
non-aligned, it will be harder to hold the support of many of our Allies,
to whom progress in arms control is important both in terms of NPT
obligations and for perceptions of their own security. Furthermore, the
Soviets will be highly critical of our own arms control efforts (Gro-
myko’s recent UNGA speech is a good example of this).2
However, I do not believe there is a real danger of withdrawal or
abrogation by Treaty parties in the near term. There was strong support
for the Treaty itself at the Conference. Many non-aligned leaders (such
as Yugoslavia and Mexico) have been instrumental in endorsing the
NPT through the years and have substantial self interest in seeing the
Treaty preserved.
While generally based on a real concern over the lack of forward
movement on arms control, non-aligned demands for accelerated
progress and a significantly greater multilateral role in negotiations
also reflect a desire by some Third World leaders to prove their creden-
tials by engaging in public confrontation with key Western countries.
The Preservation of Non-Proliferation
The NPT is essential for the preservation of non-proliferation and
it is vital to prevent its unravelling. However, the Treaty itself is not
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
ference, 9–11/80. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memo-
randum, Carter wrote “Ed. A reasonable approach. C.”
2 In a September 22 address to the UN General Assembly, Gromkyo “blamed the
United States and its allies” for “escalating international tensions and charged that Wash-
ington is working out plans for a nuclear war in an atmosphere of ‘militarist frenzy’. ”
(Don Oberdorfer, “Gromyko Blames U.S. Policies for Rising Global Tensions,” Wash-
ington Post, September 24, 1980, p. A20)
