346
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mecca, Kashani can exert a very forceful influence in Iranian affairs in
any direction he desires.
While reportedly Iran’s military forces are not demoralized and
are still being paid, there is little doubt that the Army’s old political in-
fluence has been destroyed. The Shah is now a shadowy and uninfluen-
tial figure very much in the background. Scrutiny of military ranks
gives little reason to hope for a strong military leader like Naguib Bay
in Egypt. Amid rumors and counter-rumors of unrest and British in-
trigue, the tribes in Iran continue generally in the same position as be-
fore. They are strong in their local areas but except possibly for the
Qashqais they wield comparatively little political influence in Tehran.
Certainly no tribal leader has appeared who could be depended upon
to maintain stability throughout the nation in a situation of chaos.
According to information from top officials in the Bank Melli, in-
flation of the note issue is about to begin. Economic analysis has been
that pessimism regarding failure to end the oil dispute and consterna-
tion at the expanded note issue will mean increased financial diffi-
culties to Iran’s economy.
Conclusions:
1. Whether political developments in Iran break up the National
Front or in some way change the individuals in positions of power, na-
tionalist policies as previously enunciated will be maintained. It is even
likely that any successor to Dr. Mosadeq would be a more extreme na-
tionalist than he is and would possibly be more difficult for the West to
support against communist agitation.
2. It is expected that the Iranian Parliament will support the gen-
eral line of response which Dr. Mosadeq has made publicly to the joint
US–UK proposals. It is unlikely although the possibility cannot be dis-
counted that the British will be willing or even able to come much far-
ther forward from the position taken in the proposals delivered to Dr.
Mosadeq on August 30. Such a development would bring about an al-
most complete deadlock in the oil dispute with a large gap still existing
between the British and the Iranian positions. In this eventuality it will
be hardly useful for the United States to continue to press both sides to
come to a mutually satisfactory agreement in the oil dispute, particu-
larly since the United States publicly gave up its position as moderator
when it joined with the British in the joint message of August 30.9
3. Before Iran can achieve any measure of political stability, its
economy must be restored to some measure of health by receipt of oil
income. There is of course an alternative of providing Iran with a
9 See footnote 2 above.
