Chapter 2, January–June 1989  103
SS–24s and that the Soviets, having already begun to deploy rail-­mobile 
SS–24s, would be unlikely to accept a MIRVed mobile ban.
The strategic/technical arguments for and against a MIRVed 
mobile ban (summarized briefly in the attached sheet) strike me as 
fairly closely balanced. What should be decisive is the impact of our 
mobile ICBM negotiating position on our efforts to achieve the nec-
essary domestic political support for ICBM modernization. After all, 
without a sustainable modernization program, the benefits of START 
and prospects for its ratification would both be sharply reduced.
The problem is that it is hard, in the absence of active consultations, 
to know how a proposal to ban MIRVed mobile ICBMs would play 
domestically. On the one hand, it’s argued that such a proposal would 
shore up support for modernization. This is based on the assump-
tion that Democratic support for MX rail-­garrison is very uncertain 
and could be strengthened by giving the program a bargaining chip 
rationale. Reportedly Nunn and other key Democrats favor a MIRVed 
mobile ban.
On the other hand, it’s argued that a ban proposal, by showing the 
Administration considers rail-­mobile MX to be dispensable and use-
ful primarily as a bargaining chip, could cause the coalition needed to 
sustain the two-­missile compromise to fall apart. MX proponents (in 
the Air Force and on the Hill) could withdraw their already lukewarm 
support for the Small ICBM, and the whole thing could unravel.
On something so crucial to prospects for both ICBM moderniza-
tion and START ratification, we should not make a decision on the 
MIRVed mobile ban based on guesswork and then simply let the chips 
fall where they may. Instead, we should actively seek—­through high-­
level consultations during the next few weeks with key Congressional 
leaders—­to put together a strong coalition supportive of our missile 
modernization package and our START position on mobiles.
We should let the requirements for building such a coalition drive 
our decision on MIRVed mobiles. If a proposed ban would be instru-
mental in forging a consensus, we should adopt that position. But if it 
would be harmful or not a significant factor, then I do not believe the 
case for a ban is strong enough to warrant going forward with it.
If the Administration wishes to pursue a strategy involving exten-
sive consultations with the Congress (with both State and Defense 
playing leading roles), it would have to get started very soon. If you 
consider the idea worth pursuing, I will set up a meeting for you to 
discuss it with key people in State.
