Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
773
311.
Memorandum From Charles Stebbins of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) (U)
The Mini-SCC2 agreed on the following gameplan at this morn-
ing’s meeting:
—Reg Bartholomew will try to meet one-on-one with Mendelevich
in Washington next week to fulfill the Vienna Communique´ obligation
to meet promptly on CAT.3 (C)
—He will remind Mendelevich that the US has been exercising
unilateral arms transfer restraint for two years, but will hint that the
lack of similar restraint by other suppliers will have to be factored into
our future transfer decisions—for example, in deciding how or whether
to fill the transfer “gap” resulting from the loss of the Iranian mar-
ket.4 (S)
—He will reiterate the previous US position that multilateral re-
straint can only result from bilateral progress, that progress means for-
ward movement on the regions issue, and that we are prepared only to
discuss the Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin American regions. (S)
—Reg will listen to Mendelevich’s position on regions while trying
to get him to agree that the only practical way to proceed on this key
issue is to tackle relatively non-turbulent regions where neither side
has vital interests at stake. Reg will reject Soviet regions that do not
meet this criterion. (S)
—Whatever the outcome of the meeting, Reg will suggest that the
two stay in contact through diplomatic channels, and—anticipating no
real progress on regions next week—that they meet again possibly in
Europe in the Fall. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 120,
SCM 075, Mini-SCC, CAT—Conventional Arms Transfers, 7/12/79. Secret. Sent for in-
formation. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads “ZB HAS SEEN.”
Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.
2 No other record of this meeting has been found.
3 See footnote 2, Document 309.
4 In the wake of the January Revolution in Iran, the United States suspended arms
sales to Iran. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. X, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–
November 1979.
