432
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The key is to get India to recognize that the new situation in Afghanistan
poses a security problem for the entire subcontinent. It is unfortunate
that there has been no effectively functioning Indian government dur-
ing recent weeks.
—It is important that the most favorable context be created for an
Indian policy reassessment. In particular, the Indians must be brought
to realize that there is no longer a concern about a threat from China.
We think it is important that you renew a dialogue with the new Indian
government and seek a compromise understanding on the border issue
that would permit India to turn its attention elsewhere. We believe
this deserves your serious consideration.
Afghanistan
—The events in Afghanistan are a major historical turning point
which increases the likelihood of a major US military presence in an
entirely new region of the world. Nobody at this point can predict
with certitude what the outcome of these events will be, although the
Soviet reaction to various protests and denunciations, including those
of both the US and China, is completely predictable. These prospects
were taken into consideration by the Soviets before they made their
move in Afghanistan. It is therefore incumbent on both of us to exceed
the Soviet expectation as to what our response would be.4 The Soviets
must be made to understand that this decision (to invade Afghanistan)
will be much more expensive, much more costly, much more damaging
4 In a message to Brzezinski, January 4, Brown noted that in preparatory discussions
on the plane trip to China, a question came up for which Brown needed further guidance
from the White House: “The Chinese will be extremely interested in what tangible
support [less than 1 line not declassified] which might involve the Chinese) we are prepared
to supply the Afghan insurgents. I believe that telling them of our arrangements with
the Saudis, and whatever the Pakistanis have agreed to, would improve the chance that
the PRC will join in or, at a minimum, tell us more about what they are doing along
these lines.” (Message 321 from the Secretary of Defense, January 4; Department of State,
Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262,
Box 3, 1980 Super Sensitive I, Jan, Feb, Mar–1980) Brzezinski replied on January 5: “For
over six months we have been providing modest levels of humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan insurgents. This has taken the form principally of medicines, food and
clothing. Contrary to Soviet allegations, we have not provided any training to the Afghan
insurgents. After the Soviet invasion, our assistance has taken on an increased urgency
and now includes small arms, ammunition, anti-tank and anti-helicopter weapons, and
other military items appropriate to this kind of insurgency. Some of this military equip-
ment is probably already in the hands of the insurgents, if not, it will be soon. We would
welcome Chinese participation in the support of the insurgency and offer to coordinate
what we are doing with them.” Regarding Brown’s question on Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan, Brzezinski answered: “We have no authority from the Saudis or Paks to reveal
their participation and believe that, if their participation were made known without
their knowledge, it could jeopardize both the current program and our credibility.”
(Message 90 from Brzezinski, January 5; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
zinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 120, Super-Sensitive:
1–3/80)
