652  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Frank Press suggested that we pursue the idea of putting Minute-
man on trucks as an interim measure, while pushing forward with the 
large MX missile and looking at alternative ways to deploy it. Secretary 
Brown commented that he has examined the truck idea in some detail 
and it doesn’t look practical to him. Bill Perry added that 200 Minute-
man IIIs can be deployed on trucks within three years for approxi-
mately $3B. Secretary Brown responded that such a deployment would 
be easily destroyed by the Soviets if we didn’t get sufficient strategic 
warning. Bill Perry remarked that Minuteman III deployed on trucks 
would have considerably higher survivability than they would have in 
silos, if ten hours of strategic warning were available. (C)
David Aaron said that it was important to note the long period of 
ICBM vulnerability that we were going to face. He said that the Con-
gress will say that if we can live with this period of vulnerability for 
awhile, why can’t we live with it forever. He suggested that we should 
look at the Minuteman on trucks idea in light of this question—­in other 
words, it may be a suitable, short term fix to our problems. Secretary 
Brown said that he thought other alternatives should be looked at for 
dealing with the period of vulnerability, and that he had some better 
alternatives. (S)
The President asked how long will it be until we had deployed the 
first ALCMs on B–52s. Bill Perry answered that the first deployment 
will take place in 1981, but that we will not have a complete squadron 
of B–52s with ALCMs until 1982. Dr. Brzezinski remarked that pushing 
the B–52/ALCM program somewhat harder might represent a good 
interim fix to the early ’80s problem. (S)
David Aaron remarked that simply assuming the Soviets will make 
every effort to stay ahead of us may not be reasonable in the light of 
history. He noted that they were ahead in the ABM area, but that once 
we demonstrated our willingness to compete, a process began which 
resulted in the ABM treaty. (C)
Secretary Brown remarked that this outcome probably resulted 
from Soviet fears that we would deploy a better system. He went on 
to note that the only thing the Soviets would probably feel comfortable 
with is the complete vulnerability of all our strategic forces, a situation 
we should certainly not cooperate in arranging. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Soviets would be most worried if we 
proceeded with the dyad option, because this option would involve the 
largest expansion of our forces, and would pose the greatest threat to 
them. (C)
Jim McIntyre said that he wanted to go on record that OMB sup-
ported the 190,000 lb. MX missile, despite its larger cost, because of the 
political and technical problems that would be involved in proceeding 
with the smaller missile. (C)
