664 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement crossing into Korea and attacking U.S. and other forces there operating under authority U.N. gave every moral and legal justification for those U.N. forces defend themselves by attacking bases in his country from which Chinese forces were supported. 19. I said U.N. forces restrained themselves from taking that action because of great desire, in spite actions Wang’s government, not to spread war. For month upon weary month Chinese representatives refused agree any reasonable armistice that would stop hostilities. Eventually during period that Mr. Dulles was Secretary State, armistice was finally concluded. 20. I said every agreement or collective defense arrangement U.S. has entered into around world including Far Fast very specifically and clearly limited to self defense, self defense not only of selves but collective self-­defense with other like-­minded countries which fear aggression. 21. I said President of U.S. and Secretary State have time and again expressed overwhelming sentiment of American people in stating U.S. will never attack anyone. To state that Secretary is “clamoring for atomic war” is gross libel which I most strongly resented. 22. I said I well aware of public statements of Secretary. There was nothing Secretary had ever said in any way that could possibly be inter­ preted in that fashion. To do so was grossest type misrepresentation. 23. I said as far as devotion to peace and desire avoid war is con­ cerned and with respect these talks I was satisfied facts are equally clear. As I had reviewed with him at last meeting and as he had again recognized in his statement this morning, it was U.S. which proposed we make it clear we were determined settle disputes through peaceful means and not resort war. 24. I said there is vast difference between proposing negotiate with overhanging threat of attack in background and proposal definitively to remove threat of war and then seek peaceful means resolving our disputes. 25. I said Wang had consistently in these talks and his government had in its public statement issued yesterday ignored plain statement I made in my original proposal October 8. I had made it clear in that statement, had made it clear in all statements I ever made in these meet­ ings, had made it clear in draft November 10, that it was not suggested that Wang’s government renounce in any way peaceful pursuit policy objectives which it believed it legitimately entitled achieve. Those not just idle words. I had attempted already carry out that intent. It was stated very specifically in November 10 draft, but in order meet Wang’s objections to that draft, I tried another formula in amendments which I suggested to his draft of December 1.
