686  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
telecommunications legislation.3 Commerce found it unacceptable, but 
a dialogue continues on legislative issues. (U)
Three points emerge rather clearly from an examination of the 
debate between the NCS agencies and Commerce.
—In the past, there has been a reliance on AT&T for the provision 
of adequately survivable and restorable communications networks. It 
is doubtful, in light of present vulnerabilities in the system, that such 
reliance is justified. (U)
—De-­regulation, if it leads to a competitive telecommunications 
industry, is not necessarily detrimental to our national security interests 
as long as legislative authority is reserved to the Federal Communica-
tions Commission enabling it to set standards that ensure adequately 
survivable and restorable networks. (U)
—The lack of defined national security requirements addressing 
survivability and restorability hamper our efforts to obtain legislative 
authority to deal with these national security needs. (U)
Concerning this last point, your Annual Report on the National 
Communications System calls for the establishment of a national pol-
icy for  C3I addressing survivability and restoration. Indeed, we need 
such a policy if it will provide the basis for legislation and for holding 
telecommunications common carriers to appropriate standards. My 
concept of such a policy is a statement of national security telecom-
munication objectives which serve as the basis for your staff and other 
agencies’ staffs determining C3I requirements and working out the 
technical standards essential for telecommunication carriers to meet 
them and for the FCC to rule effectively in support of them. (U)
I propose the following set of objectives as national security tele-
communications policy: (C)
1. Provide communications between the NCA and our strategic 
forces to support a flexible execution of retaliatory strikes during and 
after an enemy nuclear attack. (C)
2. Provide communications to support the operational control of 
the armed forces at all levels of conflict, including an extended nuclear 
war. (C)
3. Provide for continuity of government in a nuclear war and 
during natural disasters. (C)
4. Support recovery of political, economic, and social structure of 
the nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster. (C)
5. Provide for adequate transmission of intelligence to support all 
of the foregoing objectives. (C)
I welcome your reaction to these objectives. I would like to present 
them to a meeting of the SCC in September before recommending them 
to the President. (U)
3 Not found attached.
