International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
101
28.
Minutes of the London Economic Summit Meeting1
London, May 8, 1977
LONDON SUMMIT—May 8, Morning Session
North-South Issues
Callaghan: We welcome the President of the European Commis-
sion, Mr. Jenkins, and M. Boulin, the French Minister of Finance.2
Giscard: The French President and Prime Minister by custom, are
not supposed to be absent from the country at the same time. I assume
that this is because it is felt that were they to disappear it would be a
catastrophe. I believe it is the same for the US President and Vice
President.
Turning to North-South issues, these are one of the most important
subjects we will discuss at this meeting. This is true, not only because
the subjects themselves are significant but also because the meeting is
being watched with anxiety by the developing countries who are not
keen on this meeting of the wealthy nations. As we know, the EC has a
Community mandate on this issue so it is suitable that the President of
the Commission be here with us.
I would like to briefly discuss how the North-South dialogue came
about and its economic and political character. The idea was broached
first in 1974. Then there were two strategies vis-a-vis the oil producers.
The first was a strategy of confrontation designed to break OPEC and
cause a decline in the price of oil. The second was a strategy of consulta-
tion to help deal with the problems of the developing countries and
thereby to elicit a more responsible attitude from OPEC. Since 1973 the
countries of the Gulf, such as Saudia Arabia and the UAE, have taken a
relatively reasonable attitude. This is in part because of our policy of
consultations on energy and developing country problems. We should
continue in this way to encourage the moderate oil producers. If there
is a failure of the North-South dialogue, radical producers would gain
the upper hand. A first element in encouraging moderation is a Middle
East settlement. But the success or failure of the North-South dialogue
will also have an impact. We should recognize that if there is an in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 5/5–20/77. Secret. The minutes
of the Summit’s final session on the afternoon of May 8, which covered Summit
follow-up and the Summit declaration, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen File, Box 27, Summit: London: 5/77.
2 Robert Boulin was not the French Minister of Finance but the Minister Delegate to
the Prime Minister in Charge of Economy and Finance.
