712 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Polish vessels to enter our ports, and by way of example he cited the number six. Secretary Herter thought that this could be done. The President said he did not wish to give up completely on Poland, though at times, after reading Gomulka’s speeches, he wondered what we were accomplishing by our efforts with the Poles. The Commerce representative, referring to the President’s inquiry about increasing the number of Polish vessels by six, asked if it would not be well to limit the number of such vessels on a strict reciprocity basis to the number of U.S. vessels permitted into Polish ports. Secretary Herter called on Mr. Dillon for comment and Mr. Dillon indicated that the Poles might not be conscious of the fact that they were under limitations insofar as we were concerned. He said that it might complicate things if we were to advise the Poles that they would be per­ mitted to bring in a specified number of additional vessels. Mr. Dillon also commented upon the cargo aspect of the problem, noting that the policy as stated permitted them to take out only such cargo as came under the terms of economic agreements made between the United States and Poland. He said that if we were to suggest that they bring in additional ships but that that cargo be limited to aid-type cargo, we might have a serious problem on our hands. The Attorney General thought that in view of the comments made by Mr. Dillon it would be best not to change our present policy but pos­ sibly to be a bit more flexible, as circumstances permitted. The President said in the light of the discussion he thought it best to let the present policy and program stand as is for a while, recogniz­ ing that there is a procedure available for making limited exceptions in certain instances. Mr. Scribner concurred, suggesting that the matter be re-­examined in three months or so. The Vice President also expressed the view that the present policy should be left unchanged with the understanding that there would be a more liberalized interpretation thereof in terms of the number of Polish ships permitted entry. He thought it best to let the matter be played by ear for the time being rather than to amend our policy. The President asked if it would be possible or wise to let the Poles know that they are on their honor insofar as we are concerned, and if they violate, as in the matter of Communist-controlled vessels, they will be treated accordingly. Mr. Herter said he thought that this could be done. Mr. Dillon mentioned that the Moore-McCormack Lines and the Lykes Service were running ships into Poland. Based thereon the Poles had indicated to us that they were considering inaugurating similar service to the United States. In giving this indication Mr. Dillon did not think that the Poles were aware of the port security limitations which we had applied to them. He said there was a danger that if we acquainted the Poles with these limitations, they might prohibit
