Romania
589
challenge to Ceausescu’s authority.4 Early this year there were also
reports of restlessness among Romania’s approximately two million
Magyars. This minority is disturbed over alleged cultural and educa-
tional discrimination and what the Magyars perceive as a systematic
Romanian effort to gradually assimilate all national minorities.5
5. Ceausescu has reacted to these symptoms of popular discontent
with an extensive reorganization of the state security apparatus. He
personally assumed the security portfolio on the party secretariat. This,
together with other high-level personnel changes in the Interior Minis-
try suggest that he wants to avoid a repetition of future instances
of unrest.
6. The main problems currently facing Romania continue to be in
the economic domain. The long-term goal, of course, is to turn the
country into a modern industrialized communist state. Ceausescu
hopes to achieve this objective within an integrated, centrally oriented
framework.
7. In 1977, the economy experienced almost unprecedented difficul-
ties mainly as a result of energy, labor and hard currency shortages.
Natural causes—including a devastating earthquake and a drought
that adversely affected agricultural output—compounded the difficul-
ties. As a result, economic growth was the lowest in years.
8. Earlier this year Ceausescu announced a program aimed at
redressing the country’s economic problems. While retaining the full
mechanism of centralized planning, the scheme hinted at greater self-
reliance for enterprises in order to promote efficiency and productivity.
4 Rumors of labor unrest in the Jiu Valley, a major coal mining region of central
Romania, surfaced in August 1977. In telegram 5847 from Bucharest, August 5, 1977,
the Embassy reported Ceausescu’s unplanned “working visit” to the area to quell the
growing rebellion. Ceausescu’s visit “is very much in keeping for him to rush to the
scene of trouble to put out the fire.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770282–0284) On November 11, 1977, the Embassy reported in telegram 8323 from
Bucharest, that Ceausescu was back in the Jiu Valley, noting the “gross emphasis on
the role of Ceausescu personally—not the Party, not the Government, not other leaders”
in resolving the labor issues in the region. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770417–0427) In telegram 2413 from Bucharest, April 11, the Embassy
reported it received credible information that over 4,000 miners and their families had
been relocated from the Jiu Valley back to their original areas, mainly the economically
depressed Dobruja. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780157–0903)
5 During his meeting with Andrei in Bucharest, March 31, Vanik discussed the issue
and emphasized that he understood Romanian concerns with demonstrations against
Ceausescu during his visit to the United States, but believed the numbers would be
small and it would not interfere with the protocol of his visit. Andrei told Vanik that
“agitation by Hungarian emigrants as well as by Hungarians here in Romania is ‘fed
from the outside.’” (Memorandum of conversation, March 31; National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth
and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980, Lot 92D412, Box 6, U.S.-Romania
Political Relations)
