636  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Peresypkin added that the functional connections were different 
for nuclear and non-­nuclear warheads; the arrangement and the wiring 
revealed whether a warhead was nuclear or non-­nuclear. By observ-
ing a missile’s functional design—­the warhead’s control system, the 
manner of interface with the payload, the interface of the payload to 
the missile’s guidance system—­an expert could tell the nature of the 
payload.
Peresypkin also cited the points of attachment of the warhead to 
the missile as a way of distinguishing nuclear from non-­nuclear mis-
siles. He noted that a nuclear warhead is smaller than a conventional 
warhead, and that its attachment points are different. He asserted that 
it would be possible to determine whether a conventional or nuclear 
warhead could be placed on a given missile based on observation of 
the attachment points.
Further, Peresypkin cited the volume of the payload compartment 
as a distinguishing feature, asserting that the compartment for a con-
ventional warhead would be larger than that for a nuclear warhead. 
He also stated that the architecture of the payload compartment would 
be different for conventional and nuclear payloads. He said the Soviet 
side favored demonstrating these features in the missile exhibitions. 
He asserted that the missile would not be dismantled during the exhi-
bition; all this could be demonstrated in the course of the technological 
cycle of missile maintenance procedures.
Peresypkin also cited the points of attachment of the missile to the 
body of the aircraft as a way of distinguishing heavy bombers capable 
of carrying nuclear missiles from those incapable of carrying nuclear 
missiles. If these were designed differently for nuclear and non-­nuclear 
missiles—­for example, if the spacing were different—­the two could be 
distinguished.
On-­site Inspection of ALCMs and of Heavy Bombers
Peresypkin said this was a question that should be addressed by 
technical specialists, and that the sides should not rush to resolve it 
under pressure without consulting experts.
Peresypkin offered his personal concept for OSI, stressing that this 
had not yet been discussed by the delegation: it would include random 
monitoring of missiles in storage areas and random selection of mis-
siles for close examination to determine whether they were nuclear-­
armed or conventionally-­armed. It would also include procedures to 
determine the missiles’ externally observable differences, including 
proof they did not and could not contain nuclear warheads. It would 
thus be possible to conclude that these missiles could only be attached 
either to nuclear or to conventional heavy bombers.
