Guatemala 703 El Espectador of this afternoon which apparently will point the finger of accusation against the Cuban Ambassador.6 President having thus laid groundwork for discussion re Department desires, I dilated extensively on Arevalo, pointing out his arrival physically or to political power in Guatemala would be nothing short of disastrous. From there discussion developed into activities of MDN, of PR and splinter parties of left with President stating flatly Arevalo on arrival would not only take over entire far left, but most of PR and a considerable portion President’s own Party Redencion, who would go out of fear. President said he had been endeavouring obtain at least tacit cooperation all MDN leaders and is meeting with them again tonight.7 His purpose is to have some sort of cooperation of anti-Communist political groups to which both he and MDN dedicated in contrast PR which is not anti-Communist. He did not offer estimate his chance of success. Admitted MDN leadership so continually divided as to be ineffective. He has however offered them in addition to present Minister of Finance and Under Secretary Communications one additional Cabinet post. He told them their hopes upcoming Congressional elections not realistic in expecting they can capture 14 seats. He willing endeavor assist them four or five seats providing they will cooperate in government. Both before and after taking up Department’s instruction, President brought up and I consciously stimulated considerable discussion of the moderate left PR. President said he is not only trying, but to certain extent is working with Galich, to take over leadership PR Party as Galich is old friend, anti-Communist, able, moderate and not tarred with brush of violence which is true of Mendez because of brutality practiced while Chief of Police under Arevalo. When I asked him for estimate chances of Galich’s ascendency and strength he might exhibit in event of resurgence of Arevalo, President offered no direct answer, only indicating he could work with Galich, but Arevalo’s return would 6 The referenced article, which appeared in the November 11 issue of El Espectador, is quoted in airgram G–25 from Guatemala City, November 14, 1959. (611.14/11–1459). The Guatemalan charges of Cuban support of efforts to overthrow the Ydígoras Government were aired in a special meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States on December 5, 1959. For text of the note to the Chairman of the Council of the OAS from the Representative of Guatemala, read by the Representative of Guatemala at the Special Council meeting on December 5, see OEA Ser.G/VC–d–781 (English), 3 December 1959. The Cuban Representative to the OAS denied the charges. For the statement made by Ambassador Leví Marrero Artiles, Representative of Cuba, in the special meeting of the Council of the OAS on 5 December 1959; see OEA Ser.G/V C–d–782 (Spanish). 7 In airgram G-25, cited above, Mallory reported that Ydígoras stated on November 10 that he had refused to talk with the MDN leaders in the presence of the 1958 MDN Presidential candiate, Cruz.
