826  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
SAC aircraft were taxied or launched. We have now instituted further 
corrective actions described below.
These incidents differ from the false alert of November 9, 1979.2 
They cannot be traced to improper test procedures but are the result 
of a failure in the computer hardware or software. These incidents 
therefore weaken further my confidence in the computer system and I 
consider the situation to be very serious. I have instituted a number of 
actions designed to reinforce immediately the human safeguards, which 
have worked well, to review critically the computer system, and then 
to repair the deficiencies.
I remain confident that our system has sufficient safeguards to pre-
vent irreversible actions being taken as a result of inconclusive data. 
My highest priority is to insure that remains the case. But I am also 
determined to assure that the experience of repeated false alarms does 
not cause a real alarm to be ignored.
WHAT HAPPENED?
May 28
—A false BMEWS output of 2020 missiles appeared on the warn-
ing display at SAC for 6 seconds.
—At nearly the same time the warning display at the ANMCC 
showed 9000 missiles for a similarly brief duration.
—Because of the brevity of the display, no alert actions were initi-
ated, but NORAD began a technical investigation of the anomaly.
June 3
—A false indication of 2 threat SLBMs appeared on the warning 
display at SAC. The count quickly jumped to 200 SLBMs. No other 
command centers displayed any missile warning.
—In less than 2 minutes SAC alerted its crews to move to their air-
craft and start engines. (Note: SAC begins these actions, even when the 
data is known to be ambiguous, as a precautionary measure to ensure 
survivability.)
—Six minutes after the first false display SAC began displaying 
2020 ICBMs from BMEWS.
—Twelve minutes after the appearance of the first false display at 
SAC, the NMCC display began to show 200 SLBMs.
—The senior duty officer at the NMCC initiated a missile display 
conference, and shortly thereafter 220 ICBMs were displayed indicat-
ing all had already impacted.
2 See Document 167.
