772  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Mr. Harlow and I then discussed with the President the situation 
appertaining to the Jackson Committee investigation. The President 
approved the guidelines, attached, as a basis for Mr. Harlow’s discus­
sion with Senator Jackson.
Gordon Gray
Special Assistant to the President
Enclosure
Paper Prepared by the NSC
Washington, July 6, 1959
PROPOSED GUIDELINES
1. The proposed study would not involve a Congressional investi­
gation of the National Security Council.
2. The Executive Branch personnel would not be asked to tes­
tify with respect to the substantive consideration of matters by the 
National Security Council or its subordinate machinery. The operat­
ing Departments of Government would provide any testimony about 
their policies or activities and without reference to substantive con­
sideration of such matters by the National Security Council or its sub­
ordinate machinery.
3. Study of the National Security Council and its subordinate 
machinery would be limited to matters involving composition, organi­
zation and procedures. Executive Branch officials would be authorized 
to make full disclosure as to such matters subject to appropriate secu­
rity safeguards in case of classified projects.
4. Any testimony by present or former Government officials regard­
ing the National Security Council and its subordinate machinery would 
be taken in Executive session. Consideration of the publication of such 
testimony taken in Executive session would be as agreed between the 
Subcommittee and a representative designated by the President. This 
Presidential representative would be authorized to attend all hearings 
of the Subcommittee relating to the National Security Council or its 
subordinate machinery, and would be provided a transcript of the tes­
timony taken in Executive session as a basis for reaching the decisions 
as to publication referred to above.
5. It would be understood that the purpose of testimony regarding 
the composition, organization and procedures of the National Security 
Council and its subordinate machinery would be for background infor­
mation in considering various proposals for new legislation. Such testi­
mony would not be intended to generate legislative proposals designed
