discussing settlement by other means. If she makes good the threat of
withdrawal, Arbitrator can deal with situation as it then presents itself, and
if it be found advisable to postpone plebiscitary proceedings indefinitely,
then Peru, as well as Chile, will bear her proper share of responsibility.
The program you sketch in your March 15, 6 p.m., would only serve to
facilitate Peru’s obstructive tactics, and to render difficult, if not impossible,
any later settlement. For that reason I cannot approve it. You will see from
what I have said that, although I am alive to difficulties of situation, I am
bound to attribute supreme importance to manner in which proceedings are
now handled. We must, above all avoid creation of any situation which
would aggravate difficulty of bringing Chile and Peru together and which
would indelibly stain honor of one party and give other a moral victory
coupled with claim to legal title to the territory, while diminishing, if not
defeating altogether, chances for a proper settlement. This is what a flat
decision terminating plebiscite on ground that it has been frustrated by
Chile would do. On the other hand if the two resolutions pending are voted
down, there would then be every inducement for both parties to favor
settlement through diplomatic channels.
If the two resolutions be voted down, it would not seem necessary at this
time for you to introduce any resolution, as failure of the other resolutions
would leave proceedings for plebiscite unaffected. If you wished to make
any statement in explanation of your vote in opposition to proposed
Peruvian resolution, you might state briefly that while you did not wish to
formally review present conditions at this time, you were voting against
resolution in hope and expectation that appropriate safeguards for plebiscite
would be provided. If Peru threatens to withdraw, or does actually
withdraw, I think you should make no statement, but report situation to me
immediately.
I am sure you will appreciate importance of not conveying to either Chilean
or Peruvian member of Commission outline of policy I have indicated.
KELLOGG
