March 1952–February 1953
443
during the slack winter months, when some unemployed agricultural
and construction workers customarily migrate to the cities.
23. Prospects for increasing government revenues during 1953 are
slight. The only significant sources of increased tax revenue are the
wealthy landlords and capitalists. Although Mossadeq has the au-
thority and will probably make greater efforts to tap these sources,
perhaps in some cases by outright confiscation, even full exploitation of
these sources would not eliminate the government deficit. On the basis
of recent experience, further bond issues are not likely to raise adequate
amounts.
24. In the absence of foreign aid during 1953, therefore, the gov-
ernment will probably resort increasingly to deficit financing, primar-
ily by unsecured loans from the Bank Melli and by increasing the
amount of currency in circulation. The government may also resort to
confiscation of property and the sale of government stocks, such as
opium and rice.
25. Iran’s imports will continue to decline. Although exports are
expected to be slightly higher than the 1951–1952 level, they will be suf-
ficient to meet only about one-half Iran’s imports prior to the oil dis-
pute. In view of the near exhaustion of foreign exchange holdings, im-
ports will have to be reduced to approximately this level, thus
contributing to inflationary pressures and causing some reduction in
urban business activity. Reducing imports will cause sharp reductions
in the availability of luxury goods and some reductions in capital goods
during 1953, but is not expected to deprive Iran of essential imports.
There will also be a trend toward barter agreements, and the already
substantial Iranian trade with the Soviet Bloc will tend to increase.
26. The net results of the financial and economic steps likely to be
taken by the government during 1953 will probably be: price increases
of perhaps as much as 20 to 30 percent; some reduction in living stand-
ards in the cities; a substantial increase in the national debt; a reduction
of privately held and government stocks; and further postponement of
the government’s own economic development program. A continuing
low level of capital goods imports will lead to some deterioration of
Iran’s physical plant; at the same time, upward pressures on the price
level, arising in large part from government deficits and declining
public confidence, will bring nearer the danger of runaway inflation.
Moreover, the government will have little margin of safety for coping
with such unanticipated eventualities as a serious crop failure. Al-
though we do not believe that these developments, singly or collec-
tively, are likely in themselves to cause the overthrow of the National
Front in 1953, a continuation of these trends beyond 1953 will have a se-
rious effect on political stability.
