Nicaragua 873 as a base of operations. However, Mr. Rubottom emphasized that, even though sorely tried by these provocations, it is hoped that President Somoza will bear in mind that Hemispheric obligations constrain all of us to exercise infinite patience and forbearance rather than jeopardize the notable gains we have thus far achieved. This applies particularly to Central America which has experienced during the past few years a series of minor miracles in evolving toward stable, democratic governments. Mr. Rubottom illustrated these gains by pointing out (1) that Honduras now enjoys a stable government after years of near-anarchy, (2) that Panama has just experienced the most exemplary election in its history, (3) that the democratic system in Costa Rica continues to flourish in spite of President Echandi having to face a majority opposition in the Costa Rican Assembly and (4) that Guatemala had rid itself of a Communist government and together with Nicaragua and El Salvador are all progressing toward more democratic forms and practices. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the patience of the United States was also being sorely tried in our current relations with Cuba but that we have chosen the path of patience and forbearance, rather than a course of direct action. He expressed the hope that President Somoza would bear all of these things in mind in his current relations with President Villeda and that he would not resort to withdrawal of his Ambassador or of the Nicaraguan members of the Mixed Military Commission. In the meantime, as we have done in the past, the United States will continue to use its good offices in behalf of resolving frictions between Nicaragua and Honduras. The Ambassador thanked Mr. Rubottom and promised to inform President Somoza of our views. 2. Request for Asylum by Pro-Batista Exiles Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said he would also like to mention another matter not related to Nicaraguan-Honduran relations but a matter which had been brought to the fore by the request for asylum in Nicaragua of a group of pro-Batista Cubans now in the Dominican Republic. He stated he had been told by the Dominican Ambassador in Washington, Dr. Luis F. Thomen, that as a result of an “understanding”, or “truce”, between Trujillo and Fidel Castro, some sixty pro-Batista exiles in the Dominican Republic had been given the choice of either leaving the country or being placed in prison. A group of twenty or more of the Cubans have requested President Somoza to grant them asylum in Nicaragua, which request Somoza is reluctant to grant. Another development of which Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was also informed by the Dominican Ambassador, is that Aureliano Sanchez Arango, a Cuban exile, formerly pro-Castro but now in Venezuela, is making a visit to the Dominican Republic. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated he was at a loss as to how to interpret such a trip by Sanchez
