424 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Normalization would not solve all of our problems or disagreements, but it would help consolidate our nonconfrontational relationship, and it would help insure that the current balance in the entire region remain intact. We are, therefore, convinced that normalization is an essential objective for our new Asian policy. In pursuing this objective, we are constantly mindful of the wellbeing of the people of Taiwan. Thus, we are continuing to seek that framework which allows us to move ahead with our strategically and historically important relations with the People’s Republic of China while at the same time taking full account of our concerns regarding Taiwan. Our interest is that whatever solution there may be to the “Taiwan question” that it will be a peaceful one. We are confident that in the future we still would be able to continue the many mutually beneficial relationships which link us to the people of Taiwan. Trade and Investment The fourth key element of our post-Vietnam/Asia policy is a strong emphasis on promoting U.S. trade and investment in Asia. Economic relations are now the single most important emerging element of our relationship with Asia, and they must not turn into a one-way flow. Prompted by our large trade deficit with the region, some have argued recently that U.S. trade with Asia is increasingly disadvantageous to the United States. It is our conviction, however, that increasing U.S. exports is the best way to reduce our trade difficulties with Asia. The reason is clear and simple: International Trade and U.S. exports create jobs for Americans. The Department of Commerce estimates that every billion dollars of U.S. exports translates directly into 30,000 American jobs. One out of every three agricultural sector jobs is now export-directed. In the manufacturing sector, one out of every seven jobs is export-related. Thus, our exports to Japan alone in 1977—which totaled $10.5 billion—provided direct employment for 315,000 Americans. Our total exports to all of Asia in 1977 of $20.9 billion provided jobs for about 627,000 Americans. But even these figures do not tell the whole story. The Department of Labor estimates that for every job directly involved in the production of items for export, another job is created in an allied or supporting industry. Slow export growth over the last 4 years is second only to energy imports as a cause of the large and destabilizing U.S. trade deficit. Recognizing this, President Carter asked Secretary of Commerce Kreps to head a Cabinet-level task force to review our export policy. The task force recommendations, which will be presented to the President soon, focus on modifications of governmental procedures which create disin-
