494
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
authority and the continuation of the waivers for Romania and
Hungary.3 (C)
2. That you sign the Presidential Determination at Tab B that the
further extension of the waiver authority granted by subsection 402(c)
of the Trade Act will substantially promote the Jackson-Vanik objective
of free emigration.4 (C)
OMB concurs.
3 The President’s message is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 978.
4 Carter signed the waivers. See Presidential Directive 79–10 printed in Public Papers:
Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 979.
166.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 16, 1979, 3:15–4 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s Meeting with Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister
Istvan Huszar (U)
PARTICIPANTS
H.E. Istvan Huszar, Deputy Prime Minister, Hungarian People’s Republic
H.E. Janos Nagy, Deputy Foreign Minister, Hungarian People’s Republic
H.E. Ferenc Esztergalyos, Ambassador to the United States
Mr. Gyorgy Banlaki, Interpreter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Stephen Larrabee, Notetaker
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by welcoming DPM Huszar to
the United States.2 He said that he had spoken earlier to the President
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 17, Hungary: 1979–80. Secret. Drafted by Larrabee.
The meeting took place in Brzezinski’s office.
2 On July 9, Larrabee informed Brzezinski that Huszar was traveling to the United
States at the invitation of Secretary of Commerce Kreps. Kreps requested that the Presi-
dent briefly meet with Huszar. Larrabee recommended that, in light of the President’s
busy schedule, Brzezinski meet with the Hungarian official instead, with a Presidential
“drop-by,” if his schedule permits. Brzezinski disapproved both recommendations. (Ibid.)
However, on July 16, Tarnoff forwarded a Department of State briefing paper for Brzezin-
ski’s meeting with Huszar. In his memorandum to Brzezinski forwarding the paper,
Larrabee stated that Vance was sick and could not meet with Huszar as scheduled. (Ibid.)
