740
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
C. FOREIGN CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT
Our review indicates that U.S. exporters consider the Foreign Cor-
rupt Practices Act (FCPA) to be the second most significant export dis-
incentive. The Act has two consequences. The first, not unexpectedly, is
that some exports are lost because foreign companies can bribe foreign
officials while U.S. companies cannot. However, this prohibition was
fully intended. As a nation we have decided that bribery in interna-
tional trade is reprehensible and that American companies must forego
exports that can be attained only by illicit payments. Discouraging cor-
ruption in international business on the part of foreign firms requires a
multilateral agreement. We have been pursuing such an agreement ac-
tively in the UN, with only marginal success, but will continue to press
the issue. The steps you took at the Venice Summit give this exercise a
boost.11
The major problem in the FCPA stems from ambiguities in the law
itself and uncertainty in how it will be construed by Justice and the
SEC. In a word, what conduct is prohibited and what conduct is not
prohibited under the law is unclear. Almost without exception ex-
porters and lawyers we consulted report that ambiguities in the law
and uncertainty in how it will be construed by Justice and the SEC
cause some businesses to avoid some export markets or export transac-
tions altogether. Among the most ambiguous provisions are: (1) the
“reason to know” standard under which companies can be held liable
for the actions of foreign partners or agents over whom they have little
control, notwithstanding company efforts to assure compliance with
the FCPA; (2) the distinction between permissible and unlawful enter-
tainment and gift expenditures; and (3) the boundaries of facilitating or
“grease” payments.
11 In his September 9 message to Congress (see footnote 8, above), Carter said that at
the Venice G–7 Summit he had “urged that these seven industrial democracies renew ef-
forts to work in the United Nations toward an agreement to prohibit illicit payments by
their citizens to foreign government officials; and, if that effort falters, to seek an agree-
ment among themselves, open to other nations, with the same objective. While we did
not set a time by which an agreement should be reached in the United Nations, I believe
that one further year of negotiations should be sufficient. Accordingly, if an agreement
has not been obtained in the United Nations General Assembly, I intend to ask the other
heads of government at the 1981 Economic Summit to direct the prompt negotiation of
such an agreement among our seven nations, but open to others.” (Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 1693–1694) Carter’s state-
ment is in line with a recommendation offered in an August 27 memorandum from Eiz-
enstat and Owen to Carter. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File,
TA–8, TA 3 7/31/80–8/31/80)
