North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 875 provide less leverage18 on the receiving countries’ overall policies than it would in poor countries. It might have a catalytic effect, however, in stimulating middle-income countries to carry out specific programs or projects to help their poor. Strategy #2 would allow more flexibility19 than strategy #1, since it would permit more concessional assistance to reach middle-income countries that are politically important to us and that we may want to see participate in regional development programs—provided that these countries are prepared to use US aid to help their poor. Since we cannot assume that this will always be the case, this strategy would provide less political flexibility than strategy #3, below. The Congress might perceive this strategy as a rejection of its clearly stated preference for concentrating foreign aid in the poorest countries. If the Congress considered the amount going to middleincome countries excessive, increased aid appropriations might be jeopardized. On the other hand, we would still be serving poor people; State and AID believe there is a good chance that many Congressional objections could be surmounted. Strategy #3 would be directed to multiple purposes, under improved procedures and with differences dictated by changing circumstances, e.g., a greater emphasis on meeting equity concerns. This strategy would give the President greater flexibility20 than strategies #1 or #2 in meeting political needs. Bilateral development aid and PL–480 aid would be used to promote such foreign policy purposes as regional cooperation and non-proliferation, even if this required using aid in ways that were not directed toward helping the poor. Thus, although most bilateral development aid and most PL–480 would continue to go to helping meet the basic human needs of poor people, more would go to advancing political or security purposes than under strategies #1 or #2. Larger amounts of bilateral development aid and of PL–480 would be directed to key developing countries, regions, or problems of importance to the United States, regardless of the recipients’ level of development, and their commitment to helping the poor. SSA would probably be a larger part of total concessional aid than under strategies #1 or #2. To the extent that this strategy emphasized political purposes, it would evoke stronger Congressional criticism from supporters of development aid than strategies #1 or #2. It would probably be supported by those who view aid primarily as a foreign policy, rather than a developmental, tool, on the other hand. 18 Carter underlined the words “less leverage.” 19 Carter underlined the words “more flexibility.” 20 Carter underlined the words “greater flexibility.”
