368  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Affairs. He said that the CEG was assisted in this study by Vice Admiral 
John H. Sides, Director, WSEG, and by Lt. General Earl W. Barnes, 
USAF (Ret.), of the Central Intelligence Agency. He then called upon 
Admiral Sides who made an oral presentation of the highlights of the 
study, a copy of which has been deposited in the files of the Executive 
Secretary, NSC.
Following Admiral Sides’ oral presentation, the Secretary of 
Defense made inquiry as to what, if any, radar capabilities the Soviets 
have below 500 feet. Admiral Sides responded that the Soviets would 
not have too much capability below 500 feet. He mentioned that 500 feet 
is generally accepted as a realistic, minimum low level attack altitude 
because any attack attempted beneath the 500 foot level could result in 
serious trouble for the attacker.
Mr. Gray indicated that, as to future evaluations of this kind, the 
CEG, at a meeting held on October 27, recommended that the fol­
lowing topics, listed in order of suggested priority, be considered by 
the President as suitable subjects for comparative evaluations stud­
ies: (a) long-­range ballistic missiles systems (to include ICBM’s and 
IRBM’s, but to exclude air-­breathers); (b) computer technology; and 
(c) submarine weapons systems and anti-­submarine warfare capabil­
ities. Mr. Gray suggested that the President might wish to designate 
one of these topics as the subject of the next study to be undertaken 
by the CEG.
The President stated that he personally favored the topic “subma­
rine weapons systems and anti-­submarine warfare capabilities”, and 
Mr. Gray pointed out that this was also the selection of the Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The President inquired whether we knew enough about computer 
technology to make a meaningful evaluation. It was his thought that a 
study of computer technology would be dependent in large measure 
upon the opinions of Dr. Killian’s technical people as distinguished 
from the WSEG experts.
Dr. Killian thought that a meaningful evaluation could be made of 
computer technology, and he emphasized the view that such an evalua­
tion would yield considerable valuable information concerning import­
ant aspects of various Soviet weapons systems.
Admiral Sides pointed out that it was not intended that WSEG 
should make all of the evaluations to be conducted pursuant to NSC 
5815. He said that if computer technology were selected as a topic that 
others, such as Dr. Killian, might be given responsibility for the evalu­
ation study.
