Haiti 749 HA–8. Record of a Meeting1  Washington, September 14, 1958 Meeting—September 14, 1958—Economic Program for Haiti PARTICIPANTS State Department: Messrs. Rubottom (ARA); Snow (ARA); Wieland (CMA); Warner (CMA); Conover (REA); Post (REA); and Favell (KD) Development Loan Fund: Mr. Rayan Treasury Department: Mr. Harley ICA: Mr. Atwood Export-Import Bank: Messrs. Kimball and Dennison Mr. Rubottom opened the meeting by pointing out that the economic situation in Haiti has shown no significant improvement and that a new look was necessary. He said that we should consider obtaining, in cooperation with President Duvalier, greater responsibility in economic affairs. Since the Duvalier government was freely elected and the best prospect we could see ahead, Mr. Rubottom was convinced that we should make efforts to intensify our cooperation. He believed that Duvalier wants to work with us and that we should try to convince him that we do likewise. Mr. Rubottom raised with Mr. Atwood the need for experienced ICA personnel at the top level to deal with the Haitian government in overall economic planning and implementation. Mr. Rubottom said that Messrs. Waugh, Dillon and McIntosh recognized the importance of completion of the construction work at the Artibonite Valley and that we should consider having the DLF supply the funds for this purpose. In addition, he said we should continue our grant food program there and indicated that perhaps a greater account could be shipped. Mr. Atwood stated that the problem was one of getting adequate distribution of foodstuffs. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that it was a matter of high priority to set up an inter-­agency committee to study the Haitian economic problem, Mr. Snow agreed. Mr. Rubottom then mentioned that a Marine Corps training mission was expected to go to Haiti shortly to train the Army. Mr. Atwood agreed that ICA experience showed that there was a need for proper advisors to the GOH. He mentioned in this connection 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 60 D 371, “Haiti.” Confidential. Drafted by Post on October 13.
