672 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 80. I said neither Wang nor myself were psychiatrists, but there cer­ tainly difference between ability to travel, which apparently was Liu’s condition in 1950, and being cured of illness. Certainly neither hospital or any other official agency in US would have any interest in treatment of person mentally ill other than pure humanitarian. 81. Wang said he thought doctor in this hospital was one who capable making just statement regarding condition Liu. 82. I said I would think so too and doctor says Liu still not cured. 83. Wang said but they had letter written by superintendent hospi­ tal stating Liu was fit to leave hospital long ago. 84. I said, that is, fit to travel. 85. Wang said yes. 86. I said I only wanted to say before leaving that I was very disap­ pointed to note that in spite discussion last meeting Wang’s govt saw fit issue statement with regard talks. It difficult for me see how this could help us make progress. As I said at last meeting, I did not see how public airing our differences helped towards solution problems. It only aggravates them. 87. I said I wondered if this indicated whether his government still intrested in continuing these talks upon basis which I suggested at beginning and which I had tried very hard maintain. 88. I said exceedingly heavy responsibility rests upon two of us here. I had tried for my part to discharge talks we face here with deep sense that responsibility. I willing continue do so. I hoped Wang shared my feeling this regard. 89. Wang said he could not accept charges I had leveled against their action in making public statement. He had at previous two meet­ ings explained his position and reason tthat led for this one time to making public statement on their part. 90. Wang said I asked whether they interested in continuing these talks in previous manner. He wanted point out that in past his side had consistently been adhering to form of talks. However, form in which talks being carried on should be aimed at facilitating development of our talks. 91. Wang said he agreed with me that we had exceedingly heavy responsibility in talks. Public opinion in world had given our talks great attention as well as great hope. Public desires to see improvement in relations between our two countries as well as relaxing tension in Far East in world. However, public does not want see our talks remaining in old position without making progress forward. 92. Wang said they have always advocated means of negotiation to find way to settle statutes [disputes] peacefully. PRC side will fully and
