August 8–September 17, 1978 21 In more concrete terms, Begin wants as regards the Sinai: —A credible and public commitment to continue Sinai negotiations with a view toward reaching agreement. This could be given visibility by the reconvening of the Weizman/Gamasy talks soon after the Camp David talks end. —Assurance that such an agreement will not entail the immediate dismantling of either the airfields or the Israeli settlements in the Sinai. (Because of Sadat’s own needs, this may have to be given in the form of a verbal side understanding to which you are witness, with the recognition that Sadat may have to deny its existence if it were to leak.) Begin has the following additional desires as regards the West Bank, assuming he is willing to commit Israel to withdrawal at all: —Assurance that there will be no resolution of the sovereignty issue until after the interim period, presumably of five years. —Assurance that Israel will retain sufficient latitude in future negotiations to avoid having to confront a final solution which is prejudiced to permit only “minor modifications.” —Assurance that Israel will be allowed some agreed form of security presence on the West Bank beyond the interim period. —Assurance that, should King Hussein fail to enter the negotiations even if guidelines for negotiating West Bank and Gaza issues are agreed between Egypt and Israel, Sadat will either himself negotiate a West Bank/Gaza settlement or not insist on such a settlement as a precondition for concluding a Sinai agreement. (Sadat has on occasion told us he will negotiate a West Bank/Gaza final settlement if Hussein and the Palestinians won’t. Ambassador Eilts feels strongly that it would be impossible politically for Sadat to do this.) Sadat, for his part, wants as regards the West Bank and Gaza: —A clear and public Israeli commitment to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza, couched in terms that he can say preclude other than “minor modifications.” (Ironically, language on withdrawal that is clear on the principle but vague on the extent may now be more easily acceptable to Sadat and other Arabs precisely because of the position thus far adopted by the Begin Government.) —A freeze on further Israeli settlements. —A clear and public commitment to resolve the issue of sovereignty after the interim period in the context of Israeli withdrawal—i.e., a commitment which he can interpret as meaning the area will devolve to Arab political authority. A reiteration of the Israeli willingness to “discuss” the sovereignty question at that time will not be sufficient. —Language in any agreed document that assures active Palestinian participation in the process of determining the future of the West Bank and Gaza, including their consent to the terms of a final peace
