August 8–September 17, 1978
21
In more concrete terms, Begin wants as regards the Sinai:
—A credible and public commitment to continue Sinai negotia-
tions with a view toward reaching agreement. This could be given visi-
bility by the reconvening of the Weizman/Gamasy talks soon after the
Camp David talks end.
—Assurance that such an agreement will not entail the immediate
dismantling of either the airfields or the Israeli settlements in the Sinai.
(Because of Sadat’s own needs, this may have to be given in the form of
a verbal side understanding to which you are witness, with the recogni-
tion that Sadat may have to deny its existence if it were to leak.)
Begin has the following additional desires as regards the West Bank, as-
suming he is willing to commit Israel to withdrawal at all:
—Assurance that there will be no resolution of the sovereignty
issue until after the interim period, presumably of five years.
—Assurance that Israel will retain sufficient latitude in future ne-
gotiations to avoid having to confront a final solution which is preju-
diced to permit only “minor modifications.”
—Assurance that Israel will be allowed some agreed form of secu-
rity presence on the West Bank beyond the interim period.
—Assurance that, should King Hussein fail to enter the negotia-
tions even if guidelines for negotiating West Bank and Gaza issues are
agreed between Egypt and Israel, Sadat will either himself negotiate a
West Bank/Gaza settlement or not insist on such a settlement as a pre-
condition for concluding a Sinai agreement. (Sadat has on occasion told
us he will negotiate a West Bank/Gaza final settlement if Hussein and
the Palestinians won’t. Ambassador Eilts feels strongly that it would be
impossible politically for Sadat to do this.)
Sadat, for his part, wants as regards the West Bank and Gaza:
—A clear and public Israeli commitment to withdraw from the
West Bank and Gaza, couched in terms that he can say preclude other
than “minor modifications.” (Ironically, language on withdrawal that
is clear on the principle but vague on the extent may now be more
easily acceptable to Sadat and other Arabs precisely because of the po-
sition thus far adopted by the Begin Government.)
—A freeze on further Israeli settlements.
—A clear and public commitment to resolve the issue of sover-
eignty after the interim period in the context of Israeli withdrawal—i.e.,
a commitment which he can interpret as meaning the area will devolve
to Arab political authority. A reiteration of the Israeli willingness to
“discuss” the sovereignty question at that time will not be sufficient.
—Language in any agreed document that assures active Pales-
tinian participation in the process of determining the future of the West
Bank and Gaza, including their consent to the terms of a final peace
