3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
325
hensive settlement. We continued to believe that the only true and
lasting solution to the Middle East situation was a comprehensive
settlement.
Gromyko asked what were the principles in the declaration.
The Secretary said the declaration would deal with the nature of the
peace, resolution of the Palestinian question, and the principle of with-
drawal from occupied territories on all fronts in accordance with 242
and 338,2 as the basis of reconvening the Geneva Conference. This was
the same position we had held all along. Finally, as Gromyko knew, in
the so-called political meeting in Jerusalem several months ago in
which we participated, the subject of discussions between Israel and
Egypt had been the attempt to draft an agreed Statement of General
Principles. Further work has been continued, but it has not proved pos-
sible to reach agreement. The Secretary had kept Ambassador Do-
brynin informed of the various meetings.
Gromyko had the following question to ask and would ask the Sec-
retary to reply if he felt it advisable to do so. How did he see the Middle
East situation in the immediate future? What steps was the Secretary
thinking of in terms of normalizing the situation there?
The Secretary said that he would, of course, reply. Our own feeling
was that for the present one should let the intellectual ferment in Israel
continue. A real debate was going on in Israel regarding the three key
points he had mentioned. We felt it better to let discussions in Israel
mature for a few weeks before taking the next step.
Gromyko remarked that in Israel they loved to discuss things, pref-
erably for years rather than weeks.
The Secretary expressed his belief that one could not let things drift
much more than a few weeks. He had one more point to make. Since he
had left on his trip to Africa and Moscow, he had received a request
from Foreign Minister Dayan to meet with him on April 26 and 27. He
said he had some new ideas to present. The Secretary had replied that
he would be happy to listen. After that meeting he intended to commu-
nicate with Gromyko about the results, if any. He came back to his
point that the only ultimate solution is a comprehensive one, which can
only come out of a meeting of all the parties.
Gromyko asked what forum the Secretary had in mind, the Geneva
Conference or something else.
The Secretary replied that he meant the Geneva Conference, if all
the interested parties could be pursuaded to attend. A declaration of
general principles would serve as a framework for the Conference. This
was the subject of discussions between Egypt, Israel and ourselves.
2 See footnote 2, Document 48.
