FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1977–1980 Volume XI, Part 1 Iran: Hostage Crisis, November 1979– September 1980 Editor Linda Qaimmaqami General Editor Kathleen B. Rasmussen United States Government Publishing Office Washington 2020

DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the Historian Foreign Service Institute For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

About the Series The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the U.S. Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Foreign Service Institute, under the direction of the General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991. Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series which was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991. Sec-

IV About the Series gaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State historians by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memoranda of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of the Department’s central files for 1977–1979 are available in electronic or microfilm formats at Archives II and may be accessed using the Access to Archival Databases (AAD) tool. The Department’s central files for 1980–1981 will eventually be transferred to the National Archives. Almost all of the Department’s decentralized office files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred to or are in the process of being transferred from the Department’s custody to Archives II. Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through special access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified documents. The staff of the Carter Library is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Carter Library include some of the most significant foreign-affairs related documentation from White House offices, the Department of State, and other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Some of the research for volumes in this subseries was done in Carter Library record collections scanned for the Remote Archive Capture (RAC) project. This project, which is administered by the National Archives and Records Administration’s Office of Presidential Libraries, was designed to coordinate the declassification of still-classified records held in various Presidential libraries. As a result of the way in which records were scanned for the RAC, the editors of the Foreign Relations series were not always able to determine whether attachments to a given document were in fact attached to the paper copy of the docu-

About the Series V ment in the Carter Library file. In such cases, some editors of the Foreign Relations series have indicated this ambiguity by stating that the attachments were “Not found attached.” Editorial Methodology Documents in this volume are presented chronologically according to time in Washington, DC. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publishing Division. The original document is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the original document are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a list of abbreviations and terms is included in the front matter of each volume. In telegrams, the telegram number (including special designators such as Secto) is printed at the start of the text of the telegram. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld after declassification review have been accounted for and are listed in their chronological place with headings, source notes, and the number of pages not declassified. All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified in the footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents. The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the document and its original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document.

VI About the Series Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record. The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than to page numbers. Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation of the series and declassification of records. The Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes as it deems necessary to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations. Declassification Review The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, conducted the declassification review for the Department of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 13526 on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. The declassification review of this volume, which began in 2010 and was completed in 2018, resulted in the decision to withhold 16 documents in full, excise a paragraph or more in 54 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in 77 documents. The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that the documentation and editorial notes presented here provide a thorough, accurate, and reliable

About the Series VII record of the Carter administration’s response to the Iranian hostage crisis. Adam M. Howard, Ph.D. Kathleen B. Rasmussen, Ph.D. The Historian General Editor Foreign Service Institute November 2020

Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administration of Jimmy Carter. It is one of two which document U.S. policy toward Iran during the Iranian Hostage Crisis of

X Preface themselves. The former Shah of Iran is also an important element in the volume. Until his death in July 1980, his movements in exile provoked Iran into continued efforts to obtain his extradition and his alleged fortune. Another, and not insubstantial focus of the volume, is on policy discussions within the administration concerning rescue efforts. The volume can be divided into three main sequences: the initial embassy takeover and response by the Carter administration, efforts to negotiate with Iran through various intermediaries, and the resort to military force in the attempted rescue mission and its fallout. These developments took place against the backdrop of one of the twentieth century’s most significant revolutions, the scale and historical background of which confounded U.S. policymakers who nevertheless made tremendous efforts to understand. Their frustrations with the situation are all too obvious. Several themes are apparent by volume’s end. First, the Carter administration, for all its effort, lacked appropriate leverage to influence Iranian developments. The hostages were held in the heart of a major city by non-governmental actors. Communication with members of the Iranian Government, therefore, was of little avail. Military power was also judged to be proven ineffective. The fact that the whereabouts of all of the hostages was unknown limited planning options. Moreover, the lack of an institutional structure for effective inter-service coordination of special operations activities hindered the execution of the rescue attempt. Other military actions were considered, but were deemed too risky in the context of Cold War confrontation with the Soviet Union. Economic sanctions were hampered by a lack of international support. Furthermore, Iran itself was relatively economically insulated from dependence on foreign supplies. Acknowledgments The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Carter Library, Atlanta, Georgia. Special thanks are due to Mark Ellcessor and David Robarge of the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, who were extremely helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency. Douglas Richards and Mike Johnson of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were likewise extremely helpful in expediting access to the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Delta Force papers held by the JCS relating to the hostage rescue mission. The Office of the Historian wishes to thank Greg Perett of the Office of Information Programs and Services for coordinating the declassification review of this volume within the Department of State. Additional thanks are due to the Historical Programs Staff at the Central Intelligence Agency, the Office of Access Management at the National Security Council, and the Govern-

Preface XI ment of Switzerland for assisting with the declassification of this volume. Linda Qaimmaqami collected documentation for this volume and selected and edited it, under the supervision of Edward C. Keefer, then General Editor of the Foreign Relations series. Chris Morrison assumed responsibility for resolving issues of compilation and review during the final stages of production. Kerry Hite coordinated the interagency declassification review, with the assistance of Chris Tudda and Carl Ashley, Chief of the Declassification Division. Heather McDaniel, Kerry Hite, and Rita M. Baker performed the technical and copy editing under the supervision of Mandy A. Chalou, Chief of the Editing and Publishing Division. Linda Qaimmaqami Historian

Contents About the Series ....................................................... III IX XV Abbreviations and Terms ............................................ XXI XXVII XXXIX Note on U.S. Covert Actions ........................................ Iran: Hostage Crisis, November 1979–September 1980 First Responses ..................................................... Options Identified .................................................. Formal and Informal Negotiating Channels .................. A Break in Diplomatic Relations and the Rescue Mission .............................................. Covert and Overt Operations .................................... XIII

Sources

XVI Sources two boxes of material on the hostage rescue mission that proved critical.

Sources XVII National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland Record Group 59, General Records of the Department of State Central Foreign Policy File Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Atlanta, Georgia Brzezinski Donated Material Geographic Files Subject Files National Security Affairs Brzezinski Material Agency File Cables File Country File Brzezinski Office File Country Chron File Subject Chron File General Odom File Subject File VIP Visit File Staff Material Europe, USSR and East/West File West Europe Country File Middle East File Chron File Meetings File Subject File Trip/Visits File Office File For President or Brzezinski Only File Institutional File Office File Outside the System File Meetings File Presidential Advisory File National Security Council, 1977–1981 Institutional Files (H–Files) Office of the Chief of Staff Jordan’s Confidential Files Plains File President’s Daily Diary

XVIII Sources Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President Lloyd Cutler’s Files Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia Office of the Director of Central Intelligence Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator Job 81B00112R: Subject Files

Sources XIX U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents: Jimmy

Abbreviations and Terms A–6, U.S. long-range attack aircraft AA, anti-aircraft ACQ, acquired ADA, Air Defense Artillery AFB, Air Force Base Amb, Ambassador ARAMCO, Arabian-American Oil Company AWB, Australian Wheat Board AWACS, Airborne Early Warning and Control B, Christian Bourguet B–52, U.S. bomber B&V, Bourguet and Villalon BDG, Bangladesh Government bpd, barrels per day C, Jimmy Carter; Confidential C–5, U.S. military transport aircraft C–9, U.S. aeromedical transport aircraft C–130, Hercules, general purpose, four-engine fixed wing military transport aircraft C–141, Starlifter, fixed wing military transport aircraft C–5, Galaxy, fixed wing military transport aircraft C&R, communications and records C3I, Communications, Command, Control, and Intelligence CA, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Department of State CENTO, Central Treaty Organization Cherokee, telegraphic distribution channel for the Eyes Only messages between the Secretary of State and an Ambassador CIA, Central Intelligence Agency CINC, Commander in Chief CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific Command CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff COG, Continuity of Government COMSAT, Communications Satellite Corporation CONUS, Continental United States CPX, Command Post Exercise CRICON, Crisis Confrontation COMJTF, Commander Joint Task Force: CT, Counterterrorism CTJTF, Counterterrorism Joint Task Force CVA, U.S. Navy Attack Aircraft Carrier D, Office of the Deputy Secretary of State DA, David Aaron DAO, Defense Attache´ Office DCA, Defense Cooperation Agreement DCI, Director of Central Intelligence XXI

XXII Abbreviations and Terms DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission DDCI, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence DDN, David D. Newsom DDO, Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence Agency DDSO, Deputy Director for Special Operations Delta, 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment D, commanded by Colonel Charlie Beckwith Desert One, designated landing spot for Delta Team and helicopters inside Iran, U.S. rescue mission Desert Two, designated mountain hideout southeast of Tehran DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency DJS, Director, Joint Staff DOE, Department of Energy DOI, date of information DOUBLESTAR, an operational test and evaluation activity for JTF procurement and training for a second rescue operation DRE, Defense Research and Engineering E–3, AWACS aircraft Eagle Claw, code name for the rescue operation, operational phase EC, European Community EC–9, nine members of the European Community EDS, Electronic Data Systems EUCOM, European Command Exdis, Exclusive Distribution F–4, U.S. jet interceptor and fighter-bomber F–5, U.S. light fighter aircraft F–111, U.S. supersonic tactical attack aircraft FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service FCO, U.K. Foreign and Commonwealth Office Fedayeen al-Khalq, secular Marxist group FI, Foreign Intelligence FLAG, Family Liaison Action Group FMS, Foreign Military Sales FOI, Freedom of Information FRG, Federal Republic of Germany G (GH), Ghotbzadeh G–3, rifle produced in Iran under license from Heckler and Koch GA, General Assembly GDP, Gross Domestic Product GOI, Government of Iran GOP, Government of Pakistan; Government of Panama GS, Gary Sick H, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State HB, Honey Badger; Harold Brown helo(s), helicopters HUMINT, human intelligence ICA, International Communication Agency ICJ, International Court of Justice

Abbreviations and Terms XXIII ICRC, International Committee of the Red Cross IEA, International Energy Agency IEEPA, International Emergency Economic Powers Act INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State INS, Immigration and Naturalization Service INTELSAT, Global Fixed Satellites and Telecommunications Services; International Telecommunications Satellite Organization IO/UNP, Office of UN Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State IRG, Islamic Revolutionary Guard IRP, Islamic Republican Party IWG, Iran Working Group, Department of State J–2, Joint Staff Intelligence Division J–3, Joint Staff Operations Division J–3/DDSO, Joint Staff Operations Division/Deputy Director for Special Operations J–5, Joint Staff Plans Directorate J, JC, Jimmy Carter JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff JTD, Joint Task Delta JTF, Joint Task Force JW, Jasper Welch KC–135, U.S. aerial refueling aircraft Komiteh, self-appointed revolutionary committees that sprang up spontaneously in most neighborhoods of Tehran L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State LDC, less developed country LOH, Light Observation Helicopter LPH, Amphibious Assault Ship (helicopter); Landing Platform/Helicopter MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group Majles (Majlis), Iranian Parliament MB, Marshall Brement Mbd, Million barrels per day MC–130, Combat Talon, U.S. four-engine fixed-wing special operations military aircraft MD, Military District MEDEVAC, medical evacuation MFA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Mujahidin, Islamic guerrilla fighters; person who wages jihad Mujahiddin al-Khalq, People’s Mujahiddin of Iran, Islamic Marxist anti-Shah group founded in 1960s NCA, National Command Authority NE, Near East NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/IRN, Office of Iranian Affairs (Iran Desk), Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/IWG, Iran Working Group, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NESA, Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Central Intelligence Agency NFAC, National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency NIOC, National Iranian Oil Company

XXIV Abbreviations and Terms NM, nautical miles Noforn, Not Releasable to Foreign Nationals NSA, National Security Agency NSC, National Security Council OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OER, Office of Economic Research, Central Intelligence Agency OJCS, Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff OPEC, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries Oplan, operation plan OPSDEPS, Service Operations Deputies OPSEC, Operational Security OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense Otter, U.S. low-level research airplane P, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; President PACOM, U.S. Pacific Command Pasdaran, Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps PD, Presidential Directive PDB, President’s Daily Brief PFLP, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine PLO, Palestine Liberation Organization PN, Panama, Panamanian PNG, persona non grata PRC, Policy Review Committee PRM, Presidential Review Memorandum RDF, Rapid Deployment Force RDJTF, Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force REDCOM, U.S. Readiness Command RG, Record Group RH–53, U.S. Navy (Marine Corps) Sea Stallion Helicopter Rice Bowl, code name of the rescue operation in its planning stages RSO, Regional Security Office(r) S, Office of the Secretary of State; Secret SALT, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks SAMA, Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency SAR, search and rescue SASC, Senate Armed Services Committee SATCOM, Satellite Communications SAVAK, Farsi language acronym for Iranian National Security and Information Organization (Sazman-i Ittili’at va Amniyat-i Kishvar) SAVAMA, Farsi language acronym for Iranian Ministry of Intelligence and National Security (Sazman-E Ettela’at Va Amniat-E Melli-E Iran); replaced SAVAK SCC, Special Coordinating Committee SDR, Special Drawing Rights, International Monetary Fund SEAL, Sea/Air/Land Force, U.S. Navy SecGen, Secretary General Secto, series indicator for telegrams sent from the Secretary of State SFRC, Senate Foreign Relations Committee SOD, J–3 Special Operations Division, Joint Staff SOG, Special Operations Group (Central Intelligence Agency) SNOWBIRD, Department of Defense planning for a second rescue operation

Abbreviations and Terms XXV S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State SR–71, Blackbird, U.S. reconnaissance aircraft S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State Stadis, State Department distribution only SY, Office of Security, Bureau of Administration, Department of State SYG, Secretary General T, Tabatabai Tabas, Iranian name for Desert One TACAIR, tactical air TASS, official Soviet news agency TS, Top Secret Tudeh, Iranian Peoples (Communist) Party Twin Otter, codename for reconnaissance flights into Iran to locate what would become Desert One U–2, U.S. high-altitude reconnaissance airplane UAE, United Arab Emirates UN, United Nations UNGA, United Nations General Assembly UNSC, United Nations Security Council UNSYG, United Nations Secretary General USG, United States Government USNATO, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations V, Hector Villalon V&B, Villalon and Bourguet VHF, Very High Frequency VOA, Voice of America VP, Vice President WO, William Odom Z, Zulu time, Greenwich Mean Time ZB, Zbigniew Brzezinski

Persons Aaron, David L., President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Agah, Manucher, Charge´ d’Affaires of the Iranian Embassy in the United States Aguilar, Andres, Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States and Permanent Representative to the United Nations; former Justice Minister of Venezuela; Co-Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry established February 1980 Ahmad, Rafiuddin (Rafi, Rafiq), Chef de Cabinet (Executive Secretary) to United Nations Secretary General Albright, Madeleine, Congressional Relations Officer, National Security Council Staff, from March 1978 Ames, Robert C., National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia, Central Intelligence Agency Amini, Ali, former Prime Minister of Iran Arafat, Yasir, head, Palestine Liberation Organization Armao, Robert, U.S. public relations consultant; aide to former Vice President Nelson Rockefeller; adviser to the former Shah of Iran Ashraf, Princess, twin sister of the Shah of Iran al-Assad, Hafez, President of Syria Atherton, Alfred L. Jr. (Roy), U.S. Ambassador to Egypt from July 2, 1979 Atwood, J. Brian, Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs from August 3, 1979, until January 14, 1981 Aubert, Pierre, Swiss Foreign Minister Baker, Howard H., Jr., Senator (R–Tennessee)

XXVIII Persons Blackwill, Robert D., member, National Security Council Staff for Western Europe from September 1979 until January 1981

Persons XXIX Constable, Peter, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, and member, Iran Working Group Cordovez, Diego, Secretary of the UN Commission of Inquiry Cooper, Richard N., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Cossiga, Francesco, Italian Prime Minister from 1979 until 1980 Cottam, Richard, Professor of Political Science, University of Pittsburg; unofficial/ private liaison with Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh

XXX Persons Findley, Paul, member, U.S. House of Representatives (R–Illinois) Fish, Hamilton, member, U.S. House of Representatives (R–New York) Fisher, Roger, Professor and Director of the Harvard Negotiation Project Franc¸ois-Poncet, Jean, French Foreign Minister Friendly, Alfred, Jr., Press Officer and Associate Press Secretary, National Security Council Staff, from March 1980 until January 1981 Funk, Gerald, member, National Security Council Staff for Sub-Saharan Africa from December 1978 until January 1981 Gast, Philip C., Major General, USAF; former chief of U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group in Iran; member, Joint Task Force Gates, Robert, Special Assistant to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs from April 1979 until December 1979; National Intelligence Officer for the Soviet Union, Central Intelligence Agency, from January 1980 Genscher, Hans-Dietrich, German Foreign Minister Ghorbal, Ashraf, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States Ghotbzadeh (Qotbzadeh), Sadegh, member, Iranian Revolutionary Council; Iranian

Persons XXXI Hayward, Thomas D., Admiral, USN; Chief of Naval Operations Heikal (Heykal), Mohammed, Egyptian journalist, editor of al-Ahram from 1957 until 1974 Helman, Gerald, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political and Multilateral Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs Helms, Richard, Director of Central Intelligence from 1966 until February 1973; U.S. Ambassador to Iran from 1973 until 1977; international consultant Henderson, Sir Nicholas, U.K. Ambassador to the United States Henze, Paul B., member, National Security Council Staff for Intelligence Coordination, for Cyprus/Turkey/Greece, for Horn of Africa, and for international broadcasting, from January 1977 Hinton, Deane R., Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs Hoffman, John, partner, Shearman & Sterling, New York Holloway, James L., III, Admiral, USN; Chairman, Special Operations Review Group Hunter, Robert, member, National Security Council Staff for Western Europe from January 1977 until August 1979 Hussein (Husayn) ibn Talal, King of Jordan Hussein, Saddam, President of Iraq Huyser, Robert, General, USAF; head, military mission to Iran, January-February 1979 Illueca, Jorge, Panamanian Ambassador to the United Nations Inman, Bobby Ray, Admiral, USN; Director of the National Security Agency from July

XXXII Persons Khoeini (Khoeni), Ayatollah Mohammed Moussavi, spiritual adviser to the students holding the Embassy; liaison between the students and the Ayatollah Khomeini; Deputy Speaker of the Majles, 1980 Khomeini, Ahmad, son of the Ayatollah Khomeini Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, Imam, Supreme Leader of Iran from February 11, 1979 Khomeini, Houssein, grandson of the Ayatollah Khomeini Kirbo, Charles, friend of President Carter Kissinger, Henry A., former President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs from Jan-

Persons XXXIII Milam, William B., Deputy Director, Office of Monetary Affairs, Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State Miller, William G., Staff Director, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence; emissary to Iran, November 1979 Mondale, Walter F. (Fritz), Vice President Montazeri, Ayatollah Houssein, head of the Iranian Revolutionary Council, November 1979 Moore, Frank, President’s Assistant for Congressional Liaison Moss, Ambler, U.S. Ambassador to Panama Moussavi-Khoeini, Hajjatol Islam, key participant in Embassy takeover Mubarak, Hosni, Vice President of Egypt Murray, Robert, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Near Eastern, African, and South Asian Affairs

XXXIV Persons Pustay, John S., General, USAF; Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Qashqai, Nasser Khan, leader of the Qashqai tribe Quainton, Anthony C.E., Director, Office for Combating Terrorism, Department of State Rafsanjani, Hajatolislam Ali Akbar Hashemi, member, Iranian Revolutionary Council; President of Iranian Consultative Assembly, July 1980 Rafshoon, Gerald, President’s Assistant for Communications

Persons XXXV Suddarth, Roscoe S., Executive Assistant, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

XXXVI Persons U.S. Hostages Held for 444 Days Ahern, Thomas L., Jr. Barnes, Clair Cortland Belk, William E. Blucker, Robert O. Cooke, Donald J. Daugherty, William J. Englemann, Robert Gallegos, William German, Bruce W. Gillette, Duane (Sam) Golancinski, Alan B. Graves, John E. Hall, Joseph M. Hermening, Kevin J. Hohman, Donald R. Holland, Leland J. Howland, Michael Jones, Charles A., Jr. Kalp, Malcolm Kennedy, Moorhead (Mike) C., Jr. Keogh, William F., Jr. Kirtley, Steven Koob, Kathryn L. Kupke, Frederick Lee Laingen, L. Bruce Lauterbach, Steven Lee, Gary E. Lewis, Paul Edward Limbert, John W., Jr. Lopez, James M. McKeel, John D., Jr. Metrinko, Michael J. Miele, Jerry J. Moeller, Michael E. Moore, Bert C. Morefield, Richard H. Needham, Paul M., Jr. Ode, Robert C. Persinger, Gregory A. Plotkin, Jerry Ragan, Regis Roeder, David M. Rosen, Barry M. Royer, William B., Jr. Schaefer, Thomas E. Scott, Charles W. Sharer, Donald Sickman, Rodney (Rocky) V. Subic, Joseph, Jr. Swift, Elizabeth Ann Tomseth, Victor L. Ward, Phillip R.

Persons XXXVII U.S. Hostage Released on July 11, 1980, Because of Illness Queen, Richard I. U.S. Hostages Released, November 1979 Gross, Kathy Hughes, James Johnson, Lillian Maples, Ladell Montagne, Elizabeth Quarles, William Rollins, Lloyd Robinson, Neal (Terry) Tedford, Terri Vincent, Joseph Walker, David Walsh, Joan Williams, Wesley U.S. Hostages Smuggled Out (the Canadian Six), November 1979 Anders, Robert Lijek, Mark J. Lijek, Cora Schatz, Henry L. Stafford, Joseph D. Stafford, Kathleen Members of the Special Operations Review Group (Holloway Group) Holloway, James L., III Gray, Alfred M., Jr. Manor, Leroy J. Piotrowski, John L. Smith, James C. Wilson, Samuel V.

Note on U.S. Covert Actions In compliance with the Foreign Relations of the United States statute that requires inclusion in the Foreign Relations series of comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions, the editors have identified key documents regarding major covert actions and intelligence activities. The following note will provide readers with some organizational context on how covert actions and special intelligence operations in support of U.S. foreign policy were planned and approved within the U.S. Government. It describes, on the basis of declassified documents, the changing and developing procedures during the Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, and Carter Presidencies. Management of Covert Actions in the Truman Presidency The Truman administration’s concern over Soviet “psychological warfare” prompted the new National Security Council to authorize, in NSC 4–A of December 1947, the launching of peacetime covert action operations. NSC 4–A made the Director of Central Intelligence responsible for psychological warfare, establishing at the same time the principle that covert action was an exclusively Executive Branch function. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) certainly was a natural choice but it was assigned this function at least in part because the Agency controlled unvouchered funds, by which operations could be funded with minimal risk of exposure in Washington.1 The CIA’s early use of its new covert action mandate dissatisfied officials at the Departments of State and Defense. The Department of State, believing this role too important to be left to the CIA alone and concerned that the military might create a new rival covert action office in the Pentagon, pressed to reopen the issue of where responsibility for covert action activities should reside. Consequently, on June 18, 1948, a

XL Note on U.S. Covert Actions covered the US Government can plausibly disclaim any responsibility for them.” The type of clandestine activities enumerated under the new directive included: “propaganda; economic warfare; preventive direct action, including sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion against hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance movements, guerrillas and refugee liberations [sic] groups, and support of indigenous anti-Communist elements in threatened countries of the free world. Such operations should not include armed conflict by recognized military forces, espionage, counter-espionage, and cover and deception for military operations.”2 The Office of Policy Coordination (OPC), newly established in the

Note on U.S. Covert Actions XLI ects from the NSC, the PSB, and the departmental representatives originally delegated to advise the OPC, no group or officer outside of the DCI and the President himself had authority to order, approve, manage, or curtail operations.

XLII Note on U.S. Covert Actions group; initiative remained with the CIA, as members representing other agencies frequently were unable to judge the feasibility of particular projects.7 After the Bay of Pigs failure in April 1961, General Maxwell Taylor reviewed U.S. paramilitary capabilities at President Kennedy’s request and submitted a report in June that recommended strengthening high-level direction of covert operations. As a result of the Taylor Report, the Special Group, chaired by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, and including Deputy Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer, assumed greater responsibility for planning and reviewing covert operations. Until 1963 the DCI determined whether a CIA-originated project was submitted to the Special Group. In 1963 the Special Group developed general but informal criteria, including risk, possibility of success, potential for exposure, political sensitivity, and cost (a threshold of $25,000 was adopted by the CIA), for determining whether covert action projects were submitted to the Special Group.8 From November 1961 to October 1962 a Special Group (Augmented), whose membership was the same as the Special Group plus Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Taylor (as Chairman), exercised responsibility for Operation Mongoose, a major covert action program aimed at overthrowing the Castro regime in Cuba. When President Kennedy authorized the program in November, he designated Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, Assistant for Special Operations to the Secretary of Defense, to act as chief of operations, and Lansdale coordinated the Mongoose activities among the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense. The CIA units in Washington and Miami had primary responsibility for implementing Mongoose operations, which included military, sabotage, and political propaganda programs.9 President Kennedy also established a Special Group (Counter-

Note on U.S. Covert Actions XLIII assigned responsibility for the direction and coordination of counter-insurgency activities overseas to the Secretary of State, who established a Senior Interdepartmental Group to assist in discharging these responsibilities.10

XLIV Note on U.S. Covert Actions reaffirmed the DCI’s responsibility for the coordination, control, and conduct of covert operations and directed him to obtain policy approval from the 40 Committee for all major and “politically sensitive” covert operations. He was also made responsible for ensuring an annual review by the 40 Committee of all approved covert operations. The 40 Committee met regularly early in the Nixon administration, but over time the number of formal meetings declined and business came to be conducted via couriers and telephone votes. The Committee actually met only for major new proposals. As required, the DCI submitted annual status reports to the 40 Committee for each approved operation. According to the 1976 Church Committee Final Report, the 40 Committee considered only about 25 percent of the CIA’s individual covert action projects, concentrating on major projects that provided broad policy guidelines for all covert actions. Congress received briefings on only a few proposed projects. Not all major operations, moreover, were brought before the 40 Committee: President Nixon in 1970 instructed the DCI to promote a coup d’ etat against Chilean President Salvador Allende without Committee coordination or approval.14 Presidential Findings Since 1974 and the Operations Advisory Group The Hughes-Ryan amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1974 brought about a major change in the way the U.S. Government approved covert actions, requiring explicit approval by the President for each action and expanding Congressional oversight and control of the CIA. The CIA was authorized to spend appropriated funds on covert actions only after the President had signed a “finding” and informed Congress that the proposed operation was important to national security.15 Executive Order 11905, issued by President Ford on February 18, 1976, in the wake of major Congressional investigations of CIA activities by the Church and Pike Committees, replaced the 40 Committee with the Operations Advisory Group, composed of the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the DCI, who retained responsibility for the planning and implementation of covert operations. The OAG was required to hold formal meetings to develop recommendations for the President regarding a covert action and to conduct periodic reviews of previously-approved operations. EO 11905 also banned all U.S. Government employees from involvement in polit- 14 Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence,

Note on U.S. Covert Actions XLV ical assassinations, a prohibition that was retained in succeeding executive orders, and prohibited involvement in domestic intelligence activities.16 Approval and oversight requirements for covert action continued to be governed by the Hughes-Ryan amendment well into the Carter administration, even as the new administration made alterations to the executive branch’s organizational structure for covert action. President Carter retained the NSC as the highest executive branch organization to review and guide U.S. foreign intelligence activities. As part of a broader NSC reorganization at the outset of his administration, President Carter replaced the Operations Advisory Group (OAG) with the NSC’s Special Coordination Committee (SCC), which explicitly continued the same operating procedures as the former OAG.17 Membership of the SCC, when meeting for the purpose of reviewing and making recommendations on covert actions (as well as sensitive surveillance activities), replicated that of the former OAG—namely: the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; the Secretaries of State and Defense; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and the Attorney General and Director of the Office of Management and Budget (the latter two as observers).The designated chairman of all SCC meetings was the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. Carter formalized the SCC’s re-

XLVI Note on U.S. Covert Actions Also in the first days of the Carter administration, the SCC-I established a lower-level working group to study and review proposals for covert action and other sensitive intelligence matters and report to the SCC-I. This interagency working group was chaired by the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (David Aaron), or in his absence, the NSC Director for Intelligence Coordination. The working group was named the Special Activities Working Group (SAWG). The SAWG was active in early Carter administration reviews of ongoing covert action, and remained active through at least 1978. NSC officials in mid-1978 sought to downgrade or abolish the SAWG and replace it as needed with ad hoc working groups. Internal NSC reviews at the end of the Carter administration state that the SAWG gradually fell out of use. By late 1979, the means for debating, developing, and guiding certain covert actions was an interagency working group chaired by Aaron at the NSC. This group was referred to by several names during the late Carter administration, including the Deputy’s (or Deputies) group, the Aaron group, the interagency group, the Black Chamber, and the Black Room. The Carter administration made use of a new category of presidential findings for “world-wide” or “general” (or “generic”) covert operations. This continued a practice initiated late in the Ford administration in response to the Hughes-Ryan requirement for presidential findings. The worldwide category covered lower-risk operations that were directed at broad policy goals implemented on a worldwide basis as assets allowed. These operations utilized existing assets as well as existing liaison contacts with foreign intelligence or security services, and in some cases also consisted of routine training or procurement undertaken to assist foreign intelligence partners or other agencies of the USG.A new type of document—known as “Perspectives”—provided more specific tasking guidance for these general, worldwide covert activities. Perspectives detailed the themes to be stressed in furtherance of a particular policy goal. Riskier operations required their own presidential finding or Memorandum of Notification (see below). Perspectives were drafted by the CIA and cleared by the Department of State, so that the CIA could vet the operational feasibility and risks of the program while State could assess the diplomatic risks and verify that the program was consistent with overall foreign policy goals. At least initially, Perspectives did not require further coordination with the OAG, SCC, or the President. Once an agreed-upon Perspectives document was finalized by CIA and the Department of State, it was transmitted to the field, and posts were required to make periodic reports on any achievements under the Perspectives guidelines. Beginning in 1978, actions in this worldwide category were authorized by the President as specific line-item additions to a previously existing “world-wide” finding, though Perspectives were still used to provide additional details.

Note on U.S. Covert Actions XLVII Another new document used during the Carter administration was the “Memorandum of Notification” (MON). MONs were initially used to introduce higher-risk, significantly higher-cost, or more geographically-specific operations under a previously-approved worldwide or general objective outlined19 in a Perspectives document. Like Perspectives, MONs had to be coordinated between the CIA and the Department of State, but they also required broader interagency coordination within the SAWG or SCC. MONs subsequently came to be used for significant changes to any type of finding, not just worldwide ones. Entirely new covert actions continued to require new presidential findings. The Hughes-Ryan amendment stipulated that Congress be notified of new findings “in a timely fashion,” but did not specify how much time that meant. During the Carter administration, the CIA typically notified Congress of new covert initiatives within 48 hours, including those outlined in Perspectives or MONs. In October 1980, the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1981—also known as the Intelligence Oversight Act of 1980—scaled back the Hughes-Ryan amendment’s provisions for congressional oversight of covert action. While the requirement to notify Congress about presidential findings remained in place, the new Act limited the committees of Congress that had to be briefed to the two intelligence committees, and also explicitly clarified that this requirement to keep the committees “fully and currently informed” did not constitute a requirement for congressional approval of covert action or other intelligence activities. Moreover, the new Act stipulated that if the President determined it was “essential to limit prior notice to meet extraordinary circumstances affecting vital interests of the United States,” the President could limit prior notice to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the two intelligence committees, the Speaker and minority leader of the House, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate—a group that came to be known as the “Gang of Eight.” If prior notice of a covert action was withheld, the President was required to inform the two intelligence committees “in a timely fashion” and provide a statement of the reasons for not giving prior notice.20 19 Executive Order 12036, “United States Foreign Intelligence Activities,” January

Iran: Hostage Crisis, November 1979–September 1980 First Responses Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, November 4, 1979 SUBJECT Takeover of Embassy Tehran 1. According to reports from Embassy Tehran, an estimated 3,000 Iranian student demonstrators occupied the Embassy this morning. Although they did not brandish any weapons and professed to be engaged in a peaceful sit-in demonstration, the students penetrated the security barricades within the Embassy and have apparently taken the Embassy duty personnel hostage, tying their hands behind their backs and moving them from the inner area of the Embassy. Chargé Laingen, who was not present in the Embassy at the time of the takeover, was at last report located at the Iranian Foreign Ministry. A Radio Tehran broadcast confirms that hostages have been taken and that the demonstrators are demanding the extradition of the Shah. 2. State Department has established a crisis task force headed by Asst Secretary Hal Saunders who is currently monitoring the situation 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The SCC met to review the present situation in Iran and next steps. The following issues were addressed: 1. Presidential Statement. There is an internal rivalry inside Iran between the religious authorities under Khomeini and the more moderate, secular elements represented by Prime Minister Bazargan and Foreign Minister Yazdi. The U.S. Chargé this morning counseled extreme caution in any U.S. public statements which could undercut the position of the Bazargan-Yazdi forces or further inflame anti-American sentiments among the religious groups.2 State and NSC will prepare on an urgent basis a statement which could be issued either by Jody Powell or by the President. The statement will stress that this is a time for coolness, not inflammatory rhetoric. (S) 2. Emissary. The SCC agreed that it would be useful to offer sending an emissary to Khomeini. This could provide a face-saving device for the religious authorities if they are looking for a way out of the situation. The two most likely candidates are Bill Miller, who has personal contacts with individuals close to Khomeini, and Ramsey Clark. On balance, the SCC preferred Miller, but both possibilities will be explored. All agreed that our offer of an emissary should be tied to Iranian willingness to release the hostages. A decision memorandum for the President will be prepared by State.3 In the meantime, State will proceed with efforts to find a secure channel to relay our thinking to Chargé Laingen. Professor Richard Cottam will also be approached to see if he would be willing to undertake a trip to Tehran on a private citizen basis to use his own contacts with religious authorities on behalf of the hostages. (S) 3. Security for the Shah. The Rockefeller group, which is managing the Shah’s affairs, has increased the security around the Shah. We will suggest that they seek help from the New York police if they have not yet done so. We have suggested that they issue a new medical bulletin on the Shah’s condition and the necessity of further surgery as some- 2 Laingen’s message was not found. 3 According to handwritten notes of the meeting, Brzezinski passed on the message that Carter was “rather negative” at first on using Ramsey Clark as an emissary. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 97, Meetings

First Responses Mr. Precht telephoned Ayatollah Beheshti to request his assistance in securing the release of Embassy personnel and evacuation of the Embassy compound by Iranian students. The request was couched in humanitarian terms and included statements of understanding for the views of the Iranian people and the aims of their revolution. The Ayatollah replied that the Iranian people should be expected to become angry when a nation speaks of good relations but shelters Iran’s principal enemy. The Shah could have gone elsewhere for treatment. The presence of Bakhtiar and others in England has also angered the Iranian people and has resulted in the occupation of the UK Embassy as well. Iran will go its own way and although it wants equal relations with all countries, will remain independent. The students have emphasized that they will take care of the security and safety of the hostages. We cannot oppose the zeal of the nation; there can be no separation of the Iranian leadership from the desires of the Iranian people. Meanwhile, Beheshti advised the U.S. to consider carefully “the true causes of happenings which nobody likes.” The Iranian authorities will do their best to control the situation but much will depend upon the U.S. and UK reactions. According to Beheshti, the USG must offer the Iranian people an acceptable answer to the question of the Shah’s presence in the United States. Statements on good relations can help to improve the situation and the Iranian authorities will expect such a statement. Finally, Beheshti agreed to speak to other members of the Revolutionary Council and other decision-makers to see what might be done. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 5, 1979 SUBJECT Iran Iranian internal politics are seriously complicating the hostage negotiations. The division in the government between the religious 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

First Responses Since the Shah is a given and since Khomeini’s need to hold on to power domestically will outweigh any benefits he might receive from cooperation with us (at least in his own mind), this argues for a shift in our own policies. We have made a conscious effort to develop good relations with the Iranian government as a long-term investment. At least publicly, we can continue with that but we should have no illusions that it will pay off. Otherwise, we should shift the balance of our efforts to building up contacts with the secular leadership and other opponents of Khomeini to place ourselves as well as possible for a successor government and to end Khomeini’s rule as soon as possible. The longer Khomeini remains in power, the worse it will be for us— and for Iran. [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] In the meantime, Khomeini will use the hostages for his own political purposes. We must continue our efforts to convince him that this is a losing game by mobilizing all the resources we can. A special emissary still strikes me as a very useful initiative on our part. I suspect (and Bill Miller agrees) that when Khomeini has made his point, he will release the hostages. Unfortunately, our principal channel—Yazdi—is not the most effective way of getting our message through to the Ayatollah, and if we overload that circuit we may merely succeed in getting Yazdi, Bazargan and other possible friendly elements fired. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 5, 1979 SUBJECT Iran You asked how our contingency plans held up when put to the test. Obviously, the answer is: not at all. The extraordinary effort which has been exerted over the past nine months to reinforce the Chancery building proved futile when the mob managed to penetrate the base- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

First Responses White House Defense The Vice President Secretary Harold Brown Zbigniew Brzezinski W. Graham Claytor Hamilton Jordan JCS Jody Powell General David Jones NSC Energy Colonel William Odom Secretary Charles Duncan Gary Sick Justice Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The SCC met to review the situation in Iran. The following issues were addressed: 1. Public statement. A statement was approved for immediate release from the White House press office.2 (U) 2. Emissaries. A Presidential letter is being drafted. The two emissaries (Ramsey Clark and William Miller) should be positioned as close as possible to Tehran in order to be able to respond quickly if we get an indication that they will be accepted by the authorities in Qom. (S) 3. Contacts with Foreign Governments. Secretary Vance briefed on the efforts being made to mobilize support from Islamic nations who may have influence with the Khomeini regime, our contacts with the Turkish Government about possible refuge for our Chargé, and our approach to the Red Crescent (through the ICRC) to visit the hostages at the U.S. Embassy compound in Tehran. (C) 4. Energy. The Department of Energy, together with State and the NSC, will examine the following: (1) the feasibility and desirability of triggering IEA allocation mechanisms in the event of an embargo or reduced production by Iran; (2) explore the possibility of arranging compensatory oil supplies from other oil producers which would permit us to reject any oil threats by Iran; and (3) Secretary Duncan and Chairman Miller will consult with the leaders of U.S. oil companies about steps they could take to minimize the effects of any oil cutoff by Iran. It was estimated that the U.S. share of Iranian production amounts to about 700,000 barrels per day. If Iran successfully shuts off these supplies, it would take several months to be felt in this country, but the effects would eventually be serious. (TS) 2 The White House issued the first public statement on the hostage crisis on November 9, after Carter met with members of the hostage families. Carter referred to the strong feelings, frustration, and “deep anger” felt by all Americans, feelings that he shared, as a result of the hostage situation, and asked U.S. citizens to “exercise restraint” and “refrain from any action that might increase the danger to the American hostages in Tehran.” For the full text of the statement, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp.

First Responses Letter From President Carter to Ayatollah Khomeini1 Washington, November 6, 1979 Dear Ayatollah Khomeini: Based on the willingness of the Revolutionary Council to receive them, I am asking two distinguished Americans, Mr. Ramsey Clark and Mr. William G. Miller, to carry this letter to you and to discuss with you and your designees the situation in Tehran and the full range of current issues between the U.S. and Iran. In the name of the American people, I ask that you release unharmed all Americans presently detained in Iran and those held with them and allow them to leave your country safely and without delay. I ask you to recognize the compelling humanitarian reasons, firmly based in international law, for doing so. I have asked both men to meet with you and to hear from you your perspective on events in Iran and the problems which have arisen between our two countries. The people of the United States desire to have relations with Iran based upon equality, mutual respect, and friendship. They will report to me immediately upon their return. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter

First Responses were watching the situation with bated breath. It was a test of how we would react. The Vice President interjected that this was this week’s test. Secretary Vance reviewed the situation briefly. We had succeeded in reaching Ayatollah Beheshti in Tehran.2 He felt that the sending of emissaries was a good idea and he promised to raise this idea with the Revolutionary Council. We had a plane standing by to fly the emissaries first of all to Athens where they could wait for a decision. There was a short letter from the President which they would take with them.3 The plane was large enough to bring back sixty hostages if they are released. The President wondered whether bringing the Americans out of Iran would constitute breaking relations. Secretary Vance said only if we say that we are breaking relations. We may simply say that we are going to take everyone out. If the Iranians ask for the Chargé to remain, Ramsey Clark has said that he will remain with the Chargé in Tehran. Hamilton Jordan asked whether it may be presumptuous for us to send these emissaries off before we have an answer from the Iranians. Secretary Vance said yes it was, however, we wanted to have them close at hand in the event the answer was yes. If they flew directly through, they could arrive in Tehran tomorrow morning and be in Qom around 10:00 in the morning. It is extremely important that public knowledge of this initiative remain quiet until we have their answer. Hamilton Jordan noted that Frank Moore had told him that the word was already out on the Hill. It was a secret that was not well kept. The President said he saw no downside to having the emissaries in Athens, if the answer is no they can simply come home. 2 In a telephone call of November 6, Precht informed Beheshti that the United States wanted to send Clark and Miller to Tehran or Qom to discuss “all questions outstanding between our two governments once the Americans have been released,” and that the emissaries were bringing a letter from Carter to Khomeini. Precht also asked that a representative from the Red Lion and Sun or one of the Islamic embassies visit the hostages. Beheshti agreed to take up the issues with the Revolutionary Council. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 30, Subject File, 3 See Document 7.

First Responses Secretary Brown noted that it was probably not impossible to evacuate him physically; we did medical evacuation all the time. However, it was a real political problem. The President asked what the Shah had agreed to. Secretary Vance said that the Shah had agreed to have his doctors talk to Iranian doctors about his medical state but not to see him. The President said that the instructions were all right with the one deletion. Secretary Vance went on to note that the Pakistanian Ambassador went to Qom today to see Khomeini. The Algerians are probably willing to weigh in as well. He also noted that there was a man named Hosan ala Hosani in Lebanon who was reputed to be very close to Khomeini. [1 line not declassified] Although they could also approach him through Sarkis. Stan Turner said it would be better to go through Sarkis and the State connection since he would have to have a Presidential Determination to do it. The President noted that he could have a Presidential Determination in fifteen minutes. Dr. Brzezinski noted he had just received a report that Mr. Valeriani of NBC has a story about the emissaries going to Iran which he planned to use this evening. Hodding Carter was trying to dissuade him of using it. Secretary Vance noted that Valeriani was a good man who would listen to reason. The President said that Hodding Carter and Jody Powell and Secretary Vance if necessary should talk to him to try to stop the story. He wondered if other networks had the story as well. Everyone agreed that the indications were that they did not. Secretary Vance went on to brief that the Pakistanis had been very helpful and that their Ambassador would go to Qom to talk with Khomeini. The Turks had chickened out. They were unwilling to offer their Embassy as a refuge for our Chargé. The UN Secretary General is calling in all the Islamic Ambassadors to indicate the seriousness of the international implications of the Iranians’ actions. Stan Turner gave a brief report on the group holding the hostages. They are called the Tunidi Islami. They were originally Islamic fanatics totally devoted to Khomeini. In more recent times they have been infiltrated by the leftists to a considerable degree though they have retained Khomeini support. Recently they got into the Radio Tehran broadcast and criticized the talks that Brzezinski had in Algiers with Bazargan and Yazdi. They are clever and well organized and their objective seems to be to try to bring down the moderates in the govern-

First Responses advance was near zero even if they did not know where the operation was going to be conducted. Tehran cannot easily be reached from the sea. It would probably require staging from bases in either Saudi Arabia or Turkey. Marine helicopters are not equipped to be refueled in the air, therefore, it would be necessary to use Air Force helicopters. Six of these are in Britain, others are in United States and Okinawa, which would require a long movement in order to bring them into position. This would effectively ruin any chance for a lengthy practice session. They were currently examining ways in which helicopters could be moved into position without in any way connecting it with this operation such as an exercise in the Mediterranean. If an operation were conducted during daylight hours, they would probably have to confront the Iranian air force. It was estimated that fifty percent of the Iranian air force could be airborne, if they discovered the helicopters in the air or sighted the C–130s. The area is 500 miles from the Persian Gulf so it would greatly stretch the ability of carrier based aircraft to provide air cover. It might be possible to accomplish that from Turkey or Dhahran. Secretary Vance noted that the Turks would probably turn us down. General Jones added that any advance tip-off would permit them to get the hostages out of the area to unknown locations. Secretary Vance said that he could not see how we could get in without giving them time to kill the hostages. The Vice President noted that they would probably see the helicopters coming perhaps an hour before they arrived. General Jones said that even under the very best of circumstances the chances were great that there would be some casualties. Dr. Brzezinski said that casualties are to be expected in this kind of a situation. He noted that this group is not organized and communications are not good. Their warning system might not function. There was a good chance of conducting the operation with surprise. Secretary Brown said that they might very well have strategic warning if the planes landed in Saudi Arabia. It would mean many hours to organize a staging operation from there. Moreover, it was a five hour flight time from there to Tehran. The President wondered whether an attack team could go in with empty spaces in the helicopter to carry out some hostages. Secretary Brown said that they needed to put a great number of people in, in order to be able to hold the airfield. General Jones noted that a helicopter holds twenty-five persons. There is a 120 man team to go in and only 3 helicopters could land at once. The operation was a very high risk. It would require up to one to two hours on the ground inside the compound if everything worked

First Responses Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could look at the punitive options. Secretary Brown referring to the earlier discussion noted that we could defend the compound for an hour. Hamilton Jordan noted that the press would not keep quiet on this end and that was the biggest risk to warning them we were up to something. The President said the Iranians were not idiots. They would not be sitting and waiting for us to take them out. They would move the hostages out of the Embassy to other locations. He wondered whether the civilians were in fact coming out. Secretary Vance said we don’t know at this point. We have no one to talk to, however, normal scheduled airline flights are continuing. The President wondered if the British could pass word to our people. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could ask the companies to tell their people to get out. Secretary Vance said he would check. He thought that that had been done but he was not sure. General Jones noted that for a retaliatory attack Kharg Island was probably the most critical facility in Iran. Originally they thought it would require very little to seize the island. Later today however they had discovered that there were about 250 soldiers, another 250 air defense personnel, and several hundred (up to 500) military personnel involved in a hover craft program there. Our tactics could be to either seize the island or to impose a blockade. We cannot effectively block the entire Persian Gulf since it is impossible to discriminate between ships and their destinations. Moreover, Kharg Island is not so easy to blockade; it is very close to the coast and there are many aircraft. Secretary Brown noted that Kharg Island provided a bargaining lever. We could show the Iranians that if they take our oil we can block theirs. This is a very dangerous process, however. He wondered whether it would not shut off other oil in the Gulf. How would the Soviets react. Dr. Brzezinski said the reaction would depend on circumstances. If we did something like this right now, it would be extremely bad and the reaction around the world would be extremely critical. However, later if killings occur they might possibly consider it alright particularly if they saw Iran disintegrating. The President wondered about an aerial attack on the island. Secretary Brown said that would be more permanent since it would destroy the installation. Dr. Brzezinski noted that seizing the island provided a bargaining lever. We would have land and people in our own custody which permits us to bargain.

First Responses Dr. Brzezinski said the results of that would be to simply punish our friends. He thought that there was more merit in taking the little islands inside Gulf. The President said they would probably simply say take them and not worry about it. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought it would bother them. They have a strong territorial instinct. Going after Kharg Island would create a worldwide oil crisis. Secretary Brown said the three small islands would provide no bargaining lever. Dr. Brzezinski noted that if they only kill a few hostages we need a bargaining leverage; if they should kill all of them we need a punitive action. Secretary Brown said they will probably kill all of the hostages if we do anything at all. Secretary Vance noted that there were also economic steps that we should look at. Secretary Brown noted that we could possibly seize an Iranian ship. The Vice President suggested looking very closely at the economic steps. He found this to be an outrageous precedent. He wondered what was the legal status of an act such as this of taking diplomats hostage. Was it an act of war? Dr. Brzezinski said it was contrary to a great many agreements to which Iran was a party but it was not a casus beli unless they begin killing hostages. He wondered if we should consider taking it to the United Nations Security Council and seeking a denunciation of Iran’s action. Secretary Brown said the Third World would be against us. The Vice President said he was not so sure. For instance in cases of piracy and terrorism there were only a few extreme nations who would not condemn those actions. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the reaction by Iraq and Kuwait were both interesting. Both nations were quite concerned and this might be reflected in any UN debate. The Vice President said he would like to have a legal analysis of the situation. He suspected that something like this had happened many times before. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should take a much closer look at the military option. First of all we should look at a simple punitive act which would be effective but would not get us engaged in a long military campaign. Secondly, we should look at other actions which would provide us with leverage to deter future action by Iran. He

First Responses attack on the Iranian military as a punitive gesture would make much more difficult actions that we might want to take in the event the country came apart. The President said we had not adequately assessed the possibilities of an embargo on Iran assets and economic steps that we could take. They were very vulnerable on this score. If we had to move, we should move on a broad front including economics. To the extent possible we should avoid the loss of life. Economic options were potentially much better than bombing. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the United States could get away with only economic steps if American citizens are killed. After a long pause the President said that he doubted it. We would probably have to take some punitive action but he wanted to do something which would avoid heavy costs and lengthy problems of trying to extricate ourselves. Stan Turner interjected that we really ought to try to isolate Iran and blockade it. The President agreed and said that we should insist that our European allies cooperate with us on an air blockade as well as naval blockade. They might not agree but we should go to the mat on this one. Jody Powell noted that our blockade as leverage is alright but if it is designed as a punitive action where would we end it. Dr. Brzezinski said we may need both. Even if they kill the hostages we will still need leverage to prevent further action against U.S. citizens remaining in Iran. Hamilton Jordan wondered if the American citizens were truly identifiable. Secretary Brown wondered whether we should look at the pipeline which carries Iran’s refined product from the refinery to the market place. The Vice President noted that the weather is getting cold and this might be a real vulnerability. Secretary Brown said it would be interesting in several ways since it would conceivably make them rely on us for refined products. Hamilton Jordan wondered how much lead time it would take to conduct an air strike of that sort. The President wondered how long it would take if we wanted simply to bomb refineries. General Jones noted that the Carrier Midway is about five days away. Another alternative would be to bring in B–52s from Guam which could be done in about 48 hours or 72 hours at the most. They could not land at Diego Garcia. We had intentionally kept the runway at Diego Garcia too narrow for the use of B–52s, however, refueling air-

First Responses Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 6, 1979 SUBJECT Military Options for Iran This is to update you on my investigations following the SCC this morning.2 Unless the JCS is told firmly to go forward with staging for an operation with something like DELTA, they will not get down to the tough issues and work them out. I worked over the things General Jones brought to the NSC meeting this afternoon, and they merely reveal two significant problems: —the long time it takes to get helicopters and forces into position near Iran; —the lack of intelligence on the situation on the American Embassy compound. Given these problems, the probability of achieving surprise is very small, and the probability of large numbers of casualties at the embassy is large. Thus, I am forced to recommend against military options based on what I know now. Reluctantly, the JCS planning group is developing a number of additional possibilities. To overcome the intelligence gap, they may recommend sending in observers who could pass as Germans, or Hungarians, or some other nationality. Means for communicating their reports, however, are not easy to find. To overcome the transportation gap, they may recommend sending DELTA covertly as civilian tourists to some staging point in Europe. They would travel individually, and they would regroup at a U.S. air base. Their equipment would go by separate means, a transport flight to the base. I would be supportive of these moves if the JCS believes discovery of the DELTA move is unlikely. The intelligence effort seems imperative in any event. You may know more as a result of the NSC this afternoon. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses 4. Military Options. Thus far, the press has speculated on military options but has been unable to get any official sources to talk. It was agreed that no U.S. forces would be moved while the emissaries are conducting their talks. The principal weakness of the possible rescue operation is intelligence on exactly where the hostages are being held, how their captors are armed, etc. This is being worked on, but JCS continues to be very pessimistic at the odds of a successful operation. [1 line not declassified]. Stan Turner presented a Presidential Finding which would permit him to employ agents of influence and propaganda efforts to assist.6 The SCC recommended approval. The JCS will continue with planning on the possible rescue and punitive measures. We will not for the moment expand our contacts with former Iranian military and intelligence figures, although we have received strong indications on the part of some of them to launch a counterattack through Kurdistan. A meeting will be held tomorrow to examine the military and intelligence issues in greater detail. (TS) 5. Iranian Nationals and Property. The Attorney General presented a report on Presidential powers. Although the powers are wide, there is no quick, effective way to deport Iranians who are out of status.7 Justice will coordinate with local authorities and U.S. attorneys to try to withhold permission for Iranian student demonstrations during this difficult time. The SCC feared that popular reaction could be violent and thereby create a threat to the hostages. (C) 6 Brzezinski summarized the attached Presidential Finding as permitting the CIA to “employ agents of influence and propaganda actions aimed at ensuring the welfare and well-being of all U.S. nationals in Iran.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, November 7; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses away in response to coercion would be an act of acquiescence to blackmail unprecedented in American history. (S) 5. Economic. Secretary Vance presented a paper on possible economic countermeasures.9 Other studies are also under way. (S) 6. Military Contingencies. Further study has been given to the rescue option. The JCS does not believe it is viable. There would be a very high risk of failure, even with very good intelligence on the location of the hostages and other operational detail. (TS) A number of punitive options have been examined in more detail. An attack on the refinery at Abadan would potentially destroy a large proportion of domestic fuel stocks and reduce refinery capacity for kerosene, heating oil and gasoline by more than half. There are three specific targets: the power plant, the refinery and the catalytic converter. The power plant could be repaired relatively quickly, although it would be very disruptive. The refinery would take about six months to replace, and the catalytic converter would take several years. The operation could be conducted by carrier-based aircraft from the Midway (4–5 days away), a Seal team to be put ashore (could be organized in 2–3 days),

First Responses hereafter? Vance meekly argued that we don’t have to decide these things as a whole; we can decide the Shah’s disposition and then later do something different in connection to Tehran. ZB responded that he was quite prepared to move the Shah as part of a strategy to get our Embassy personnel back and then retaliate, but only as part of an overall strategy decided in advance. Vance and Brown argued that an overall strategy is not essential because we can take the decisions a step at a time. ZB repeated his lecture, adding that this would be a historical first for the United States as abject capitulation, not a first he cared to participate in creating: backing down before foreign mobs, sullying the dignity of US values and power. He explained that if he were a relative of one of the hostages, he would naturally be grieved about their fate and want a concession made for them. But in the position of responsibility for recommending a decision to the President, he could not let those feelings prevail. We in the SCC must look at the larger American interest and the significance for the fate of Americans and our allies elsewhere. From that viewpoint, Vance and Brown were making no sense at all. Again, he agreed to consider a plan of deception, using the Shah to get our people back, but only as a tactical ruse, not as an ignominious act of surrender. Brown waffled, agreeing with ZB but also arguing that we should not take an overall strategic decision. Rather, take each in light of the current situation. ZB confronted him, “You can’t have it both ways, Harold; you must decide whether you will surrender the Shah to the mob or not. If not, you must accept my points.” Brown leaned, sheepishly, toward agreeing with ZB but tried to leave a loop hole for later escape. Vance’s “lawyer” Weltanschaung, dump the Shah now if expedient, was repeated. Civiletti was the only other person to speak up. He supported ZB fully. Strangely, General Jones remained silent and poker faced. One could only take away a feeling of disgust. Brown’s squeamish smiles and Vance’s naturally dull face revealed, in this exchange, a shocking lack of character and moral courage. A sniveling spinelessness informed their performance. One can only wonder if they are worthy of the power with which they are entrusted. I confess to a deep sense of satisfaction in watching ZB confront them so directly and candidly with the political and moral implications of their positions.

First Responses politically for being out of the country at the time of a major crisis. I would predict that it would cost you your re-election as President. Suppose the chances of this happening are 1 in 10. Should you have to take such a gamble? An argument could be made that to cancel the trip would send a bad signal. I think that it would have to be made clear that you are staying merely to give this situation your complete and undivided attention. I don’t see how Joe Clark could fault you for delaying your trip to a later date. Mr. President, this crisis is a crisis in every sense. It is a crisis for your Presidency, for the hostages and for our country’s image around the world. I can see no good or valid reason for you to leave the country—even for 24 hours—while this is going on. Your trip to Canada will be perceived by the American people as largely ceremonial. Issues and problems will pop up here that will require your attention and thought. I don’t see how you can justify your trip under these circumstances. (CBS news last night devoted 55% of its coverage last night to Iran. The Today Show this morning spent the full first 20 minutes of its half hour on Iran).2 2 A handwritten addition by Jordan at the end of the memorandum reads: “If you even consider cancellation of the trip, it should be done earlier instead of later. I have not talked to the VP about this. Possibly someone should.” Carter did not go to Canada.

First Responses [less than 1 line not declassified] the possibility of serious psychological trauma for the hostages. The cable from Geneva2 reflects some of the same concern. Under the circumstances, we should have in mind a contingency plan to ensure the hostages receive prompt medical and psychiatric support on their release. 2 Not further identified. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 9, 1979 SUBJECT The Soviet Role in the Crisis in Iran The SCC discussions to date have conspicuously ignored the Soviet variables in the power equation in Iran. I am sure they are clear in your mind but as a reminder I enumerate the following points: First, the Soviet strategy in the Persian Gulf region for several years has been aimed at demobilization. The seizure of power in Ethiopia and later in Afghanistan2 showed a Soviet willingness to set in motion upheavals in Iran, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula. Clearly the Soviet decision on this strategy was based on the assumption that they could ride the upheavals and benefit. Second, the Tudeh cadres and other pro-Soviet groups have proved relatively weak as an objective basis for Soviet influence within Iran. The obvious tactic for them, therefore, is to exacerbate tension and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [cable number not declassified]

First Responses upon the Soviets, which is now permitted by a clause in the constitution. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: In early November 1979, this particular clause was among several abrogated by the Iranian Government in the Soviet-Iranian treaty of 1921.) 11. ACQ: [less than 1 line not declassified] 12. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: Embassy and DAO at Paris. Sent to [2 lines not declassified] USCINCEUR, COMIDEASTFOR, CINCUSNAVEUR, CINCPAC, IPAC, CSG, PACFLT, PACAF, USNMR SHAPE for General Rogers. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses 3. Iranian Assets. There is a report that Iran has ordered the withdrawal of all their assets from U.S. banks.5 The Federal Reserve can probably delay acting on this, but private banks will find it much more difficult. By declaring a national emergency, all Iranian transactions could be blocked. Dr. Brzezinski and Lloyd Cutler will talk to Treasury Secretary Miller and ask that he contact Federal Reserve Chairman Volcker to see what can be done to delay any withdrawals without taking dramatic, overt actions. Their views will be sought on the implications of any freeze or other public act on our relations with other major depositors. (TS)

First Responses 1. A group of [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranian expatriates [less than 1 line not declassified] have formed a group, in Paris, France, to organize a new, pro-Western government in Iran. The group hopes to shut down oil production in Iran during November 1979 as part of its campaign to remove the current leadership from Iran’s political scene. The group is considering selecting either an Iranian general or former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar to be the titular leader of the provisional government, which could be confirmed subsequently in a national referendum. A shadow government has been named to the extent of having three choices listed for each of several principal government jobs. Some of those on the list are Iranian expatriates, [1½ lines not declassified]. Bakhtiar [less than 1 line not declassified] is not everyone in the group’s first choice to head the government, but he is the most likely nominee because he already is in France, and previously has served as Iranian Prime Minister. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: [less than 1 line not declassified]2 2. The Paris group has made high-level contacts with at least two Persian Gulf governments in an effort to secure support for the venture. [3 lines not declassified] Major Western governments apparently have not been approached by the Paris group. The expatriates have not received any firm pledges of support from any foreign government; the search for signs of encouragement from such quarters continues. 3. The group’s timetable was dictated in part by [less than 1 line not declassified] the United States Government intended to replace or repair some of Iran’s military equipment commencing in January 1980. The group concluded its best chance of success involved taking action in Iran prior to that time. The expatriates reportedly believe the problem is not so much the ouster of the Ayatollah Khomeini as it is having enough support internally to keep a new government in power.

First Responses geous analyses of his representatives in Washington and New York, and the flood of messages from previously sympathetic or uncommitted observers throughout the world should at least have given him grounds for concern that the revolution is being seriously damaged. (S) Of more immediate importance—and more difficult for us to influence—is his concern about his own power position. As you know, I am convinced that he is exploiting this situation (as he exploited the Kurdish situation) to consolidate his direct control. In each case, he has used a popular cause to rally public opinion against a well-identified enemy, thereby taking their minds off the failures of his own rule. He has also used these occasions to accomplish specific political objectives. In the Kurdish case, he appointed himself commander in chief of the armed forces, closed down a troublesome press, and banned opposition political activity which was beginning to develop some clout. In the present case he has disposed of the Bazargan government, which had become a thorn in his side. (S) Just before going to Algiers, Bazargan had submitted to Khomeini a petition signed by most of the members of his government calling for the disestablishment of the Islamic Council of Experts on the grounds that they had exceeded their mandate in revising the constitution. Khomeini must also have known that Yazdi, Bazargan and others were meeting with U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified]—which he would interpret as nothing more than plotting against him. Although Bazargan was quite open in admitting his powerlessness, he also refused to shirk his responsibility to inform Khomeini of what was going wrong and the disagreeable steps necessary to correct it. Was he the bearer of bad tidings one time too many? (S) Every policy option available to us should be examined first in light of whether it will contribute to persuading Khomeini that his own power position is being undermined by his present course of action. We have very little to work with, especially since Khomeini will be making his judgment in terms of the facts on the ground rather than words. Some thoughts: —[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —I have suggested to State that they take advantage of the telex link to Bruce Laingen (directly through the Iranian Foreign Minister) to give periodic updates on events as we see them. We could slip in a few facts to give the Iranians pause, e.g. the USG is being flooded with popular calls to take drastic action but the President is resisting. This telex link is probably the most authoritative way we have of communicating with the Iranians and we should try to use it imaginatively. (S)

First Responses Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 12, 1979 Prospect of Indefinite Impasse in Iran We think that enough evidence is now on hand to warrant the judgment that 1) diplomatic action has almost no prospect of being successful in liberating our hostages in Tehran; 2) no economic or other American pressure on the Iranian regime (including U.S. military action) is likely to be any more successful in securing their safe release; and 3) with a continuation of present conditions, the detention of the hostages could continue for some months. No significant improvement has taken place in the status of the American hostages despite seven days of exceptionally intensive American diplomatic efforts. The Iranian authorities have made it clear that they are—and will remain—scornful of all foreign initiatives to effect the release of the hostages On the other hand, during the same period, the Iranian position has solidified, and the Iranian determination to stand firm has been greatly strengthened: —With ever increasing enthusiasm, the great majority of Iranians has supported the Embassy seizure. Demands for the return of the Shah and attacks on the U.S. are being voiced with growing stridency. Khomeini and others have played on the martyrdom theme by praising the glory of dying for Islam and the nation. —The adamancy of the national leaders and of the “student” captors is now so intense that none but Khomeini himself now has any flexibility in this affair (not that he has shown any signs of a desire to exercise such flexibility in any event). —The Iranian authorities have enunciated a conceptual framework of self-justification, and it has gained great national acceptance. According to them, the Shah is a criminal, and human decency demands his 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

First Responses Paper Prepared by the Interagency Group1 Washington, November 12, 1979 Political Actions Contingency Planning At SCC direction, David Aaron chaired a small interagency meeting to consider political action/intelligence aspects of the Iran crisis. The following points emerged: —The key issue is whether we now want to undermine Khomeini with a view to his overthrow. Up to now, we have tried to get along with him in the hopes that moderates associated with him will prevail. The assessment is that Khomeini is no longer in control of events, that leftward radicalization is increasing and that a struggle for power is under way. The moderates and we may be better off without Khomeini than with him. —[1 paragraph (14½ lines) not declassified] —If we decide to try any of this, should we begin before the hostage issue is resolved? No one had a clear assessment of whether stirring up divisions among the current leadership would increase or reduce Khomeini’s flexibility or the chances of getting the hostages back safely. Finally, it should be stressed that at this point we cannot be confident that we can actually overthrow Khomeini and install a moderate regime. We can influence a process that is already underway but not control it. There are very preliminary planning judgments that will now get systematic scrutiny and assessment on a very close hold basis. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses provide an advisory opinion by tomorrow on revocation of existing visas which have not yet been used, exclusion of further Iranian nationals from entering the U.S., and the best means for prohibiting or delaying issuance of additional visas. One possibility is to request that all new visas be referred to Washington for review.3 It was noted that about half of the visas granted in the past year were to minority groups (Jewish and Bahá’í), and a formal exclusion could impact on these 2. Unofficial Trade Embargo.4 On the military side, State and Defense have talked to the principal companies involved and they will cooperate on a quiet basis. Commerce will have a paper ready today cataloguing other areas of commerce except food. Treasury will provide a recommendation tomorrow on how best to proceed. Secretary Bergland has provided to the NSC a survey of food exports to Iran which will be examined today.5 All agreed that interference with food exports is quite different from other commodities and should be handled with great care. Any work on a trade embargo is to be handled as extremely sensitive. (S) 3. Iranian Assets. There was no unusual movement of Iranian assets from U.S. foreign branch banks yesterday. The initial report of withdrawal of Iranian assets appears to have been exaggerated.6 Major U.S. banks have been asked privately to keep us closely informed of any request for withdrawal and to delay action on the grounds of assuring authenticity of the order after the change of government in Tehran. All communications on this are to be conducted through Treasury. State [less than 1 line not declassified] will turn off [less than 1 line not declassified] normal contacts with banks. Treasury has done a draft paper for the NSC on steps to be taken in the event of a freeze, and the machinery is ready if needed. Iranian assets are estimated at $6–7 billion in U.S. banks, versus about $3 billion in U.S. bank loans to 4. Energy. Foreign and domestic reactions to yesterday’s announcement7 have been uniformly positive thus far. DOE has prepared a list 3 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “I agree.” 4 On the front page of the Summary of Conclusions of the November 12 SCC meeting, Carter wrote: “Zbig: Expedite proposal for unofficial economic embargo.” The meeting did not discuss an embargo. (Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 105) 5 Carter underlined “paper,” “recommendation,” and “survey of food exports” and wrote “to me” in the margin. Several of these papers were conveyed to Brzezinski under a November 13 covering memorandum from Sick. (Carter Library, National Security

First Responses 4. UN Security Council. The Iranians are calling for a UNSC meeting to establish a commission to investigate the Shah’s crimes and return his assets to Iran.10 All agreed that a formal debate in the Security Council was undesirable, and Ambassador McHenry has been instructed to attempt to turn off the request.11 If a UNSC meeting cannot be avoided, we would take the position that there should be no discussion of the Shah until after the hostages are released, since that represents a clear violation of the UN Charter and international 5. Diplomatic Relations. The SCC believed that severing diplomatic relations with Iran at this point would complicate the efforts which are presently under way, including the PLO and the Iranian Chargé who is trying to get a meeting with Khomeini. It could also introduce unpredictable and possibly unproductive consequences from the Iranians; however, the possibility of a break in relations should not be precluded as part of a larger deal. Secretary Vance felt that other friendly nations would probably resist any attempt to persuade them to join us in breaking relations. The British Ambassador only yesterday recommended to London that they cut back as far as possible but maintain their staff in Tehran. The Mexican withdrawal is related to their own expectation that the Shah will return to Mexico at some point. State will do a more complete assessment of these questions on an urgent basis. (S) 6. Contact by Kurds. State has informed our Embassy in London not to meet with the Kurdish delegation seeking to contact us there.12 We could probably not get the Kurds to do more than they are already doing, and the contact could be used as evidence of hostile intent. (S) 7. Embassy Security. State briefed the press last week on the precautions which had been taken at the embassy, but the story got little play. State will make the attempt again to get the story out. (C)13 10 As reported in a memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, November 13. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 17, SCC Meeting #200 11 Not found. 12 The Department instructed the Embassy not to “have any contact with dissident Kurds at this time. Any public suggestion that we are having such contacts could have dangerous consequences for the hostages.” (Telegram 294989 to London, November 13; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 30, Subject

First Responses groups taking a specific action in Khomeini’s name following his general policy statements. [3½ lines not declassified] Although individual members of the occupying forces are reportedly equipped with light arms, the initial entry into the Embassy came as a protest demonstration rather than an armed attack. Some 400 to 500 people were reportedly involved in the initial entry. Their number apparently has since been reduced to about 150 to 200. [portion marking not declassified] The occupying group is well organized. There is a security force of 20 to 30 men outside the Embassy gates, some are carrying walkietalkies, to control the crowd of anti-US demonstrators on the street. Five or six of these guards are outside the main gate and three or four are at each of the other gates or on patrol around the Embassy in several jeep-type vehicles and reportedly are armed with G–3 rifles. Watch posts reportedly have been established in buildings within at least a one-kilometer radius of the Embassy. According to one report, a group has been organized outside the Embassy to come to the assistance of the occupying forces if required. [portion marking not declassified] Inside the Embassy gates, which are chained and padlocked, a further security force of 20 to 30 men is reportedly located in the parking lot. These guards also are armed with light weapons, including G–3 rifles, machineguns, machinepistols, grenade launchers, and handgrenades. The compound and adjacent buildings are illuminated at night. Despite the presence of armed guards and the daily demonstrations outside the Embassy gates, the atmosphere inside the Embassy compound is reportedly calm, and groups of up to 60 of the occupying force gather periodically for prayer services. The relations between the hostages and their captors is apparently good. The hostages, who have been dispersed to at least three separate buildings in the Embassy compound, have been provided with food and reading material from the Embassy library. There have been no reports of violence directed at the hostages. [portion marking not declassified] Composition of the Occupying Forces Although there are conflicting accounts on the forces occupying the Embassy, the principal group involved reportedly is the “Islamic Monotheists,” a group of Islamic militants devoted to Ayatollah Khomeini that was formed a number of years ago. The group has been infiltrated recently by leftists who reportedly compose nearly 50 percent of the present membership and who strongly influence the group’s policies. On 9 November, when documents apparently recovered from Embassy files were released, a statement was issued by spokesmen for the group that was couched in leftist jargon and contained sophisticated analysis which indicates that at least some members of the occupying group are university educated. [portion marking not declassified]

First Responses gan’s government was even more suspicious of radical Palestinian activity in Iran. We cannot rule out the possibility, however, that the PFLP is involved with at least some faction of the group occupying the Embassy. For a number of years the PFLP has had contacts with Iranian leftists. [portion marking not declassified] The Palestine Liberation Organization’s Role [1½ lines not declassified] Principal PLO leaders, however, moved quickly to gain what international and American good will they could from the situation. They presumably believe they gained a minor victory in the relaxation of Washington’s ban on contacts with them, but their primary goal appears to be the major improvement in their image if they can play a mediating role in obtaining the release of the hostages. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] Memorandum for the Files1 Washington, November 13, 1979

First Responses Khomeini; ministries are ill staffed and demoralized; a small war is going on with the Kurds, and the Kurds are not losing; an angry mob of unemployed workers yesterday attacked the Ministry of Labor to demand action on jobs; today there is a report that Iraqi helos penetrated Iranian airspace and drew AA fire—all this and many other problems while they are engaged in a test of will with a superpower. Besides observing that it could not happen to a nicer bunch of guys, we also need to be alert to the signs of total systemic breakdown. Khomeini has gathered all power to himself and the Revolutionary Council, but he is an old man, with no experience in government, and a “staff” composed of squabbling clerics. The risk of serious mistakes, miscalculations, or irrational acts of sheer frustration is very high. There may not be much we can do about it, but we should not assume we are working with an opponent who is capable of exercising real judgment. Memorandum for the Record by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1 Washington, November 14, 1979 In a telephone conversation with an American contact, I received the following report at 0700: the American contact had received a phone call from Khalid al-Hassan in Germany. The report was as follows: —Hani al-Hassan, the PLO representative in Tehran, saw Khomeini for three and one-half hours Tuesday, November 13. —They have set up a committee consisting of Khomeini, Hani al- Hassan, a representative of the students in the American Compound, a representative of the Foreign Ministry (possibly Bani-Sadr himself). 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

First Responses Editorial Note On November 14, 1979, Iranian Acting Foreign Minister Abol Hasan Bani-Sadr told reporters in Tehran that Iran would transfer approximately $12 billion deposited in U.S. banks to branches of banks that would not be able to block the funds. He specifically mentioned Iranian withdrawal of funds from Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, headed by David Rockefeller. (John Kifner, “Iran Defends Move To

First Responses 5. Another consideration in the above context, said Mr. Aaron, is the Soviet position and response in the current situation. What are the Soviets doing and how can we counter this? DDCI plans to task NFAC to respond to this requirement. 6. At the conclusion of the meeting, the DDCI noted that it would seem feasible to undertake destabilization measures in Iran; e.g., orchestrating a press campaign that Khomeini is leading the country to disaster; inducing defections; announcing these defections; having Bakhtiar go public in his opposition; organizing anti-Khomeini rallies, etc. 7. A paper prepared by NE Division (attached) was given to the DDCI as background and talking points for this meeting. Charles G. Cogan Attachment Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, undated Possible Options to Increase Pressure on Khomeini, Assuming Policy Decision to Unseat Him I. While the hostages are still held, and there are believable assurances that they will not be harmed: (A) [1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified] (B) [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] (C) [1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified] (D) Orchestrate an open anti-Khomeini rallying call by Bakhtiar. Insure widespread press play. [1 line not declassified] (E) [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] (F) Float rumor (press) campaign suggesting other western countries are soon to freeze Iranian assets. (G) Establish contact with [less than 1 line not declassified] to confer with him on options for possible future government. II. While the hostages are being held, but we are uncertain as to their well-being (threats having been made, one or more having already been executed); and/or the post hostage situation: 4 Secret.

First Responses Memorandum From the Inspector General, Central Intelligence Agency (Waller) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, November 15, 1979 SUBJECT Iran Situation 1. This memorandum contains an idea for your consideration and further exploration.

First Responses the administration on CIA to find political action solutions in Iran; congressional/public concerns for Iran will provide an atmosphere permitting such operations.” That the above scenario is unfolding as predicted is no tribute to my prescience; it is the result of an entirely inevitable, predictable dynamic. That the administration made an honest try to get along with Bazargan, provide military supplies, etc., was good insofar as the onus of the deterioration of relations now rests firmly on the Iranians. But, if this short-lived policy of accommodation with Khomeini was based on a genuine conviction that Bazargan or some other reasonable government under Khomeini could work and cooperate with the U.S., then this policy was demonstrably unworkable. At any rate, the situation as it stands today is: —The left on one major occasion on 12 August 1979 tested its street strength with impressive showing. That it has not made a serious bid for street control and power is probably based on the conviction that the time is not ripe. Khomeini, particularly now that he benefits from a new anti-American wave, is not yet dislodgeable [less than 1 line not declassified] and economic disintegration has not reached an advanced enough stage. The left is still biding its time. —The moderates in Iran’s political spectrum are becoming rapidly disenchanted, and with Khomeini having obviously jettisoned responsible government in favor of medieval Islamic bigotry, totally devoid of statecraft, this process will accelerate rapidly. —The various “conservative, middle-class land-owners” referred to above seem, indeed, to be finding a rallying point in Bakhtiar. Bakhtiar has, in all likelihood, or will seek, Iranian expatriate private backing and will probably seek backing from the U.S. if he has not already done so (feelers through the Qashqai, etc.). Bakhtiar’s move, if it ever comes, (or some other move by moderates, possibly military) will precede a leftist bid for urban power and the leftists will be the urban beneficiaries of civil war in the streets. They will have the advantage thus of not having to take on Khomeini, a semi-deified saint in the eyes of Iran’s common man; they will instead pose as the champions of order in the face of a bourgeois effort to depose Khomeini. The groundwork for the other feature of my scenario, tribal, provincial autonomy, is already taking place. The Kurds clearly are beyond reach of the center and intend to stay that way even though it means withdrawing into the mountains. Khuzistan Arabs, possibly incited by Iraq, have had to be brutally suppressed by Admiral Madani (who has now resigned and may not be replaced by such a resolute man). And, [1½ lines not declassified], the Qashqai strategy is to build a tribal coalition to maintain southern tranquility ostensibly as a favor to Khomeini, but actually to get into position to bid for power under a nationalist banner in the event of civil war in which Khomeini is martyred. In many ways, the Qashqais, using a provincial base of power, are

First Responses [2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified] [1 page (heading and 7 paragraphs) not declassified] Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 15, 1979 Cy: Don McHenry called while you were away to report a conversation he has had with the Secretary General. Basically it relates to a response which the Secretary General wishes to make to an indication from Tehran that he may now be welcome. He is working with Rafiq Ahmed on a scenario in which he would like our input. Basically the scenario would call for the Secretary General to go to Iran. His first requirement would be the release of the hostages. Next, he would need something relating to the departure of the Shah but would want that to be part of the scenario and would not want it to happen before things were worked out. Thirdly, there must be some recognition of the criminality problem possibly through establishing a commission of former ICJ judges. Finally, there must be elements suggesting the beginning of a return to normality in US–Iran relations. He indicated that he may find it necessary to make it successful to come up with statements indicating that he understands the emotionalism of the revolution but he would want to discuss any such statement with us in advance. David D. Newsom2 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary

First Responses Attachment Chart Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, November 15, 1979 RESCUE OPERATION OPTIONS Probability of Success by:5 Type of External Key Factors Driving Plan Operation Support Nov 20 Nov 27 Dec 3 Dec 10 Dec 17 Probabilities A Air land rescue team; [less than 1 line Very Very Low Low- Medium Vulnerability of air lead; helo to Tehran and not declassified] low low Medium availability of helos. return; fly out. B Air land rescue team; [less than 1 line Very Low Low- Medium Medium Vulnerability of air lead; helo to Tehran and not declassified] low Medium availability of helos. [less return; fly out. than 1 line not declassified] distances less; chance of land exfiltration higher. 4 Top Secret; Sensitive. An updated chart was attached to a November 27 memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski. This memorandum detailed the status of the CIA’s role in developing a rescue operation. Turner noted that the CIA would continue to play an important role in “providing technical and operational guidance and logistical support “to virtually all aspects of the Delta team planning effort” and that “interface” between CIA and Defense and Delta “in planning for a hostage rescue operation has been extensive and continuous.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses loans, and we have no authority or any inclination to interfere in what is a private banking matter. Thus far there has been no attempt to interfere with U.S. accounts in Iran. (C) 4. Energy. Secretary Duncan drew attention to press indications that we are requesting other nations not to purchase the oil freed by our embargo. He noted that it was in our interest to permit this oil to enter the world market. All agreed that we would not attempt to interfere with contractual purchase of the oil, but no public statement is necessary.5 (C) 5. Visas. Dr. Brzezinski relayed the President’s approval of postponing revocation of visas until Monday. (C) Political-Military Issues 1. Security. The Attorney General reported that preliminary evidence resulting from a search of the premises of the Iranian students arrested in Baltimore suggests that there may be some truth in an earlier report that Khomeini has ordered agitators in this country with false documentation and specific instructions to stir up violence. There may be a security issue separate from the prior decision to revalidate 2. White Paper. The Department of State, in coordination with the NSC, will prepare a White Paper on administration actions dealing with Iran.6 (C) 5 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed next to it. 6 Carter wrote “good, expedite” in the right margin. Paper Prepared by the Joint Staff1 Washington, November 17, 1979 BEST ESTIMATE OF SITUATION AT THE COMPOUND Immediate Security of Compound: Although not confirmed by hard intelligence, it appears that hostages are being held in at least five and possibly eight locations within 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses would entail having people in the city providing hard intelligence, developing safe havens in advance, arranging for guides, transportation, communications, and general support. Some progress is being made in developing this capability and personnel involved believe much can be done but some time will be required to reach the desired level of effectiveness. Insertion concept is to have two MC–130 “Combat Talon” aircraft (specially equipped C–130 aircraft and crews trained for blackout night operations at low altitude over hostile territory) take off from a country in area (planning now from Aswan, Egypt) and airdrop or assault land Delta personnel in outskirts of Tehran to be met by personnel in-country, transported to safe havens, and spend approximately 24 hours reconnoitering and preparing for assault the following night.2 If successful in freeing hostages, force will then move to transportation (such as garbage trucks which are reportedly a common sight during the night). Departure would be to the north and west (into area of city with best roads and fewest people) to designated departure airstrip (e.g., blocked off road or flat open field) for MC– 130 aircraft pick up. Aircraft will make an assault landing, quickly load passengers and depart for third country. Personnel and Aircraft Preparatory Movements: Air refuelable MC–130s are required, and because of their limited number would have to be drawn from Florida and Okinawa. The aircraft from Florida would go through Europe to Egypt and aircraft from Okinawa through Diego Garcia. Personnel from Delta would be transported to Europe via C–141 aircraft and transferred to MC–130s in forward area for onward movement to Aswan. Actions Required for Implementation: —Delta personnel must assemble in isolation, plan, rehearse and make final preparation. Thirty-six Delta personnel have been isolated and are in training, preparation and rehearsal. A scale model of the compound has been provided to assist with familiarization and planning. The number of Delta personnel in isolation is being increased gradually and carefully to reduce potential for compromise. —Detailed planning will continue by Delta personnel [less than 1 line not declassified] until departure. Planning with limited, essential interagency interface will continue in Washington. MC–130 crews will have to be alerted to begin their specific planning and rehearsal for the mission. Some limited face-to-face coordination and planning 2 In the left margin, Jones wrote: “May be possible to do operation in one night if we can get some Delta people in a day or two in advance—time consuming to arrange. We are working on it. DJ.”

First Responses —Build in-country capability to receive, guide, transport, provide safe haven for and generally assist Delta upon insertion. —[2 lines not declassified] Alternatives: Use of helicopters for extraction from the general area of the compound and movement to an assault air strip for pick up by the MC–130 aircraft has been under consideration from the outset. If the extremely difficult logistical and visibility (security) problems could be solved, use of helicopters would be the preferred tactical option for extraction. Efforts to solve these difficult problems are continuing. Risk: Actions are being taken to improve chances for success but in any event it will be a very high risk operation throughout. All planning and security could be disrupted by premature forward positioning in order to reduce implementation time. To proceed now beyond what we are doing before in-country support problems are solved would not be prudent. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 18, 1979 SUBJECT Looking Ahead The Constitution as Prime Mover The events in Iran since mid-summer can be related directly to the power struggle underlying the formulation and adoption of a new constitution. In June and July, Khomeini acceded to a western-style constitution based on the 1906 document. However, in late July and August he moved with great determination to insure that his own version of the constitution would be adopted. First, he packed the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses nated those elements most likely to be troublesome in achieving his own vision of an Islamic Republic. Khomeini’s Position Khomeini now has a tiger by the tail, but he is playing for high stakes and is willing to risk all. By placing himself at the visible center of authority, he becomes directly responsible for government actions. Since he and his people are largely incapable of administering the country, this will work against him in time. However, by seizing the initiative in a bold way, he assures that all factions remain cautious. Groups may get together and complain, but as long as he is unyielding and winning, they will probably do little but talk. The stakes have been increased, however, since Khomeini cannot allow himself to be perceived to be out maneuvered or defeated in this latest test of wills. I suspect that his confidence at present is based on several assumptions: —The United States will take no direct action for fear of losing the hostages. —He can wait longer than we can, and eventually he will be able to drive a bargain that makes him appear the winner. —If the U.S. should strike, the U.S. moral position will be undermined and his own position strengthened. He does not mind losing even large numbers of lives. —He is the glue holding the country together, and especially in a time of great threat, Iranians will stick behind him as the only alternative to total chaos and dismemberment of the country. —Although he cannot ride this wave forever, it should be enough to get him through the announcement of the constitution and the referendum now scheduled for December 2. In the meantime, he will attempt to shift the burden of proof to the United States by conducting spy trials. —Celebration of Ashura on November 28–29 assures that religious frenzy and emotional commitment will increase, rather than decrease, in the short run. Nevertheless, Khomeini is not in full control. His control over the students is less than complete. Unrest is growing in the military and probably in other areas of society. He is losing in Kurdistan. Azerbaijan is on the verge of revolt and would require only the smallest signal from Shariat-Madari to move against him. The oil fields are increasingly anarchic. Iraq is sending threatening military signals. The Bazargan group is looking for an opportunity to reestablish itself. And the average Iranian is probably far more apprehensive about a direct clash with the U.S. than Khomeini himself.

First Responses Comment I do not believe the hostages are in imminent danger of their lives. A U.S. escalation therefore carries the danger of casualties which could have been avoided by a more cautious approach. Strategy I could possibly succeed in getting back many, even most, of the hostages over time. However, some of the hostages would almost certainly remain in Iran as “convicted spies” for a long period of time—if only to deter a U.S. military intervention. We will have to be prepared to live with that. Strategy II should be adopted soon in some form. We must begin to make decisions about successors we would be willing to support. The Soviets will certainly have their candidates, and we cannot afford to leave it all to chance. If the chances of getting 75% of the remaining hostages by a rescue operation are higher than 50%, I strongly recommend Strategy III. I understand the absolute necessity for compartmentalization, but you should be aware of the importance at some point of relating any direct action to a fine-grained awareness of the political and internal developments. You will be the best judge of whether an independent evaluation is desirable at some point, but I urge that any such operation not be left entirely in the hands of the JCS. You know where to find me. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [document number not declassified] Washington, November 19, 1979 Iranian-US Economic Sanctions: Impact and Reactions [portion marking not declassified] Iran’s revolutionary leaders appear determined to continue their head-on conflict with the United States. The Ayatollah Khomeini and 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

First Responses Unless it felt seriously threatened by the United States, Iran probably would prefer to take less drastic actions. These might include: • Refusing to accept dollars for payment of oil. With 70 percent of oil payments to Iran in dollars at present ($15 billion annually) this would cause minor, short-term disruptions in world currency markets. • Blocking debt payments to the United States. Total Iranian debt to the United States amounts to about $3 billion, with debt-service payments probably running over one-half billion dollars a year. US banks reportedly have seized an estimated $1 billion of frozen Iranian assets to cover themselves against this contingency. • Converting all liquid dollar assets to other currencies. This would put substantial downward pressure on the value of the dollar. [portion marking not declassified] Possible US Countermoves Most US economic countermoves would involve cutting Iranian imports. The Iranian import picture has changed drastically since the revolution. Exports to Iran, led by capital goods and semi-manufactures, have fallen about 70 percent in value so far this year compared with 1978. Food imports, down 25 percent from last year, still cover a quarter of Iranian requirements. [portion marking not declassified] Iran is especially dependent on imports for the following agricultural products: • Vegetable oil imports equal about 80 percent of domestic consumption; shortages have already been reported. • Corn, sorghum, and other feed grain imports cover nearly 60 percent of domestic consumption; stocks are low. • Rice imports provide about 40 percent of domestic consumption; current stocks are probably sufficient for one to two months. • Wheat imports provide 15 to 20 percent of consumption; current stocks probably equal one and one-half months of supply. • Mutton and beef imports supply about 20 percent of domestic consumption; current stocks are reportedly very low. [portion marking not declassified] The United States, West Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, Italy, and France (in that order) have been Iran’s major suppliers during the past several years. These countries provided roughly 70 percent of Iran’s imports in 1978. This year, because of the increased importance of food items and Iran’s attempt to diversify trading partners, Australia, New Zealand, and some less developed countries—especially sugar exporters—have grown in importance. [portion marking not declassified] About three-fourths of Iran’s international trade arrives at the Persian Gulf ports of Khorramshahr, Bandar Khomeini, Bushshr, and Bandar Abbas. Khorramshahr, traditionally the best equipped and most modern port (surpassed by Bandar Khomeini in traffic in 1978), primarily handles private sector trade, while Bandar Khomeini is the port of

First Responses time. The most critical items include military equipment and spares, spare parts for civilian aircraft, turbine compressors for gas pipelines, pumps, drilling rigs, power generating equipment, and telecommunications equipment. How long it would take for an embargo on these items to have some effect would depend in part on inventories in Iran. While we do not have specific information on inventories, recent trading patterns would suggest that stocks are extremely low. Stocks of kerosene, in short supply earlier this year, have been rebuilt, and kerosene should not be a problem as long as the oil refineries are kept operating. [portion marking not declassified] Collective Embargo by the West A collective ban on exports to Iran is only a remote possibility as long as Iranian oil continues to flow. Given their heavy dependence on Iranian oil and worsening domestic economic conditions, Japan, Western Europe, and major LDCs such as Brazil would oppose actions that could lead to a complete oil cutoff. Collective action by even a few countries would probably prove difficult as illustrated by the inability of the United States to get support for its trade embargo against Cuba. [portion marking not declassified] Upon extreme Iranan provocation—a cutoff of oil exports or the killing of US Embassy hostages—a collective export embargo might be feasible. Such action, if rigidly enforced, would affect some threefourths of total Iranian imports, including over 50 percent of all food imports and most manufactured and industrial imports. The problems associated with controlling a US embargo would also apply in the case of a collective embargo. Although the USSR and other suppliers, mostly less developed countries, would be unable to replace all the embargoed trade, they could supply most essential imports. Replacement of spare parts for Iranian industry, which was developed largely with Western equipment, would be especially difficult. [portion marking not declassified] Naval Blockade An effective naval blockade of Iran would have the most serious disruptive effects on the economy. The international support of a blockade would depend upon whether it was seen as an unprovoked US unilateral action or as a countermeasure to extreme Iranian measures. Barring further Iranian provocations, such action would probably be vigorously opposed by the major foreign oil importers. If employed as a countermeasure, it would receive more support in the West. [portion marking not declassified] History has shown that efforts to interdict a nation’s lines of communications on a sustained basis are rarely completely successful.

First Responses bazaaris who were the financiers of the revolution would be hard hit by economic sanctions; their support of Khomeini has already waned because of deteriorating economic conditions. [portion marking not declassified] The most immediate pressure on Khomeini could come from the cutoff of US military equipment and supplies. While he has shown little concern over the domestic economic and political difficulties created by his actions, Khomeini might be more disturbed by the loss of military equipment because of the sorry state of the Iranian military and the tense state of Iranian-Iraqi relations. The most realistic members of Iran’s military are already aware that they are no match for the Iraqis. As the US ban results in a further military deterioration, their views are increasingly likely to be transmitted to Qom where they probably will cause great concern. [portion marking not declassified] The timing of US actions will also be critical in determining the resolve of the Iran populace. US actions taken without extreme provocation would probably solidify Persian support behind Khomeini’s anti- American campaign. All economic hardships—including those suffered since the start of the revolution—are now justified by blaming the United States. In the absence of what the Iranians see as new provocations, a chance exists that in time Iranian attention will be refocused on the domestic economic situation. The revolution has not produced the hoped-for improvement in economic conditions. Indeed, it has made things worse for many, including the large number of unemployed urban workers, and disillusionment is spreading. Moreover, many Iranians are becoming increasingly uncomfortable with the fundamentalist Islamic percepts that guide today’s Iran. [portion marking not declassified] The urban workers would be the hardest hit, at least initially, by trade sanctions. These workers, who had hoped to reap substantial economic benefits from the new Islamic government, are instead finding high unemployment, rising inflation, and shortages of goods. Given the exodus of middle and high level managers and skilled technicians, industry is unlikely to be kept running at even its current low rate with the additional burden of trade sanctions. Thus, as unemployment mounted and additional shortages appeared, a trade embargo or blockade could exacerbate the frustrations of many socioeconomic interest groups. These frustrations could be vented against the Khomeini government as well as against the United States. [portion marking not declassified] Foreign Reactions and Positions to Date Foreign official reactions to the US-Iranian confrontation have been predictably low-profile and publicly balanced. Privately, foreign gov-

First Responses Brazil would be needlessly antagonizing a source of needed oil while closing a potentially lucrative market. Given appropriate inducements, such as US guaranties to make up oil losses, however, Brazil could probably be persuaded to join. [portion marking not declassified] If Iran shut down its oil production, the Big Six and Brazil might be induced to cooperate with the United States in a collective embargo. Under these conditions, the other members of the IEA probably would demand that the United States, at a minimum, bear its share of the burden of the reduction in oil supplies based on its total consumption. Complete cooperation for a collective embargo is unlikely; in particular Turkey would be unwilling to stop cross-border trade in the absence of major Western incentives. Brazil, while probably going along with a trade embargo, might use the occasion to demand a substantial restructuring of its foreign debts. [portion marking not declassified] Arab support and reaction also depends upon the timing of events. If the United States imposed a strict embargo while the hostages remained unharmed and oil continued to flow, a strong negative Arab reaction could be expected. This could possibly include a cutback in Arab oil production. [portion marking not declassified] Even if the trade embargo or naval blockade followed extreme Iranian provocation, the Arabs would probably condemn it publicly. Privately, however, many Arabs would be pleased to see Khomeini replaced so long as a more radical alternative was not likely. Many would also like to see the United States take a strong position. The Iraqis have indicated that they might even be willing to help, though indirectly, by not objecting if other OPEC members increased oil production to offset an Iranian cutback. [portion marking not declassified] Editorial Note On November 19, 1979, the White House released the following statement: “Three of our hostages in Tehran have been released and have left Iran. After a brief period of rest and care, they will be reunited with their families here in the United States. The remaining hostages must also be released. Their detention is without justification. The Government of Iran is responsible for achieving their immediate and safe release, and the United States has the right to expect that Iran will do so. The specter has been raised of other American diplomatic hostages being placed on trial. Such a step would be a further flagrant violation

First Responses 3. Contact Opposition. Direct U.S. contact with potential alternative leaders indicating support for their efforts. Expanded contacts with tribal elements, initially aimed at better intelligence collection. 4. Encourage/Organize Alternative. On political side, aim at a government-in-exile or creation of a political cadre which could move in quickly. On the tribal side, provide arms, support and coordinating mechanism for regional movements. Several basic policy questions must be answered in considering our approach: 1. Are we prepared to accept a commitment to destabilize the situation in Iran and try to replace the present leadership?2 —It could be a protracted effort, and success is by no measure assured. —The commitment will tend to grow over time and to become increasingly visible. —This could weld the left and religious extremists together on a common anti-American theme. But —Friendly opposition forces are unlikely to act effectively without a clear signal from us. —Continuation of Khomeini’s rule is likely to destroy the moderate elements in the political spectrum, leaving the left as the only credible alternative to religious fanaticism when Khomeini inevitably falls or passes from the scene. 2. If we make such a decision, what is our strategy? Should we focus our efforts on the regime in Tehran and attempt to replace the central government? —Tends to preserve territorial integrity and unity. —Minimizes risks of Soviet (or Iraqi) dismemberment. But —Khomeini is strongest in Tehran—controls the streets. —[1 line not declassified] 3. Alternatively, should we focus our efforts on the periphery to build up an alternative government? —Tribal opposition is real and could undermine Khomeini’s authority. —The oilfields are the possible prize. We would maximize our chances of holding the oil in the event of complete collapse or Soviet intervention. 2 Carter wrote “not yet” in the left margin.

First Responses his overthrow.3 We will probably not be able to bring it off, and the commitment is open-ended. The Iranian revolution was a true expression of deep-seated national will, and the anti-Americanism we are seeing is a true expression of national outrage at U.S. actions over the past 26 years. To support the overthrow of Khomeini will be seen in Iran as an attempted replay of 1953 and the return of the Shah. Such a move opposes the fundamental trend of events and will foreclose any future cooperation. 3. We are not in control of events, and we must prepare for the worst. The oil fields are what count in the final analysis. We should focus our attention on the south and prepare to hold it no matter what. [1 line not declassified] Our Choices: Actions —Destabilize the current situation—this can be done without showing the American hand and could contribute to undermining Khomeini and the emergence of more moderate leadership but equally could hasten the advent of a more radical leftist regime. —Increase contacts with dissidents. To be more effective to our current contacts, this would have to involve some financial support. Our hand would begin to show. —[1 line not declassified] Strategy —Focus on developments in Tehran. —[2 lines not declassified]4 3 Carter wrote “I agree” in the left margin. 4 At the bottom of the page, Carter wrote: “Be extremely cautious about U.S. action for now, but assess options within CIA. Let them give me analysis of all potential Anti- Khomeini elements. J.” Editorial Note On November 20, 1979, Carter administration officials held a series of meetings to discuss developments in the hostage crisis. The SCC

First Responses executed as the result of a trial. This group dispersed at 2 p.m. so that some of its members could attend the emergency SCC meeting called by Carter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

First Responses be moved to Ebin Prison. (The Germans believe the latter would be a constructive move since it would place the hostages outside of student control.) The trials could take a number of alternative courses: —Quick, in camera trials with some or all of the hostages found guilty and all expelled unharmed. If trials are inevitable, as now seems likely, this is the most favorable outcome. —Some hostages are found innocent, but others are found guilty and sentenced to prison terms. This could include a public show trial in which hostages “confess” and “documentary” evidence of espionage is produced. —As above, but with some hostages sentenced and quickly executed. —Trials could be held at the compound by students, or by revolutionary courts, or by both. General Strategy —While we want to generate universal condemnation of the trials by governments, organizations and jurists in an effort to prevent them, we will also want, in recognition of the probability that trials will be held, to work through some special channels for the least damaging outcome. —Our primary objective, once trials seem imminent, should be to influence the Iranians to adopt the most moderate approach in conducting the trials, i.e., rapid, in camera proceedings leading to quick and safe expulsion of all hostages. —We should avoid any steps which would lend any legitimacy to the trials, such as urging the presence of international observers. —Policy options below should be considered against the following criteria: (1) will they have an impact on the Iranian position on trials or (2) will they further inflame opinion in Iran without producing the desired outcome? And will they help the President maintain the initiative with domestic opinion, but without inflaming U.S. public anger? —We need also to consider the psychology of Khomeini and his entourage. Open threats and punitive signs may influence the Revolutionary Council toward moderation, but may inflame Khomeini and arouse his own sense of martyrdom. Threats quietly delivered can also influence the Council, and may speak to Khomeini’s respect for “strength.” —A crucial question is whether a series of “tit for tat” actions, or a more dramatic step, is more likely to be effective in moving Khomeini. —In any case, we should keep the negotiating track open through Waldheim and the PLO, with elements already introduced, i.e., once

First Responses Embargo all Further U.S. products reinforce military forces, Indian Ocean Initiate destabilization efforts Break diplomatic relations Serious Students hold Overflights Seek economic Escalation trials Step up measures by Islamic Court destabilization U.S. allies begins trials efforts Seek UN Reduce oil Deny visas to sanctions exports to 2 all Iranians Shah to Mexico mbd except special or Egypt Burn/Destroy cases Ask many Embassy or Move carrier nations break U.S. property close to or in diplomatic Expel all P.G. relations Americans Expel Iranian Convince IFIs/ Some hostage(s) students/ UN reduce found others operations in innocent, Total Embargo Iran others await on exports to trial Iran Severe Hostage(s) Selective Emergency Escalation found guilty military UNSC American(s) option(s) hurt or executed Declares war on U.S. Attack U.S. ship/acft [Omitted here are Sections III and IV of the Contingency Paper.]

First Responses IRANIAN HOSTAGE PROBLEM My Two Talks With Sadat (November 14 and 18) As we had anticipated, Sadat felt that there was relatively little that he could do with respect to the Iranian hostage situation. He characterized Khomeini as “mad.” He suggested that Fahd might be able to exert some influence on Khomeini, but acknowledged that because of Sunni/Shi’a cleavages, even Fahd’s prospects might be limited. He doubted that the Lebanese Shi’a leadership could do much, but thought it was worth a try and suggested the Saudis be asked about this. I explained to Sadat that you were thinking of (a) a possible contingency action in the event our hostages were hurt, and (b) a possible punitive action against Iran after the hostages have been gotten out. While you had not yet made any decision, you would welcome Sadat’s views and also, should you decide to undertake one or another such action, his help. I specifically mentioned your hope that he might permit us to use the Aswan Airfield for staging purposes. Aswan, I noted, is somewhat remote and therefore out of the public eye. Sadat said that he had been thinking a great deal about the Iranian hostage problem. He had been looking at maps to consider what kind of action he might take if he were in your position. He spoke firmly about the need to undertake some kind of punitive action against Iran in order to reestablish the United States’ credibility and national honor in the Middle East. If Khomeini gets away with his action, Sadat said, the position of the United States in the Middle East will be badly hurt. At my first meeting, Sadat had no specific ideas; at my second meeting, however, he suggested that after the hostages are out, the United States should level the Iranian oil fields as a lesson. Whatever you decide to do, Sadat emphasized on both occasions, should be done in the form of a one-time action rather than an American occupation of parts of Iran. A one-time, punitive strike, in Sadat’s view, will be understood by most of the nations of the Middle East, even though some will publicly protest. An American occupation, on the other hand, will be counterproductive in terms of Middle East attitudes. Sadat wants you to know that, should you require help, any facility in Egypt is at your disposal. He mentioned Aswan and also Berenice as possible places to be considered.4 Should you wish to send an advance team for planning purposes, this can be taken up with 4 On November 30, Mubarak reiterated Sadat’s suggestion to Atherton. In a December 3 memorandum, Brzezinski informed Brown that Carter wanted Brown and Vance to explore this idea and report. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski

First Responses to Tunis was cut short because of the Mecca incident,5 he probably did not have the opportunity to raise it. Still, it is worth a try.) I asked Fahd if he thought that the Lebanese Shi’a leaders might have any influence on Khomeini. Fahd noted that since the disappearance of the Imam Musa Sadr, there is no acknowledged Lebanese Shi’a leader. He frankly did not know whom to suggest, but said he would consider the matter further. Later in the conversation, he suddenly reverted to this theme and said he would be seeing Lebanese politician Saeb Salaam the next day and would ask him. (I am not sure Salaam can help much, since he is Sunni.) It might be worth following up on this with Fahd, although the prospects are limited. Fahd had two other points on Iran. First, he was extremely curious about the Shah’s state of health. Did the Shah really have cancer and, if so, how serious is it? (I think his curiosity was prompted primarily by suspicion that we may have allowed the Shah in under a pretext of the need for medical treatment.) In asking these questions, he showed no signs of hostility toward the Shah, but also no particular affection. Second, after I had told him that the blocking of Iranian assets was prompted by the need to assure that American claims against Iran will be settled, Fahd wanted to know what the extent of these American claims might be. Again, he did not criticize our action, but I did sense an underlying uneasiness on his part over the freezing. Since I did not have specific information on either of these two points, I limited my comments to an assurance that I understood (a) the Shah is indeed seriously ill and (b) the American claims are sizeable, though I had no specific information on their exact amount. You may wish to consider instructing Ambassador West to provide clarification to Fahd on these two points. Talk With Chatti (November 16) Chatti, who has just taken over the function of Secretary-General of the Islamic Conference, had relatively little to offer. [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

First Responses b. The Hughes/Ryan amendment provides that it is inapplicable “during military operations initiated by the United States under a declaration of war approved by the Congress or an exercise of powers by the President under the War Powers Resolution.” My General Counsel is of the opinion that the current level of activities in support of contingency planning would be subsumed under this exception if it were clear that any actual operation, when and if initiated, would be pursuant to an exercise of the President’s powers under the War Powers Resolution. The General Counsel cannot, however, render an opinion to this effect without appropriate assurance that any approval to carry out the proposed contingency plan will in fact be given by the President and in accordance with the War Powers Resolution. [portion marking not declassified] 2. Based on the foregoing, I must conclude that the CIA cannot properly provide the required assistance unless the legal doubts are resolved in one of two ways: a. Permission for the Agency’s General Counsel to consult with the Attorney General of the United States, or b. A written assurance from the President, either directly or through you, that any initiation of actual operations would be pursuant to an exercise of powers by the President under the War Powers Resolution. There is no guarantee under option a. that the Attorney General would agree with the preliminary legal view of the CIA General Counsel, in which case it might be necessary to proceed to option b., in any event or even to seek a Presidential finding under the Hughes/Ryan amendment.3 [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner 3 Brzezinski forwarded this memorandum to Carter under a November 20 covering memorandum, which asked whether to proceed under the War Powers Act or to consult with Civiletti. Carter wrote at the bottom of Brzezinski’s memorandum: “Check with Fritz & Cy first, then discuss with AG directly re preference between options a. and b. Then give Stan necessary assurance. J.C.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

First Responses incident. They employed such interrogation techniques as playing one hostage against another, and telling them the U.S. had abandoned them. While the hostages could not discern all the leaders or a chain of command or fixed command post, there appeared to be a firm leadership within the compound. The students would not identify who was in charge when asked, but the Iranian who appeared to be the chief interrogator claimed to have been trained by the PLO. He gave his name as “Mehdi.” He claimed to have operated in the U.S. for the PLO and also claimed to have been incarcerated in an Israeli jail for three years for PLO activities. He claimed to be from the Isfahan area and gave his PLO name as Abu Ali. 6. There were several religious leaders in the compound but none appeared to play a leadership role. Khomeini’s son however played a major part and reportedly visited the compound often; he had much authority and was responsible for having Joan Walsh released from 36 hours of solitary confinement. The students stated firmly that they would do whatever Khomeini told them. 7. The hostages believe that the remaining hostages will be freed when Khomeini orders it. 8. All cryptographic equipment was reportedly destroyed in the communication center. All files of the following offices were not repeat not destroyed: DAO, Embassy Political Office, Ambassador’s suite, and MAAG offices. The students highlighted the following documents: —Precht/Laingen letter dated August 2, 1979, Secret “Eyes Only” concerning ramifications of Shah’s entry into U.S. —Airgram drafted by Mike Metrinko re sabotage of oil fields. —RSO Golacinski’s report of counterfeit money in Iran which a walk-in provided to RSO and was under investigation. The students convoluted this report into a plot by the United States to destroy the economy of Iran. —Metrinko memcon with a relative of General Bolibzan, a figure in Kurdistan whom the students feel is fomenting revolt there. [5 lines not declassified] The students were extremely intent on identifying intelligence personnel and claimed that those so identified would be executed. 9. The students were defensive about being labeled terrorists. During the press conference at the Tehran airport, the Iranians appeared concerned that the students were being portrayed as abusing the hostages. The Iranians took pictures the first week, asking the hostages to smile and look comfortable. The day the Pope’s emissary arrived was the only day the women were untied all day and given a snack. When

First Responses Norwegian Ambassador when the latter visited him today. As Norwegians have only limited facilities we have been asked to transmit it. I should be grateful if text could be conveyed urgently to Mr. Vance. Begins: For the Secretary. 1. We had an opportunity to send a message several days ago via the British Ambassador with some specific suggestions on the situation here and which we hope you have seen.2 This morning the Australian Ambassador was allowed to see us and we asked him orally to convey via his Embassy in Washington some of our concerns about the period immediately ahead. We reiterate them below, hoping we will have some means later today to communicate them on the record. 2. Before doing so, I must note with regret that aside from these occasional Ambassadorial contacts and access to a portion of the media, our ability to know what is underway in the background is extremely limited. I have had no substantive contact with Iranian authorities for the past ten days. 3. The public atmosphere here is one of dangerous emotional frenzy. Yesterday’s demonstrations around our Embassy were almost unprecedented in size and venom and were supplemented by similar affairs in cities all over the country. Khomeini and his entourage of clerics have skillfully used the seizure of our Embassy, charges that our diplomats are spies, and our refusal to hand over the Shah, to develop a mass psychology of hate that may have few parallels in history. The few Iranians who recognise the disastrous implications of the course Khomeini has set for his country are too frightened to speak out. 4. Worse, we are now entering the mourning month of Moharram, a period when even during normal times emotions run high. Hence the next week to ten days will be exceedingly dangerous for the hostages. We cannot emphasize too much the importance of avoiding as much as possible any actions and statements on our side during this period that risk exacerbating the situation here, no matter how compelling they may appear in terms of public opinion at home. It is in any event vital that we avoid any action that risks vitiating in any way the 2 In this November 19 message, Laingen suggested that the United States “continue using every possible means to bring the weight of world public opinion to bear on Iran,” including a Security Council resolution, and “try to find some third party intermediary(s) that would try to reach the decision makers here, looking toward a framework for discussion that might lead to a possible compromise.” Laingen added that “it is important that for our part we avoid anything that risks further escalation in the crisis. Continued restraint is vital, both in terms of retaining our now overwhelming support on the world scene and with regard to the safety and welfare of the remaining hostages.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Subject File,

First Responses 10. But acquiescence in trials may yet prove the only means of securing the release of the hostages unharmed. If we are reduced to that option, we would need to continue to hold firmly to our public position that such trials are totally contrary to international law and that the Iranian Government remains fully responsible for the safety of our diplomatic personnel. It can be argued that by taking this position, while the regime here goes ahead with the spectacle of such trials, that Iran is humiliated more than we. But that is a judgement that affects both principle and public opinion at home that we cannot and should not make from here. 11. We wish you and all our colleagues in Washington a very blessed Thanksgiving day. Ends. Graham Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses U.S. action and that any executions would result in very severe action. A blockade was considered as a possibly appropriate step in the event trials begin. This is to be discussed further with the President. (TS) 5. The Shah. Available information indicates that radiation treatment should be completed this week, with a non-surgical attempt to remove the gallstone early next week.5 If all goes well, we are informed it is the Shah’s present intention to leave near the first of December, either to Mexico or some other location. Warren Christopher believes the Shah will ask for our advice before taking any decision. The Shahbanou is apparently counseling him not to go and to ignore the United States. It would be useful to have direct information, rather than secondhand messages, about what the Shah is thinking. The DCI will consult with the Attorney General about possible technical surveillance. The DCI believes the Shah’s departure would lead to an emotional outburst in Tehran which would be unpredictable but dangerous for the hos- 6. Iranian Diplomats. The SCC felt that restrictions on Iranian diplomats were too insignificant to have any effect on the negotiating situation. They might, however, interfere with the progress of negotiations or—if our restrictions were very severe, e.g. restricting them to the embassy—it could lose us support by dragging us down to Khomeini’s level. The Vice President recommended continuing for several more days with the negotiating track through the UN. If that does not work, then we should do something with some bite, such as sanctions, limiting sale of foodstuffs, perhaps mining harbors. (TS) 7. Covert Action. The DCI will prepare a finding for the meeting tomorrow to begin specific steps [3 lines not declassified]. 8. Longer Range Options. The SCC discussed our objectives in the post-hostage situation. All agreed that a decision to work for the overthrow of Khomeini would require a major U.S. commitment to follow through with money and the risk of direct military involvement. David Aaron will circulate an options paper drawn from the work by his “black chamber” group. (TS) 5 Attendees at the November 19 SCC meeting discussed the Shah’s health, noting that he had completed his fifth radiation treatment and that he was scheduled for nonsurgical gallstone removal, a procedure that, if successful, meant that the Shah could leave the United States as early as December 1. Attendees questioned the impact on the hostage crisis. On the Summary of Conclusions of the meeting, Carter wrote: “I think it’s better for him to leave when able.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff

First Responses Since the Treasury action permitting setoffs in blocked accounts, up to $1 billion in setoffs have been made by U.S. banks—mostly in London. Some banks that have made sizeable loans to Iran did not have Iranian deposits, and they have, therefore, not been able to setoff. Those banks are presently considering attachments, that is action by which they can seize Iranian assets wherever they can find them by a court order known as an attachment, to satisfy their loans to Iran. Again, attachments (like setoffs) are governed by local law and it is by no means clear that they can be utilized in the present state of affairs. The only attachment Treasury knows of is the Morgan Guaranty attachment in Germany of the Iranian’s shares in Krupp. Generally speaking, neither a setoff nor an attachment is available to satisfy a debt unless the debt is due and unpaid. Debts become due and payable when there is a failure to pay interest or principal when due or when there is an anticipatory breach or a violation of a term in the loan agreement. For instance, some of the Iranian loan agreements contain a provision, known as a cross-default clause, that states that the loan becomes due and payable if Iran defaults under any other loan. As a consequence of the blocking, Iran did not pay the interest due on a $500 million loan on which Chase Manhattan is the agent bank. Chase notified all the members of the syndicate of the default and asked instructions as to whether the loan should be accelerated and thus become immediately due and payable. A majority of the banks in the syndicate (including all U.S., but none of the foreign banks) voted to accelerate the loan. Chase accelerated the loan on Tuesday (November 20). Several other loans have since gone into default; others are soon expected to. Thus, cross default provisions are being triggered and other loans will also soon become due. That will widen the scope of setoffs and attachments that are possible. It could lead foreign banks to try to protect their positions by setoffs and attachments, thus wiping out most of Iran’s presently free assets. (It also may be relevant to this discussion that last week Treasury modified its regulations to permit the Iranians to pay interest and principal due on a loan, with new (unblocked) dollars. Thus Iran cannot argue that the blocking made compliance with the terms of the loan impossible. Iran has made no attempt to pay interest or principal on any loan with new money.) Eximbank has about $400 million in loans outstanding to Iran. Several of these are now in default, either because interest has not been paid or because of cross-default provisions. Eximbank has never declared a loan to a foreign government to be in default and initiated attachment proceedings, although there have been a number of defaults in the past. Options Available The balance of this memorandum discusses the options available in the context of the situation described above and in the context of

First Responses • This action is the natural corollary to Option 2 and the same considerations apply. Option 4. Request the key foreign central banks to advise their banks to proceed with calling defaults on Iranian loans and collecting by way of setoff or attachment. • If the key foreign central banks were to act, this would be the most effective way to ensure that all credits to Iran are collected. That would dry up at least another $2 billion of Iranian dollar assets. • The central bankers are in a position to advise their private banks that Iranian credits are unsafe and unsound, but they are not likely to do so without instructions or acquiescence from their governments. Option 5. Obtain agreement from the major purchasers of Iranian oil that they will only purchase, or facilitate the purchase of Iranian oil, through dollar contracts. • This would preserve the oil market as a dollar market and reduce possible damage to the dollar in the exchange markets. • Technically it may be difficult to make this stick for the long term because Iran might be able to switch a good part or all its oil sales to the spot market through non-major entities. • This would expose our allies to possible oil cutoffs by Iran. Option 6. Obtain the agreement of our major allies to prohibit their central banks from taking substantial increases in non-dollar Iranian deposits. • This would complement Option 5 and would have the effect of locking the Iranians in dollars. • On the one hand this would run counter to a general policy of free exchange rates and markets; on the other hand, it might appeal to Germany’s desire to avoid having the mark become a reserve currency. • So long as the Iranians were unable to find a way to hold large amounts of foreign currencies through intermediaries, this would strengthen the dollar. However, it is unrealistic to think that this type of action would be sustainable over the longer term as too many evasion routes are available. Option 7. Move to a full export embargo and get our allies to do the same. • In the longer term quite apart from other considerations, this would not be effective. • It might have limited appeal domestically as it is readily understandable. Option 8. Move to a broad range effort to mobilize overt multilateral support, of which some or all of the economic measures outlined above would be a part. • To be effective, even for a brief period, economic measures will require the active support of our allies. That may be best obtainable through a broader based appeal.

First Responses Attachment Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5 Washington, November 21, 1979 SUBJECT Dangers if the Shah Leaves the US I. We are concerned that an early departure of the Shah from the US would increase the risks faced by the hostages. A. The present tenuous equilibrium in the hostage situation would be broken by the Shah’s departure, especially if it occurs in the emotional religious mourning period over the next four weeks. —Early on, such a move might have been interpreted by the captors and the Khomeini regime as an act of good faith by the US. —Now, it would increase their frustration over their inability to bring the Shah and the US to account for past actions and to prevent future US/pro-Shah involvement in Iranian affairs. B. The captors have been operating in a very well organized manner, but we think they might split over how to react to what they would see as a US effort to circumvent their rightful claims. Individually or as a group, they might over-react. —We believe their public announcements show a significant degree of tension over possible US retaliatory moves against them. —As little as a single frustrated captor’s angry outburst or blow (or a slight provocation by a hostage) might spark a disintegration of the group’s internal control that could lead to abuse of the hostages. C. As the captors see it, the US will have given an absolute no to their demands that the Shah be returned to Iran. D. Some, if not all, will also see his departure as the first step in a new US attempt to overthrow the Iranian revolution. E. At the very least, the Shah’s departure is likely to precipitate trial of the hostages. —Despite a statement on 20 November by a government spokesman that the Revolutionary Court would [not] conduct any trial, it is not certain that the Khomeini regime could easily take control of the hostages from their captors. —Khomeini apparently had some difficulty in arranging the release of the thirteen women and blacks. 5 Secret; Noforn.

First Responses Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated THE U.S. STAKE IN IRAN I. Introduction The purpose of this paper is to analyze the U.S. stake in Iran from a broader perspective than that of our present concern with the hostages. In effect, it attempts to leap across the morass of negotiating tactics and turbulent Tehran politics to the situation a year hence, however the hostage situation is resolved. Its approach is: first, to define critical U.S. national interests in Iran as they now appear; second, to identify the range of possible Irans of, say, 1981; and third, to analyze each of these in terms of U.S. interests. II. Assumptions A. Khomeini’s attempt to rule a semi-developed state of the late twentieth century by the standards of a tenth century theocracy will ultimately fail. B. If there were ever any possibility of the U.S. doing business with the present regime, it has been destroyed in the past few weeks. C. The Soviet Union’s primary national goals are to strengthen itself and to weaken the U.S. It will exploit any opportunity open to it in the pursuit of these goals, restrained only by its calculations of risk. It is not in the interest of the United States to become, or to be perceived as becoming, weaker than the USSR. III. U.S. National Interests 1. U.S. national interests in Iran are many and complex, but events of the past two years have served to clarify in the starkest way which 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

First Responses B. Denial to the USSR 5. Even without Iran, the power balance will be exceptionally delicate in the early to mid-1980s. In this period Soviet military strength will grow substantially relative to that of the U.S., an imbalance that will only be redressed when military programs now underway or under consideration come to fruition in the later years of the decade. On the other side of the scale, the USSR will be subject in roughly the same time-frame to increasing economic difficulty, most notably in the energy field. Petroleum production has peaked and will apparently begin to decline sharply. The Soviet economy, lacking the West’s cushion of unnecessary consumption that can be conserved, can only maintain its present position by a combination of drastically reduced exports and purchases in the Western market. In fact, the Soviet leadership may be able to maintain its military power advantage only by accepting even greater economic and ideological disadvantages—sacrifice of technology imports for imports of grain and petroleum, political turmoil in Eastern Europe, a reduced standard of living at home, all adding to a demonstration that the Soviet model for a modern state is a failure. 6. Moreover, the Soviet leadership itself is in a state of interregnum. The introverted cluster of old men surrounding the fading Brezhnev are jockeying among themselves to succeed him, but appear united in resistance to the admittance of younger and more vigorous men to their circle. Their behavior as a group, with or without Brezhnev, is likely to become increasingly erratic and unpredictable until power passes to the next generation, although it could lapse into paralysis. We know little of the policy views of the younger men, although some analysts have suggested that they are impatient with the caution of their elders: the Soviet state has too long tolerated the pretensions of a declining West; it should take advantage of the power it has achieved and press more aggressively toward its national goals. 7. We are not sure how fully the Politburo yet understands its predicament. If the power balance is delicate without Iran, however, it will become even more so when the Soviet leaders recognize their situation and the possible role that Iran might play in it. To an old Soviet leadership that sees its achievements of decades past gravely threatened by a lack of petroleum, or to a younger one that sees its opportunities for the future equally threatened, the prospect of a chaotic Iran, its armed forces shattered and its allies alienated, may become tempting in the early 80s. Not only could Soviet energy shortages be alleviated, but the supply of foreign exchange could be assured. Moreover, in geo-political terms the Soviets would be in a position from Iran to dominate the Middle East and South Asia, and ultimately to deny Gulf oil to the West. 8. Either leadership would of course calculate the risks. They would be relatively small if a Marxist, preferably controlled Communist,

First Responses should be limited, particularly so on ground so disadvantageous as Iran. D. Maintenance of Iranian Oil Flow to the West 12. Obviously, a substantial and dependable flow of Iranian oil would, at least in the short run, relieve pressure on the oil market and limit economic difficulties in the West. The market, however, has absorbed a considerable decrease in Iranian production and continuing uncertainties as to its future. A complete cut-off of exports would drive prices higher, slow Western growth and severely handicap the nonoil LDCs, but would be far less traumatic than the loss of oil from across the Gulf. Its loss has already to a certain extent been discounted in the West; supply will in the longer run decrease in any case. IV. Interests of other Powers 13. It is as critical for the West Europeans and Japanese as it is for the U.S. that the flow of non-Iranian Gulf oil be sustained and that the world power balance not be seriously disturbed in favor of the Soviet Union. There is no question that these states recognize the importance of the flow, but some will believe that they can better protect themselves by bilateral than by multilateral action. Some will not see the balance as so seriously threatened, short of Soviet military operations in Iran. The greater weight they give to avoidance of US-Soviet confrontation will make it difficult to convince them of the reality of the Soviet threat. As to Iranian oil flow, they are likely to view this and to seek ways to maintain it in bilateral, nationalistic ways, regardless of the position of the U.S. 14. The Middle Eastern states, and particularly those of the Gulf, are of course less concerned with the economic well-being of the West than of their own, but their interest in avoiding infection from Iran is as great as ours in protecting them from it. Some are concerned over the general U.S.-USSR power balance (Saudi Arabia) but most (Iraq) would be more concerned over the clear and present danger of a Sovietoriented Iran. They would fear a U.S.-Soviet confrontation, if only because it might force them to chose sides between a USSR that was militarily stronger in the area and a West on which their economic well-being depends. Their attitude toward Iranian oil as opposed to Iranian politics will range from indifference to pleasure at the effect of its loss on a sellers’ market. 15. China desperately needs a strong West to divide Soviet attention, but it sees the West as losing its will in the face of Soviet power. China may well believe it sees the dangers to Western interests in the Iranian situation more clearly than the West itself. It certainly will be more strident in pointing out those dangers. For Peking some degree

First Responses throughout the non-Communist world. As long as it remains weak, and Western attitudes are not defined, it will present temptation to a USSR that may well become desperate for energy. These statements, and the four U.S. national interests discussed above, suggest a policy for the U.S. once the hostage issue is behind us. First, define Western attitudes, lest the Soviet Union miscalculate. Second, take concrete steps with our allies to make this position credible. Third, take measures with them to shield the Gulf States from subversion and military action. Fourth, work toward a degree of strength and stability at least in strategic areas of Iran. Fifth, prevent the extension of Soviet power and influence in these areas. 40. The discussion above suggests that among possible lines of development in Iran one, the extension of Soviet influence behind a shield of nationalism, offers a greater threat to U.S. interests than any other. Two, however, offer greater promise of protection for major U.S. interests than the others. These are: 1) emergence of a strong leftnationalist regime; 2) disintegration of Iran, leaving a relatively stable Khuzistan protected from Soviet influence. A choice as to which of these goals to pursue, and of the means to achieve it, is beyond the scope of this analysis. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

First Responses Secretancy Vance: Clark spent four hours with the Iranian emissary. The emissary asserts he has Khomeini’s approval. McHenry thinks we should go to the Security Council on Monday3 with a three-point resolution: (1) respect for diplomatic immunity and release; (2) U.S. and Iran peacefully to resolve differences; (3) Secretary General to offer good offices. The PLO channel was helpful in the release of the 13. I believe one must test fully the UN channel. The President then reviewed the four points that “Cy, Zbig and I” went over last Friday.4 The Iranians sense their increasing vulnerability. (Discussion of the four points—what do they mean?) General Jones: Point 4 rules out punitive action. The President: It would not prevent breaking diplomatic relations. Dr. Brzezinski: The mining then wouldn’t make much sense; a single punitive strike would be better. Hamilton Jordan: Our signing a document like this will cause a domestic outcry. The Vice President: We may have to sign to get our people out. Secretary Brown: How about substantial economic warfare and substantial military presence? Admiral Turner: Is there a moral difference between violating the agreement and publicly doing something? Dr. Brzezinski: We should act in a way that retains international respect for ourselves; a punitive strike after signing an agreement would be counterproductive. Point #2 to be interpreted as including Khomeini, and this woud be made clear on the first day of the debate. Jody Powell: This means we have accepted preconditions. We claimed before that we wouldn’t. Dr. Brzezinski: Suggest second sentence of #2 be amended. The President: “None of the interested parties.” (Changes in #3 dictated by the President; #4 slightly amended to permit breaking of diplomatic relations.) Hamilton Jordan: If it looks like we ate crow and then diplomatic relations are broken, it will sit badly with the American people. 3 November 26. 4 November 16.

First Responses The President: Authorization of telephone tap through Attorney General. Newsom to talk to Reed about the Shah leaving.6 What means should we use to warn Khomeini of consequences of trial? Dr. Brzezinski: What is the message? The President: We should say: (1) any trial would result in interruption of Iranian commerce; (2) any harm to any one would result in direct retaliatory action. Secretary Vance objects to the first. The President: How can I sit here as President and watch the trials? Dr. Brzezinski: Either the Iranians understand we will do something, in which case it is a useful repetition; or they don’t, in which case they need to be told. The President: We need to put more pressure on our allies. We should communicate the foregoing also to our allies. General Jones describes modalities of blockade; also it variants. Mining best. Secretary Vance objects to threats. Secretary Brown supports Secretary Vance. You have a bigger effect by military deployments. Dr. Brzezinski: So far they have done daring things without advance warnings from us. So we know they do outrageous things if or when not warned by us. The President asks the Vice President. The Vice President: It is very difficult. The President: This puts our allies under pressure. There is no way I could sit here. We would have to take action if there is public trial. Secretary Vance: You would not be ruling it out. Admiral Turner: Khomeini said you have been bluffing. You need to make it clear. The Vice President: Might not this threat imperil the success of the negotiating track? Might not a few days be needed—then if hostages are hurt, national honor will come first. The President: National honor comes first. Jody Powell: The longer we wait, the less we deter. 6 Reed told Newsom that the Shah intended to leave for Mexico if his scheduled surgery was successful, wanted advice, and was embarrassed by the problems resulting from his presence. (Memorandum from Newsom to Vance, November 23; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,

First Responses Message From the U.S. Government to the Iranian Government1 Washington, undated We request that the following message from the highest levels of the US Government be transmitted by the most secure and discreet channels possible to Acting Foreign Minister Bani Sadr for the highest authorities in Iran: 1. As the President has said, our preference remains a peaceful solution, which we are pursuing through the channels that are available to us. 2. Any public trial or governmental trial of US personnel in Iran would result in interruption of Iranian commerce. 3. Any harm to any hostage would result in direct retaliatory action. 4. This message is being conveyed totally privately by the most secure channel available. We do not intend to give any publicity to the message, but we do not want there to be any misunderstanding about the seriousness of our message. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H– Files), Box 106. Top Secret; Sensitive. Transmitted through the Swiss Embassy. According to a June 4, 1980, Memorandum for the File by Precht, the message was transmitted to Bern at 1800 EST on November 23, reached Tehran the next morning, and was given to Bani-Sadr by Lang at 0705 EST, November 24. Precht wrote that “Bani-Sadr read the message and said he would transmit its contents at once to the Revolutionary Council.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee (Intelligence) Meeting1

First Responses Attachment Presidential Finding3 Washington, undated Finding Pursuant to Section 662 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, As Amended, Concerning Operations in Foreign Countries Other Than Those Intended Solely for the Purpose of Intelligence Collection I find the following operation in foreign countries is important to the national security of the United States, and direct the Director of Central Intelligence, or his designee, to report this finding to the concerned committees of the Congress pursuant to Section 662, and to provide such briefings as necessary. SCOPE DESCRIPTION WORLDWIDE Using any and all possible means, including tasking or encouraging the network of agents or other contacts in foreign countries, clandestine radio broadcasting and the use of media placements, to cause the distribution or broadcast in foreign countries of non-attributable propaganda for the purposes of: influencing the Ayatollah Khomeini, other Iranian religious and political leaders and anti-American segments of the Iranian populace to abandon or moderate anti-American political and economic positions and to protect the safety of U.S. nationals and U.S. property in Iran; and reducing the ability of the Ayatollah Khomeini and other anti-American religious and political figures in Iran to incite anti- American violence, or to stimulate policies and activities hostile to the interests of the United States and to the safety of U.S. 3 Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. In a November 23 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Carter to approve the finding, noting that it “does move toward a decision to support overthrow of Khomeini.” (National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Box I020, SCC Meetings, Minutes—SCC 1979)

First Responses class and the military in Iran fear that opposition to Khomeini would lead to a civil war where the leftists would be the final victors. Bakhtiar, with small offices in Paris and London, appears to be the only exile leader with an established organization. Some Iranian businessmen have recently attempted to organize wealthy exiles to support Bakhtiar. An unconfirmed report of the establishment in September of a Paris Coordinating Group is the first sign of a coalition effort among exile groups. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is detailed material on Bakhtiar, Jam, and Nahavandi.] Paris Coordinating Group of Iranian Oppositionists There are reports that an organization composed of four different groups—the Iranian National Front, the National Democratic Front, the Mujahadin and the Fedayeen E-Khalq—has been formed in Paris, although a coalition of these four groups seems unlikely. The group calls itself Ittihad-e-Melli (National Union) and Bakhtiar is the nominal head. [portion marking not declassified] The agreement of the four groups to form an organization is apparently still subject to ratification by each group. The groups will still have separate command structures and operate independently. The group claims it has received messages of encouragement from Shariat- Madari, Hosein Montazari, Mohammad Golpayegani and Sadeq al- Tuhani as well as having the support of some monarchists and bazaaris. They have no contact with the Arab minority in Khuzistan. [portion marking not declassified] They see the principal obstacle to their success as being Khomeini’s grip on the lower levels of the clergy and through them on the large number of undereducated and unemployed youth of Iran. [portion marking not declassified] The organization supports PLO self determination even though it has no contacts with the PLO. It favors autonomy status for Iranian minority nationalities and has sent financial aid to the Kurds. It has been unsuccessful in getting Tudeh party support. [portion marking not declassified] Shadow Government [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranian expatriates in Paris are attempting to form a shadow government and have chosen candidates for top government positions.2 There is no information on whether these individuals have been contacted. The group claims high level 2 See Document 20.

First Responses satisfactory resolution of this crisis; I know that SALT II will certainly not move ahead in the present atmosphere;2 —The world community which presently supports us will begin to fall off given its heavy dependence on Mideast oil and their desire to avoid an international conflict; —The crisis is taking a toll on your Presidency and your ability to lead. Politically, a protracted crisis will prevent you from doing the very minimal things that you need to do to win the Democratic nomination; I don’t have a sure sense of how it is done, but I would argue that there are many good reasons for trying to bring this thing to a head at the earliest possible date. Most of the Iranian/Moslem experts seem to agree that we should wait until after Ashura and the December 2nd Constitutional vote to take those steps. Again, this is a difficult decision, but at some point in time, you are going to have to take some risks and make some very difficult decisions, I believe that the risks and difficulty of those decisions will increase with the passage of time. (You should read the most recent cable from Laingen if you have not already seen it.)3 Secondly, I share your concern about the negotiations and the UN channel. I don’t think that we have much choice but to try that approach, but I personally hope that it does not succeed. Despite our best efforts to explain and defend, I believe that we will be savaged politically for signing a document permitting a trial of the Shah by an international tribunal. Our participating in that exercise comes very close to violating the principles that we have adhered to throughout this crisis. If those four principles are the basis for the safe release of our hostages,4 it will make it all the more important that we take some punitive steps against Iran. For the balance sheet will not be even, and the UN trial will be seized upon by our critics at home and abroad as evidence of our lack of strength and resolve. Review with me the results of this crisis precipitated by Iran: —The national humiliation of our country and its ability to protect our diplomatic interests; —The crisis has required actions on our part—Iranian oil embargo and the freezing of assets—that will work a very specific hardship on our people and has had some adverse impact on friendly nations (like Saudi Arabia). —Emotional wear and tear on our people at the Embassy. I saw a “terror psychologist” on television last week who said that a good 2 Carter sent the SALT II Treaty and Protocol and related documents to the Senate for advice and ratification on June 22. 3 See Document 46.

First Responses nians for a long time to come. We certainly have to be concerned about Iran post-hostage and post-Khomeini, but we should be realistic about what that means. I am sure that there are people in the middle class in Iran and persons with Western educations that deplore what Khomeini has done and is doing, but those people will be outnumbered by many times by the people whose religious zeal has resulted in a strong anti-American feeling. I believe that some time soon you should spend several hours with the Iranian experts from State and CIA and talk about Iran post-hostage crisis. We have been focused almost exclusively on the day-to-day situation with the hostages and some of the decisions that you will have to make soon as relates to the hostages will have implications for us in terms of our long-term objectives in Iran. Fourth, if possible and compatible with the best strategy for safely extracting the hostages, the application of one of the military options resulting in their release is much better than the application of the military options after their release. The best scenario would be that we exercise one of the military options and the hostages were then released. This would show American will and ability to act and would respond to the pressure for us to “punish” the Iranians for their actions. If we have to punish the Iranians after the release of the hostages (which I would strongly favor), world opinion might very well turn against us. At that point, I would say to hell with world opinion. You know, Mr. President, it is difficult to be the richest kid on the block and also the most popular. As a people and as a nation, we desire to be loved and respected. As a result, we are neither. Looking at the great challenges which face our people in the future, it seems that at this point in time in our history it is much more important that our people have their self-respect and some respect from the international community. If we are not respected around world and at home, there is no chance for us to be loved.

First Responses possible. I said I could not yet promise when an answer might be possible on the other matters that he raised. David D. Newsom3 3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. Memorandum from the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 24, 1979 SUBJECT Seizure of Documents in Tehran This responds to your November 22 memorandum to the Secretary.2 The attached paper3 summarizes the information available November 23 about the Tehran Embassy documents under Iranian control. None of the working files of the Chargé, the Political Section, the Economic Section, the Defense Attaché Office (DAO), and Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) were destroyed. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses and this seems to be catching on. A flood of telegrams to the UN or Iran was also mentioned. (C) 7. Shah. Iran intends to bring suit against the Shah. One suit will probably seek the return of his assets to Iran and the other will attempt in some fashion to bring him to account for crimes. We have always said they could resort to our courts, and there is no immediate decision required on our part. However, we may later wish to consider filing an amicus brief or otherwise intervening if the question arises about Iranian standing in our courts, especially while they continue to hold hostages. (S) Political-Military Issues: 1. International Court of Justice (ICJ). The SCC agreed that we should be prepared to request the ICJ for a finding on interim measures for protection and release of U.S. hostages. It is anticipated that the Court could act within a week to ten days. Going to the ICJ would complete a record of having exhausted all available remedies under international law. It does not deprive us of the right of unilateral action while the case is under consideration, although it may make certain actions more difficult. Under the terms of our treaties with Iran, they can renounce jurisdiction by the ICJ by simply sending a telegram; therefore, we should not reveal that this course of action is under consideration. All agreed that no approach should be made to the ICJ until 24 hours after the Security Council resolution, to avoid providing an excuse for Iran to delay on the grounds that the matter was under consideration by the Court.6 2. AWACS Deployment. A possible base has been identified at an isolated location in Egypt in the Eastern Desert. Two AWACS aircraft can fly non-stop from Oklahoma to Egypt. Refueling aircraft would be required from the Azores, four KC–135 tanker aircraft would have to be positioned at the Egyptian field, and support equipment would

First Responses Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, November 26, 1979 1. Meeting with Families of Embassy Tehran Hostages—I met with about forty family members of Embassy Tehran hostages today in the Department. I assured them that the release and safety of their families is uppermost in our mind and that we will continue to work around the clock. I described in particular our current efforts at the United Nations to obtain their release. Dave Newsom continued the session and spoke about our efforts to ensure regular visitation and proper care for the hostages. He also read a message to the families from Bruce Laingen praising the character and conduct of the hostages and urging patience and restraint. The tenor of the initial questions from the family members was disturbed and many were particularly forceful in criticizing the decision to admit the Shah. However, after they expressed their feelings and frustration, there was a general recognition of the need for patience and restraint aimed at securing the release of the hostages. The group decided to draft a public statement along these lines. They also indicated interest in having periodic meetings until the hostages are released, with the next one possibly scheduled following the December 2 Iranian referendum. [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 4. Iran—Warren briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, more than 100 House Members, and Tip O’Neill today on the situation in Iran.2 A good deal of interest in the activities of George Hansen was evidenced. Warren characterized them as unhelpful, and explained that promises of Congressional hearings on the Shah before the hostages are released undercut our efforts. Frank Church and Clem Zablocki both issued statements after the meetings to the effect that hearings would be considered only after release of the hostages. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner.

First Responses Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, November 27, 1979 SUBJECT Iran: What Next? I enclose today’s SCC minutes.2 As you will see from them, we appear to make useful current decisions, but it is extremely difficult to get the group to focus on any strategic goals or steps. I again tried to push the participants to reflect on the needed steps if our current “litigational” approaches fail. I asked, what will we do if the Security Council’s resolution is defied? What will we do if the World Court’s ruling is also defied? There simply was no predisposition to answer these questions. As a result, we are locking ourselves into a litigational approach, which is fine if our strategy is to transform the crisis into a prolonged malaise. But we need to ask more directly whether that is what we want. More specifically, Iran poses for us three interrelated dilemmas: 1. How to get the hostages out; 2. How to get rid of Khomeini—or, in other words, how to save Iran for the West; 3. How to get on with the Moslem world. What are the implications of the above and what are some of the contradictions between them? Patience and Litigation The easiest way might seem to be by peaceful means. We are trying that now. But it may not succeed. In the meantime, however, we might lock ourselves into a pattern which increasingly excludes the use of force. I can see us sliding already into the usual litigational mode to which there is no end and from which there is no easy extrication (because a peaceful solution is always around the corner). Meanwhile, our domestic support will gradually fragment—with some howling for military action and others engaging in a do-it-yourself diplomacy. Our international support is also likely to be dissipated in the context 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

First Responses would be understandable to much of the international community, especially if the UN/International Court options were exhausted. I suspect that it would also prompt a less hostile reaction from the Arab world than a punitive post-release strike, since Moslems generally respect firm action based on clear legal/moral principle. Such an action could also contribute to Khomeini’s eventual fall. If he were to back down and release our hostages, he will have been humiliated. If he did not, the cumulative effects of the blockade as well as the punitive strike would encourage Iranian internal opposition, especially if we were to couple such action with more direct appeals to Iranians to overthrow his regime. Many Iranians are concerned that Khomeini is jeopardizing their chances to enter the 20th century as an independent and viable nation. Finally, I believe that this course of action, though inevitably risky, would be politically more appealing. The public senses that our position is 100% correct on grounds of principle and that a strong reaction is justified. It would support it. To conclude, I see us facing three possible outcomes: 1. A positive solution by peaceful means. If accomplished without too much humiliation, it is the best course of action, especially if followed by political/economic sanctions against Iran. We should know in a week if we can get it.4 2. Endless litigation, transforming the crisis into a prolonged malaise. This seems to me to be the worst outcome possible, for reasons already outlined. 3. The application of military pressure, which involves very high risks but which historically and politically is a preferable course to #2 above. Moreover, the paradox of the situation is that increasingly evident willingness to use military pressure may actually hasten a peaceful outcome, because it is likely to generate greater worldwide desire for a rapid termination of the crisis. 4 An unknown hand, presumably Carter’s, underlined “in a week.”

First Responses Memorandum of Conversation1

First Responses Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 27, 1979 SUBJECT The U.S. and the Islamic World (U) It disturbs me that the net result of our response to critical events in Iran and elsewhere in the Muslim world contributes exactly to what our enemies most want to see: we isolate ourselves from Muslims, mutual suspicions grow and permanent alienation sets in. Thus we will find it harder and harder to communicate with Muslims—because we reduce our opportunities for communicating. If we do not stem this process, the Carter Administration will have left its successors a legacy that will require many years to eliminate. (U) Steps to protect Americans in Muslim countries from imminent attack by evacuating dependents and reducing staffs are probably unavoidable in the circumstances in which we now find ourselves, but I sense that we may be on the edge of a form of bureaucratic panic. The more we reduce presence in such countries, the less opportunity we have for communication with their governments and peoples on any level and the more opportunities there will be for suspicions and misunderstandings to grow. Rather than demonstrating to the world that we break and run when under pressure, we would serve our own interests better if we displayed a stubborn insistence on staying in place, asserting ourselves and being ready to fight (let the Marines shoot!) to defend our installations and our principles when challenged. (C) Eleven hundred Marines to protect more than 150 diplomatic installations around the world is too few. We need to double that number. We still possess the most advanced technology in the world—we should announce a new program to apply it to defense of our diplomatic establishments abroad. Our information efforts are already too weak in most of these countries; our exchange efforts are oriented too much toward listening to others and too little toward telling our own story. The naive idealistic thrust of these programs which has become enshrined as a set of sacred principles in recent years should be reversed. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

First Responses • to discourage unofficial Americans, businessmen, and others from packing up and running, • to accuse the Soviets of what we know—or suspect—they are doing, and expose their tawdry record toward Islam, • to get our story across in every way possible—by increasing outlets and expanding resources, • by showing the kind of determination and strength that will enable our friends to help us assert ourselves. (U) Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, November 27, 1979 1. UN Security Council Meeting on Iranian Situation: After consultations throughout the day which resulted in an agreed scenario,2 the UN Security Council met this afternoon to hear statements by Secretary General Waldheim and the President of the Council (Palacios of Bolivia). Characterizing the conflict between Iran and the US as a grave threat to international peace and security, Waldheim said the US was deeply concerned with the seizure of the Embassy and the detention of diplomatic personnel “in violation of relevant international conventions.” He noted that Iran seeks the redress of perceived injustices and abuses of human rights by the previous regime. Waldheim said it would not be appropriate for him to make detailed proposals at this time, but that he was certain the parties want to see an end to the present situation. He appealed for maximum restraint and avoidance of any actions which could “further inflame the situation.” The Council President then read an agreed statement in which he noted Waldheim’s letter of November 25 calling for an urgent Council 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter wrote “Cy, J” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 A draft of the agreed-upon scenario contained the following five points: (1) that deliberations before the Security Council would begin November 27; (2) that simultaneously all U.S. personnel would be permitted to leave; (3) that the Secretary-General would establish an international commission to investigate allegations of human rights violations in Iran; (4) that the United States would recognize the rights of the Iranian Government to assert in U.S. courts its claims to assets frozen by the United States; and (5) that both Iran and the United States agree to abide by international diplomatic norms. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran

First Responses Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses which would say that we had heard this rumor, that we are checking it out, but that we cannot confirm its accuracy. We should also be prepared to state that we have sent a démarche to the Iranian authorities on this issue, and we may wish to background on the possible implications of this act in order to structure the speculation in the press. On one hand, it means less centralized control. On the other, it may fit together with information about mining the embassy walls, etc., as evidence that this is a measure to protect the hostages. State is preparing a statement which will make these points and reiterate that we hold the authorities in Tehran accountable for the safety of the hostages. (C) Next Steps: (All of the following is Top Secret) Dr. Brzezinski opened the discussion by noting that we may be facing a situation where Iran will continue to defy all of our diplomatic and international moves while gradually undercutting international and domestic U.S. support by focusing on U.S. intelligence activities. In the meantime, we will have locked ourselves into a litigation strategy which ties our hands. The President had asked the group to think about the following options, to reflect on them, refine them and discuss them with him later: 1. Seek strong condemnation of Iran in the Security Council; 2. Have the Shah leave the country this weekend. There is concern that Khomeini may at some point commit himself to trials if the Shah is permitted to leave the country; 3. Call publicly for the embargo of all shipments to Iran until the hostages are released, and ask other nations to support us in this; 4. Seek sanctions against Iran under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter; 5. Mine Iranian ports and issue a statement that strong punishment will be inflicted on Iran if any of the hostages are harmed; adding that the mining will be lifted immediately once they are released; 6. Taking of stronger reactions which have been planned in the event the hostages are harmed. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we should not escalate the situation in a measured way as a means of bringing other nations into support for us rather than let the crisis subside into a condition of normalcy. Hamilton Jordan observed that it was not only the President’s political situation that was at stake but also U.S. national interests. He was surprised that the situation had not turned sour already, but he did not see how the country could go on for two or three months this way. Secretary Vance agreed but noted that the question is what can be done to change the situation in an effective way without making it worse. Hamilton Jordan said that once the Shah leaves, they will have to respond. With all that is going on, a lot might happen by next week.

First Responses losing world opinion, yet we must stand up at some point. He had no answer as to when. Jody Powell agreed with Harold Brown that the danger to our people increased over time, and our position at home is eroding. Time works against us and appears to work for Khomeini. He favored taking some action to reverse this situation. However, such action would not only put our people in danger but it was unlikely Khomeini would respond positively in the near future. We should know what we intend to do if any of the hostages are harmed. A rescue operation—even if unlikely to succeed—might be desirable. We should not go after Chapter 7 sanctions unless we think there is a good chance we will succeed. A Soviet veto would be undesirable. Hamilton Jordan agreed, noting that other things we might do could also damage SALT. Mr. Kirbo said that as long as we know our people are safe, the public will stay with us.8 If they pull people out of the compound, there will be rumors that they are being killed one at a time. We should not take drastic actions as long as we are fairly sure they are there. If that vanishes, it becomes very difficult. He was unsure about the Soviets. Cutting off supplies might do the job, but if the Iranians kill someone, we must kill someone. Khomeini was the only one he wanted to hit. Dr. Brzezinski summarized the following points of agreement: 1. Any such act (mining or military) increases the danger to the hostages. 2. If any hostages are killed, we should react forcibly. Mining was not enough. (Our act should be precise, not indiscriminate.) 3. We should exhaust all diplomatic recourse. 4. We should take the first four steps now. Secretary Vance agreed we should do points 1 and 2 on the President’s list, but felt that we should not ask other countries for embargo until all diplomatic recourse has been exhausted. That will take three weeks to a month. Secretary Brown said we should not wait for one thing: we should insist immediately—perhaps in the press conference tonight9—that there be daily visits to the hostages by neutral observers. 8 Carter underlined most of this sentence and made a checkmark in the margin

First Responses Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to President Carter Washington, November 28, 1979 [Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 73, Presidential Advisory File, Middle East Box 6

First Responses In political terms, it is doubtful in the current mood that these economic measures would do anything but stiffen the backs of the Iranians. Our move to block assets on November 14 drew a swift reply from Khomeini, who regarded the freeze as an act of economic warfare. The announcement by Bani-Sadr that Iran would repudiate its debts was mainly triggered by the President’s decision.3 By taking these actions at this time, we would reduce rather than strengthen or expand our influence with Khomeini and those Revolutionary Council members who count. There is also a question of timeliness since the actions could not be expected to produce any strong effects for three to four weeks, and the principal results will not come for months afterward, regardless of the outcome of the present situation. 3 See Document 30. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

First Responses to lose the judgment, although appeals can stretch the process out for several additional weeks. This fact is an additional argument for going ahead with Option 4 in the relatively near future, to avoid the impression that our position is unravelling. (S) 4. Student Remittances. Licenses have been issued for $20 million in payments to Iranian students. Another $20 million will be licensed next week. The program is about $1 billion per year. All of this is new money being brought in for that specific purpose, consonant with the previous decision to license student remittances. (C) 5. Japan. Mr. Carswell will talk to the Japanese at a high level today and will make clear our displeasure at their lack of cooperativeness on financial matters regarding Iran. (C) 6. U.S. Payments. The SCC agreed that Treasury should issue licenses for about $100 million in new Iranian money to pay U.S. creditors for exports shipped before the freeze went into effect.5 (C) 7. Transfers out of Dollar Accounts. Iran has offered to pay interest on a loan for which Chemical Bank is the agent, if it is licensed to be paid in Switzerland in other than dollars. The amount of this payment is about $7 million. The SCC recommended that we insist on payment in this country in dollars as specified in the contract. We do not want to license moves away from the dollar, even though the company may not get its payment right away.6 (C) 8. Immigration. A total of 26,000 students have been interviewed;

First Responses for tomorrow’s meeting. The preliminary reactions of the SCC were to avoid any point-by-point defense of the charges, to claim that the information includes forgeries and suspect documents, and to avoid comment on specific allegations. (S) Attachment Paper Prepared in the Department of the Treasury11 Washington, November 28, 1979 ADDITIONAL OPTIONS FOR FINANCIAL MEASURES AGAINST GOVERNMENT OF IRAN The following are a series of steps that could be taken in the financial area to interdict Iranian financial transactions. Options 4

First Responses Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, November 29, 1979 SUBJECT Iran: Next Steps Your press conference2 has been enormously helpful in placing the issue in perspective, in reassuring the U.S. public, in dramatizing your personal leadership, and in keeping up front the central issue: the illegal detention of hostages. In the meantime, we are proceeding with the UN Security Council debate and with the World Court case. What other steps ought we contemplate, in the event the Iranians are not accommodating? The table I gave you a week ago has a complete list of options,3 and I will not duplicate it here. However, I do want to outline a possible scenario, in the event that peaceful accommodation proves not to be possible. Khomeini’s conduct suggests that he may not want any compromise or peaceful solution. Accordingly, you may wish to consider the following: 1. We obtain a positive Security Council vote—while refusing to debate Iranian charges as long as our hostages are detained. (Through the middle of next week—in progress.) 2. We press for a World Court ruling. (Anywhere up to about the third week of December—in progress.) 3. We go to our allies and ask them to join us in a financial and economic embargo of Iran—hinting to them that lack of support will leave us no option but to act militarily, a contingency they much fear. We should also consult with them at a high level, perhaps through a Presidential emissary.4 4. We request economic sanctions from the UN under Chapter 7. 5. You appear before the General Assembly to appeal for support in preserving international norms. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

First Responses in Tehran that is already highly charged by the advent of Ashura and the upcoming constitutional referendum. Attached at Tab 14 are some thoughts on alternate countries of residence that we may want to pursue with Armao. We are also considering suggesting to the Shah that he return to Mexico since his visa does not expire until December 9. This will allow him to consider to ask for political asylum in Mexico, and it will permit us to help him check with other countries which might be willing to receive him. Although his visa is technically valid until December 9, we cannot exclude the possibility that the Mexicans, who have publicly discouraged him from returning for a short period, would actually revoke it if the Shah actually attempts to return there. [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis] 4 Attached but not printed. See footnote 3, above. Paper Prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency Washington, November 30, 1979 [Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-

Options Identified Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Options Identified Efforts are continuing to get as many nations as possible to speak on behalf of release of the hostages. The Soviets are being unhelpful by requesting that no meeting be held tonight. Mr. Newsom will raise with Secretary Vance the advisability of raising this directly with Dobrynin 4. Iranian Assets. Mr. Solomon said that there is a noticeable erosion of our position on the assets frozen in U.S. banks abroad. An adverse court ruling in London may come within a matter of days. Mr. Solomon stressed the urgency of deciding on a course of action. The options are: (1) proceed to ask our allies to adopt financial sanctions of their own, which would then assure their intervention on our behalf in their own national courts; (2) ask our allies to intervene with their courts for a delay in judgment on the grounds that this is a sovereign matter between governments; or (3) we can begin taking steps to withdraw on the foreign freeze as gracefully as possible. (TS) Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1), getting our allies to impose sanctions, will be very tough and will require extreme pressure, including threats to the allies that a failure to respond will adversely affect our overall defense relationship. He did not believe that a strongly worded letter from the President would suffice nor would the prospect that we might take some military action against Iran which would ultimately interrupt oil supplies. The British, in particular, were not concerned about Iranian oil. (TS) The second option, getting allied governments to persuade the courts to stay a judgment, would protect our present freeze position but not place more pressure on Iran. The U.K. is the key since that is where Iran is presently challenging us in court. Mr. Solomon reported that the British told us informally that they wanted to stay neutral and avoid getting involved in the case. (TS) The rationale for the third course of action would be that we have now determined that sufficient assets exist within the United States to cover prospective claims; therefore, there is no need to hold assets abroad. It would be seen as a retreat but perhaps less so than if the U.K. court ordered the freeze lifted. (TS) Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1) would take very significant pressure at the highest level and should not be undertaken unless we were determined to follow through. Moreover, it was becoming increasingly difficult as each day passed. Mr. Komer noted that if we interfered with our NATO defense relationship, we would be threatening self-defeating action which might not be credible. [Note: The fact that the U.K. wants a decision in the near future that we will help modernize the U.K. deterrent does provide us with very significant leverage over this key country. Moreover, U.K. refusal to help could

Options Identified Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, December 1, 1979 SUBJECT The Dynamics of the Hostage Situation Pursuing the diplomatic options and applying the pressure of world opinion to the Iranians is clearly the right approach over the next several days. The question of the Shah’s departure from the U.S., the UNSC and ICJ proceedings, the religious fervor of Muharram, the Iranian vote on the new constitution, the continued international perception of the U.S. as the aggrieved party—all argue that it is too soon to move to “other means.” But as time goes on, the Iranians, and the world—though not the American people—are likely to begin to see the holding of the U.S. hostages as the natural state of things, rather than as an abomination. There may then be more international pressure on the U.S. to “confess our sins of espionage,” and to promise amnesty to Iran, than on the Iranians to release the hostages. At home, the general support for our policy (strong pressure with peaceful means, holding military action in reserve) will begin to fragment. On one side there will be calls for extreme military actions, on the other for meeting some or all Iranian demands. Your press conference of Wednesday evening2 (the most effective of your Presidency thus far) has held the situation together for an extra week or so. Early in the week of Dec. 3, I believe it will be time to push our Allies and friends to adopt some of the strongest economic measures we can devise. Apparently action by the European and Japanese banks similar to our own—blocking, defaults, etc.—would soon have increasingly severe effects. But those countries correctly view such action as risky and painful to themselves. They will take it, if at all, only if they believe the alternative is military action by us that is even more risky to them in economic and political terms. We must be prepared to threaten such action. If we cannot persuade them to take such economic and political action, or if it fails to secure release of the hostages, we will have to 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Options Identified us another week or so. But even then I do not think we can delay facing up to at least the mildest military actions for more than about a month from now. Harold Brown Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, December 1, 1979 The Shah—We worked out the plans for the movement of the Shah to Wilford Hall Hospital at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio.2 Lloyd Cutler has gone to New York with Peter Tarnoff to present these plans to the Shah and get his concurrence. The Group who will implement the plans in New York consists of a representative of State, Defense and the FBI. Arrangements are being made to take him from the hospital to the Marine Terminal at LaGuardia Airfield. The FBI will be in charge of that operation. The anticipated time of departure from New York will be tomorrow morning. The precise timing has been left to the implementing team who will be working out the details in New York. They will keep us informed here. In order to preserve security at Lackland, we will not indicate how many people will be coming but rather merely reserve the VIP Suite at the hospital. Jody and Hodding have worked out a press release which will be issued at the time the flight is airborne.3 It will stress the fact that he has completed his hospitalization but needs a period of rest and recuperation, and that this will be done at a safe and secure location at the specified air base so as to provide adequate security. We will preposition a brief message to be delivered to each of the Governments in the area at the same time the announcement will be made here. This is necessary in order to prevent any misunderstanding as to what is 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 Vance met with Brown, Christopher, Newsom, Webster, Caldwell, Powell, Cutler,

Options Identified SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues: 1. Economic Sanctions. Secretary Miller reviewed the three options:2 (1) persuade our allies to take more stringent economic actions of their own; (2) persuade the British to intervene with their courts to stay a judgment; or (3) move to unfreeze the Iranian assets held abroad as gracefully as possible. He felt that a letter to the heads of state would not be sufficient. It would be better to call them to Washington and invoke our defense alliance as persuasive leverage. Similarly, a public appeal to these states would be likely to backfire since there is little public support for stronger action. All of these countries foresee damage to their own interests if they act against Iran. Specifically, they are concerned about an oil cutoff (Japan gets 13% of its oil from Iran), disruption of their own investments in Iran (which are sizable for Germany especially), and instability of the banking system (a tender issue for the British). Our contacts to date reveal that they are opposed to any action. All agreed that an attempt, and failure, to get option 1 would be worse than not trying at all. The SCC recognized that the dollar was under severe pressure and that the failure of our allies to support us could unravel the situation not only to the detriment of the situation in Iran but also the strength of the dollar generally. It was agreed that Treasury would take another hard look at option 1 in a smaller group, including the possibility of the Export-Import Bank declaring Iran in default.3 (S) Option 2 appeared feasible. Mr. Christopher suggested that option 2 should make clear that we intend to fight hard and with imagination to win the cases in British courts, even if the British refuse to intervene. Mr. Cutler strongly agreed and noted that British statements in the Security Council could be cited as evidence that blocking of assets was consistent with British public policy. The cases might be won if a stiff fight were put up. Even if they are lost, we can tie up the process for several months with appeals, which will keep the Iranian economic process in some turmoil, and that is to our advantage. We can strengthen our case by U.S. Government intervention in London. Mr. Aaron observed that we have the means to bring some real pressure on the British. All agreed that we should proceed immediately with option 2, as modified by Mr. Christopher.4 (S) 2 See Document 74. 3 Carter neither approved nor disapproved the item. In the right margin, he wrote: “This is too weak—I’m more concerned about not trying than of possible failure. We’re losing support now.” 4 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin: “Prepare strongest possible move.”

Options Identified on the Libyan response, explanation and willingness to compensate, this can be reviewed later.10 (C) 5. Next Steps. The SCC tomorrow will consider a scenario for the diplomatic efforts over the next two or three weeks. It will also examine the longer range objectives and strategy of our relations with Iran. (S) 10 Carter checked the disapprove option and wrote in the margin: “Call Libyan Chargé in—give Khadafi 24 hours to reply satisfactorily to a Presidential demand. Then suspend (not break) relations.” On December 2, the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli was attacked in what Vance called a “government-inspired demonstration.” At the bottom of a December 3 memorandum to Carter from Vance, Carter wrote: “Cy—a) prepare to declare Iranian diplomats PNG. They can have either a bank or very small financial staff handle student money. b) prepare to inform European allies this week that after UNSC vote we will call for them to embargo trade with Iran and then (or simultaneously) seek sanctions thru UN. We will inform them in advance of any military action (or if you prefer I can send a separate emissary). J.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14) Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 3, 1979 SUBJECT Mid-Range and Longer-Range Strategy A checklist and possible structure for your meeting on Tuesday.2 A mid-range negotiating strategy is not incompatible with a longerrange strategy aimed at replacement of Khomeini or other strategies which seek a fundamental change in the political situation. The key decision to be made is whether or not we will place all our eggs in the negotiating basket and let ourselves be carried along by events or whether we will consider negotiations as one arm of a more activist strategy aimed at transforming the situation. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Options Identified what we want. If we can convince them that they are in a net with no way out, pressure will build rapidly to change the situation. However, the negotiating strategy is unlikely to be successful in itself. They can potentially live with economic chaos for a prolonged period of time. Khomeini’s support is the “rabble” which has been disadvantaged historically and which can survive at a level which the intelligentsia would find intolerable. If he can keep them minimally fed and full of glorious dreams, they will stay with him. He is their man. Change is not likely to be evolutionary. Pressures are building for a new explosion which will come from dissaffected elements: the army, a disillusioned faction around Khomeini, a loose tribal coalition, a new strongman . . . perhaps all of the above. It could also come from the left, which is gaining strength but still far short of the kind of support needed for a direct challenge. Our objective should be to encourage forces which we see as desirable alternatives to Khomeini and help them to be ready to step in when the explosion occurs. We cannot directly change the course of events, but we can nudge them in the direction we want them to go. Our nudges are likely to be ineffective, however, unless we are acting in an agreed policy context with clear objectives and a degree of commitment which will lend consistency and purpose to our efforts. Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves in the same position as last year when different sides of the policy house were speaking with different voices and fighting their battles in the press. We are edging toward that situation. An Activist Policy I outlined my ideas on this yesterday4 and will not repeat them here beyond a schematic: —Policy Decision: We cannot work with Khomeini. A gradualist approach is futile in a revolutionary situation and only encourages the left. —Covert Action. Must be a major effort. We need to build (or rebuild) a cadre of imaginative, effective talent. —Coalition Building. Potential allies are everywhere. Our support, even if private and qualified, will speed them to do their own thing. —Military. Our presence in the region is vital and effective. We must know when and how we will be prepared to use it in order to 4 In a December 2 memorandum to Brezezinski, Sick provided an assessment of the internal power situation within Iran. He argued that Iran faced a potential civil war that “offers almost no latitude for classic diplomacy” which was particularly “useless in trying to move Khomeini and the students.” He thought Khomeini’s position was also deteriorating. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File,

Options Identified would ultimately be to rally so much opposition to Khomeini that new leadership could move into Tehran and take over. Clearly, this process would be difficult, if not impossible, to control, and the results might be quite different from our plans. 2. The other approach is to begin putting lines out to moderate leadership in Tehran and in the religious community with an eye to developing relationships which will put us in a favorable position when responsible elements decide to take more and more of the decision-making out of Khomeini’s hands. We need not view these approaches in either/or terms. We could set in motion the second option, holding in reserve consideration of the first. Both options present us with the same problem we have faced all along: There are no groups with sufficient strength and popular appeal to pose a serious threat to Khomeini. Those that we can deal with are fragmented and fearful. Thus, we will have to move with great caution and not expect early results. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] If one were to bridge this longer-term program—if one is decided on—and the present situation, the point would be that efforts in the present situation to demonstrate that Khomeini’s government is not able to manage Iran’s economic problems as long as Iran remains isolated from the rest of the world and in confrontation with us.

Options Identified has been that a regional crisis is likely to develop as a result of the Shah’s fall. It could even become a global crisis. At our meeting yesterday2 the Vice President said that the emerging confrontation between Islam and the United States, accompanied by European backsliding, could transform overall international and economic relations in a drastic fashion—and I fear he is right. Accordingly, we need to look beyond the hostage issue in shaping our broad strategy. Specific Issues: 1. Economic Sanctions Options: (a) To ask our allies to adopt financial sanctions of their own. This would require a very major effort, including perhaps convening an emergency Summit meeting of the Seven. Solomon feels that something like this may be necessary because, otherwise, our allies will cut their own deals while the dollar will continue to decline. (b) To ask our allies—notably Great Britain—to intervene with their courts for a delay in judgment on the grounds that the financial steps taken by us involve a sovereign matter between governments. This will work best with the UK, and the SCC, in general, leans toward this option. (c) To invoke Chapter 7 of the UN. This could follow a Security Council vote, though support is not certain. (d) You should also consider sending a top level emissary to consult with our allies. 2. Additional Political Measures Cy envisages proceeding with the Security Council toward a resolution, and in the World Court toward a judgment. You might ask him what additional steps he envisages beyond these two. You have previously urged an expulsion of Iranian diplomats from this country.3 Is the time right to take that action? In addition, you should explicitly review the possibility of a dramatic personal appearance by yourself before the General Assembly. A powerful speech, with the tone and substance much like your last Press Conference,4 could have a dramatic impact. It would also lay the ground for more decisive action. 2 No record of a December 2 meeting has been found.

Options Identified We will present specific options to you at the meeting after review by the SCC. [7 lines not declassified] We need to shape a coalition to defeat Khomeini; and we should orchestrate a propaganda campaign to help achieve that end. To reinforce this strategy, we would have to maintain as many economic pressures on Iran as we can generate, both directly and indirectly. Once the existing fervor dies down, economic dislocations will make more modernistically minded Iranians think about the lunacy into which Khomeini has plunged them. I have tried to raise the subject repeatedly in SCC meetings, but almost everyone shies away from reaching any firm conclusion on the subject. [4½ lines not declassified] [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] 6. Public Posture The conflict is not with Islam. I have raised this matter at SCC meetings on more than one occasion, and I explicitly spoke to it at the Jewish Labor Committee convention. More important, and with far greater effect, you commented on it very eloquently in your last Press Conference, but the point needs to be made over and over again. It might be useful for you to reiterate that point and instruct all U.S. spokesmen to keep repeating it at every opportunity. 7. Middle Eastern Security [Omitted here is information on Saudi Arabia, Oman, Somalia, and Egypt.]

Options Identified US dollar as a reserve currency would cause difficult adjustments in the near term, but could prove beneficial over the long haul to the United States. [portion marking not declassified] Monetary and Trade Problems Theoretically, the US order blocking Iranian monetary assets should not impede international economic transactions with Iran. In practice, however, confusion on the part of the Iranian banks and general uncertainty over the present situation among Western traders and bankers—largely inspired by intemperate and ill-chosen remarks made by high Iranian officials—are creating problems for all parties concerned. As a result, oil revenues continue to flow into blocked accounts, and some foreign companies and banks are unwilling to accept letters of credit (L/C) for exports to Iran. [portion marking not declassified] The reluctance of international bankers to open new lines of credit with Iran stem from fears of not being paid. In particular, the banks do not wish to comply with the Iranian requirement that L/Cs be drawn on Iranian banks. They are afraid that possible massive loan defaults by Iran would trigger blocking orders by West European governments, tying up almost all of Iran’s official assets. Some of the L/Cs that are being opened apparently carry risk premiums. [portion marking not declassified] Chaos in the Iranian banking system has made it difficult for Tehran to sort out trade financing problems; inadequate—sometimes conflicting—instructions are being sent to customers, branch banks, and correspondent banks. Lack of management and direction as a result of the flight of key personnel are largely responsible for the chaos. Indeed with careful management, the solution to the US asset block would be relatively simple: the Iranian government need only maintain deposits exclusively in non-US banks and cancel outstanding letters of credit that would channel money into blocked accounts. However, given the erratic behavior and uncoordinated efforts of Iran’s government and banks, the process of establishing new, orderly relations with non-US banks is taking considerable time and depends heavily on assistance from foreign bankers and traders. [portion marking not declassified] Iran-US Financial Dispute Spreads Because of their dependence on OPEC oil, US allies are trying to remain neutral in the US-Iranian financial hassle while generally voicing support for release of the hostages. [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] Western Europe and Japan West European central banks and governments are attempting to maintain positions of strict neutrality on financial issues in the face of mounting difficulties. [9 lines not declassified]

Options Identified • Venezuela, the only non-Arab OPEC member with large foreign holdings, has expressed concern that the flare-up might create a rift in OPEC. [portion marking not declassified] Only a few oil producers, notably the radical states of Algeria and Libya, sharpened their public anti-US stance in response to the US financial action. The Libyan delegation to the Arab Foreign Ministers meeting in Tunis called for joint Arab reprisals against the United States. The Libyan initiative received only mild support from Syria and was soundly rejected by the conference. [8 lines not declassified] Little OPEC Support for Iranian Initiatives [1 paragraph (10½ lines) not declassified] The Iranians have received no support for their request that OPEC discontinue the use of the dollar as the means of payment for oil exports. Acting in their self interest, the oil exporting countries seem unlikely to reject the dollar as a vehicle currency as long as it remains a principal currency for transactions by the rest of the world; they will need dollars to pay for their imports. Some would be especially reluctant to take actions that might be thought to have a long-term, adverse effect on the dollar, because more than half of their assets are dollardenominated. [portion marking not declassified] Longer-Term Implications of the Iranian-US Flareup The following is our preliminary reaction to the longer-term impact of the Iranian crisis. Impact on Iran The financial and governmental confusion generated by the USblocking of Iranian assets and by the threats of the Iranians to default on their external debts is having a seriously adverse effect on trade and other external relationships that will be felt for many months to come. In addition, skepticism about the government’s ability and willingness to ensure personal security will slow the return of foreign contractors and technicians who are leaving the country. Overall, spinoff from the current crisis is undermining Iran’s ability to supply itself while making imports more difficult. Hence, worsening economic conditions—including spot shortages of critical commodities such as food—are certainly in the cards. The worst of these problems, however, are a few months off. [portion marking not declassified] While the economic downturn being brewed by the current crisis is not apt to change the Ayatollah’s mind set in the short run, its political impact will be felt in the longer term. Most Iranians are willing to pay some price to ensure the success of the revolution, and for the time being many find the United States a handy scapegoat for most of Iran’s problems. Nevertheless, before the current flareup in US-

Options Identified In addition, Swiss, Japanese, and West German banking officials fear the increased use of their currencies as reserve assets and settlement currencies. The Japanese, for example, strongly resisted US pressure in the early 1970s to further internationalize the yen. Wider use of the Swiss franc, yen, and Deutsche mark, would lessen the control of domestic monetary authorities, making money management more difficult. Unregulated Euro-markets in these currencies—now limited— would undoubtedly grow, as happened with the US dollar in the 1960s. If other developed countries continue to resist pressures for greater international use of their currencies, support for a broader role for the SDR in international transactions would likely grow. [portion marking not declassified] Although other oil exporters have rejected Iranian demands that oil be priced and sold in other currencies, the issue is not a new one. Indeed, OPEC as a whole has been discussing for some time now the possibility of pricing its oil in a currency—or a basket of currencies— stronger than the dollar. If only Iran shifted away from using the dollar, the result would probably be a brief flurry in exchange markets. If all oil were suddenly priced and sold in other currencies, however, the one-time drop in demand for dollars would be dramatic and adjustment problems could be severe. World oil trade at current prices is now running at the tremendous level of something more than $250 billion a year. If the value of the dollar takes a plunge, however, so does the value of OPEC assets worldwide. [portion marking not declassified] Over the longer term, the strength of the US dollar will essentially be determined by fundamental economic factors, such as the US inflation rate, current account balance, and the general health of the economy. Thus, any erosion in the status of the US dollar as a reserve currency would not cause serious long-term damage, provided it occurs on a gradual basis—a process that OPEC countries have a strong interest in assuring because of their large dollar holdings. Providing the change in the international currency regime is a gradual one, the dollar over the longer run might benefit. Such a move would give the United States greater control over monetary policy and an enhanced competitive position. [portion marking not declassified]

Options Identified growing. Lopez Portillo of Mexico has been critical of our economic measures. Begging others will not help. We must be pragmatic and take into account other nations’ interests in Iran so long as they stay with us. If he were Schmidt, for example, he would try to stay out of this as long as possible. But if Schmidt had to choose between Germany’s relations with us on economic, military and political areas as opposed to their temporary interests in Iran, he would choose the U.S. Some economic matters must come to a head. If we cannot depend on others, the President wanted to know it. He wanted to insure that the status quo hurts Khomeini. He felt that Khomeini was benefiting from continued trade and diplomatic presence. The presence of our naval forces was a major factor in his reticence to do damage to the hostages. We must act carefully, not lash out in a way that would embarrass us. We should leave no peaceful stone unturned, but we must have our allies on board—which they are not. The President had outlined his ideas in his comments on the SCC notes each day. No timing had been established yet for next moves. There was one thing he feared, that the status quo would be established on a permanent basis. Domestic support will not last. He had deliberately withheld some actions to have them in reserve. We do not know if they have moved the hostages. It is time to inform our three major European allies about the options we may take in the future. Eventually we will have to draw the line, through Chapter Seven sanctions and trade by our allies with Iran. It will be good to know their attitude. The President did not fear a rebuff if we are in the right and have a good case. We have worked to try to find a way out, but we have found no flexibility from Khomeini except for the release of the 13 hostages.4 In that case he chose only women and blacks to try and divide the country. We need to find a place for the Shah to go. Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion in the first, larger half of the meeting first of internal economic steps, then the status of political negotiations, and additional sanctions against Iranian diplomats. We should also discuss how to respond to Mexico. On economic matters, Secretary Miller could speak on possible collective actions—either a full embargo or cross default—as well as the status of court proceedings in London and the special problems with the French. Secretary Miller said he had some good news. One case involving Citibank in London had resulted in an important legal step. The judge had ruled that all of these separate cases should be consolidated, and that they dealt with such grave matters that they deserved full prepara-

Options Identified to call loan B and so on. Declaration of default by the Export-Import Bank would reinforce this process some, but not add much since most American loans have already been triggered. Secretary Brown noted that the trick is to get other countries’ banks to join in. The President asked whether it takes action by the heads of state. Secretary Miller replied that it differed by country. The French own the banks, so it is a government question, whereas in Germany the banks are private. However, it requires a head of state decision since without that kind of political judgment the banks will not do it. It is not a legal decision, it is policy. It will not be easy to get. He suggested proceeding in steps. First we should approach the various advisors through emissaries with written instructions. They should brief but not pull out all the stops. That would be premature until we have softened the turf. Treasury and State representatives should go to the UK and France, another team to Germany and Switzerland this week. There should be a Presidential message saying they are coming. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if this message should preview economic sanctions? We would be using up a lot of ammunition on this initial step. Secretary Miller said that the tougher message should be carried by Vance, who will be going to Europe for the NATO meeting. Secretary Vance agreed. The President agreed, noting that Vance should sit down with each of them for an hour or so. They must know the seriousness of the situation and the seriousness with which we regard their reluctance to help. In the letter he should say that Vance was coming later.5 Dr. Brzezinski said Vance should make the point that the only alternative to multilateral economic actions was unilateral action by the U.S. Secretary Vance said the implications of an embargo were very serious. We must think how it would be received in the Arab world. The reaction could be violence in spades. It would be viewed as the Western Christian world ganging up on the Islamic world. Secretary Miller said there were serious implications about continued oil delivery. Mr. Cutler wondered about the legal ability to proclaim an embargo. 5 The draft letter is in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office

Options Identified Admiral Turner suggested that we might wish to encourage trade unions around the world to join with our own unions to boycott Iranian shipping. Secretary Miller said that Iranian commerce is well contained for the moment. There is virtually nothing moving from the U.S. to Iran. Secretary Brown agreed that it was a trivial trickle. Some corn was moving from the West Coast. Admiral Turner noted that another step would be to have Navy ships interrogate all ships bound for Iran. This would not interefere with shipping, but it would raise insurance rates and increase apprehension about shipping to Iran. Secretary Miller noted that Lloyds has already quadrupled insurance rates and declared Iran a war zone. Secretary Vance noted that we need to generate additional pressure on the trial question. We need more public demands that there will be no trials. Mr. Powell noted that the tickers were very heavy with news that there will be trials. That is an important question today. It has a short fuse. Secretary Vance said we should go to various countries and have them weigh in. The President said this concerned him. We need to get our timid allies to speak out. We must let them know what we would do if there are trials. He knew that the group was more timid than he was. We should get the EC Nine. Dr. Brzezinski interjected a reminder that we had told them before what we would do. Secretary Vance noted that the Ambassador of Sri Lanka has received a commitment for favorable action from the Iranians and he proposes to go to Tehran with a representative of the Secretary General. The Secretary did not know if the Ambassador had overstated Ghotbzadeh’s position. We can also ask for a freeze on military shipments. He could do this while he is abroad, as well as getting in touch with the Pakistanis, Turks and others who have been approached. Admiral Turner noted that a Pakistani delegation is scheduled to go to Iran soon. Secretary Brown said he would be seeing the Turks soon and would raise the issue. Secretary Vance said we should pursue our case in the World Court. They will meet on Friday or Monday.7 In addition, we should

Options Identified cause them to come together. We cannot abide keeping the hostages tied up for another six weeks or six months. Mr. Jordan noted that we had hoped the vote on the constitution would bring things to a head. He thought there was no option but to get the hostages released. Secretary Vance said we do not know the answer. We cannot be assured of a positive outcome. A fellow was just back from Tehran where he met with Ghotbzadeh and others.9 According to him, Ghotbzadeh badly wants a settlement. The Revolutionary Council wants a settlement. But they cannot affect Khomeini and the students. The Revolutionary Council is 100% against trials, and trials would be a defeat for them. Negotiations may prove to be a dead end. The President said they need to know that we cannot stay on this road indefinitely. There is no immediate crisis at the moment. We need not act today. We need to strengthen ourselves. (At that point the meeting was reduced to the statutory members of the NSC.)

Options Identified including several possibilities which Harold Brown would be prepared to present. In this connection Dr. Brzezinski said we should consider how to address these measures with our Allies to encourage their help on the economic measures discussed previously in the NSC meeting. Finally, Dr. Brzezinski said there was the question of timing: is time on our side or is there a continuing erosion in our position internationally? He concluded by suggesting that Harold Brown brief the NSC on the military options which he had under consideration. The President indicated that he first would like Secretary Vance to respond to a question he had asked earlier: what should the U.S. do if the Iranians institute trials. He said that he was at ease about our military preparations and he felt that Khomeini was ill-at-ease. He said the Ayatollah knows that we can blockade Iran, that we can destroy the refineries at Abadan and that we can take out their aircraft and airfields. He noted that we had reached a consensus on the nature of these options within the government but that he would decide when they might be implemented. On the other hand, there was no consensus on the possibilities that were available to us short of these military actions. He thought that as soon as the Security Council finishes its action and the International Court of Justice renders its decision, the U.S. should proceed to ask for mandatory sanctions in the UN Security Council and call for other countries to join us on a voluntary basis. He said he was not certain exactly when economic sanctions should be applied, but it was clear that if the Iranians start trials, the U.S. should move forward on sanctions. He recalled that we had already informed the Iranians that we would seek to interrupt their commerce if they tried the American hostages. Secretary Vance said he had no problem with calling for sanctions but he opposed the mining of harbors to achieve an interruption in Iranian commerce. The President explained that he was not in favor of mining harbors as soon as the trials start as long as the Allies have joined us in imposing voluntary economic sanctions and the Security Council is debating in good faith the possibility of mandatory sanctions. However, if this effort is not successful, he reserved the right to mine Iran’s harbors. He said he wanted Prime Minister Thatcher, President Giscard and Chancellor Schmidt to know that this is an option that we have, and that we are prepared to exercise, if economic sanctions do not work. The Secretary of State said that he agreed with the President but was against mining. The Vice President asked whether the concept was that if the Iranians start trials we would immediately move to sanctions and mining.

Options Identified become a “normal” situation. We are really skating on thin ice with the American public. The Secretary of State said that one action we could take is to move the Shah to a permanent home. The President agreed. Dr. Brzezinski said that there were deployment actions, like positioning AWACS in Egypt, that also might be undertaken. The Secretary of State opposed deploying AWACS to Egypt. He said that we will be pursuing the negotiating track with the Secretary General, with the PLO and others. He thought that the deployment of AWACS to Egypt would put a big obstacle into this track. He thought it would only serve to get the Iranians to rally around Khomeini and toughen up again just when we were hoping to induce them into a more accommodating stance. He said it simply did not make sense to move the AWACS in at this time. Secretary Brown said that there were considerable difficulties in Libya at the moment and that the movement of the AWACS to Egypt could be related to Libya as opposed to the Iranian situation. Dr. Brzezinski said that we have followed the two-track approach in this crisis—increasing military preparations and pursuing negotiating efforts. He said the political negotiations will be going forward and that the deployment of AWACS will demonstrate that the military track is moving forward in case negotiations should fail. Secretary Vance disagreed. He said he thought it would block negotiations. Harold Brown recalled that this was what the Secretary of State had thought if a second carrier were moved into the Arabian Sea. The President said that he did not agree with the Secretary of State. He said that the use of American planes in this situation is a real possibility and we need to prepare for it. He recalled that he had turned down proposals to deploy a third carrier to the region or to put Marines into the area. But he thought the reaction to AWACS would be no worse in Iran than to the two-carrier deployment and that he would feel better if the AWACS were there in case of a conflict. The Secretary of Defense said that we could get the AWACS there in a short period of time. The President responded that he thought he had decided to do this ten days ago at Camp David. Secretary Vance responded that he had not been a participant in that decision. Dr. Brzezinski recalled that the decision had been taken in connection with the Defense Budget meeting4 and that immediately thereafter, when the Secretary of State had learned about it, had registered his concern. 4 The meeting at Camp David to discuss the Defense budget took place on November

Options Identified the program we have in mind.6 The President said that we should get the Allies thoughts rather than lay out a U.S. plan. He also thought there might be a possibility that the French could help provide us information on the Iraqi position and their intentions in this situation. The Secretary of State said that Dick Cooper had been in contact with oil company officials operating in Iraq. They were all convinced that the Iraqis will invade Iran’s oil fields. [Omitted here is information on regional security.] Turning to the question of a permanent location for the Shah, Secretary Vance outlined the situation: In Argentina, Videla has said “the negative generally outweighs the positive.” The price they want is for the United States to lay off on human rights and to say nice things about their government. They also want the Shah to invest his fortune in Argentina. The President commented that we certainly could congratulate them on their hospitality. The Secretary said that in Austria, Kreisky is waiting for Arafat’s reaction on the consequences to the hostages should the Shah relocate there. The President asked what Kreisky had in mind. Secretary Vance replied that Kreisky does not want to be responsible for the deaths of the hostages. The President replied that Kreisky could write a letter in advance disclaiming responsibility. Secretary Vance concluded that we will learn soon what the Austrian reaction is. South Africa wants a request from the Shah in order to consider seriously the possibility of granting him asylum. The Shah has said that he does not like South Africa because they are racists. We are in touch with his people to say that this response is not satisfactory. We understand that the Shah told Peter Tarnoff that he would go to South Africa but that the Shahbanou does not want to go there. Continuing, the Secretary said that Guatemala too would accept the Shah but they too want a big price. Tonga has volunteered asylum, but the Shah has said he does not like islands. There is even the possibility of Ireland. A church leader in Iceland, speaking on behalf of the Government, has said that he might come there. We have asked our Ambassador to Iceland to assess that possibility. Finally, we know that Paraguay will take him, but he will not go there. Costa Rica has said in the past that they would take him, but we do not know what their 6 In a December 4 memorandum to Vance and Turner, Brzezinski wrote that when Vance talks to Thatcher, Schmidt, and Giscard, he should “seek their views on the possibility of supporting an alternative to the Khomeini government in Iran. In particular you should ask for their assessment of alternative leaders and rival groups within and outside Iran we well as the most effective strategies for supporting them.” (Carter Library,

Options Identified The President asked the Secretary of State to get answers to the question of how the money to the students is distributed and on the number of Iranian diplomats that must remain in the country. He said Khomeini must think that the situation cannot be serious if we are still doing diplomatic business as usual. [4½ lines not declassified] he wanted to see if the banks could handle the students. The Secretary of State said that Mr. Farhang, the Cultural Attaché at the Embassy, wants to go back to Tehran to see Khomeini before taking the job as head of the UN Mission in order to tell him what a mistake the holding of the hostages has been. If Khomeini still wanted him to take the UN job, then he would come back and do so. The President asked the Secretary if he could get in touch with Khomeini if he wanted to communicate with him. The Secretary replied that we can do it. The President asked about Lopez Portillo’s comments and what we were doing about Mexican reaction to our freezing of assets. The Secretary of State said that he would be seeing the Mexican Ambassador the next day. The meeting then adjourned. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 5, 1979 MEMORANDUM FOR The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of Treasury As the result of the NSC meeting today,2 it was agreed that the following strategy should be pursued with respect to increasing economic pressure on Iran for the release of American hostages.

Options Identified Memorandum From the Special Assistant for Counter Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency (Kalaris) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, December 5, 1979 SUBJECT Iran—Balance Sheets I don’t think there is anything new in what I have to say in the balance sheets. The stark presentation, however, leads to the conclusion that our long-term national interests call for decisive military action. a. Gains/Losses in pursuing present direction for the following three months: Gains for the U.S.: —It will permit economic measures we are taking to have their impact on Iran. —It will probably ensure that hostages are not executed. Losses for the U.S.: —It will not secure the release of all the hostages. —It will compound the chaos that prevails in Iran and will give determined and organized groups, such as the Tudeh, an excellent opportunity to gain influence to the long-range detriment of the Western world. —It will give opportunity to Khomeini to fractionize Western world public opinion. —It will give Khomeini opportunity to gain support in Moslem world. —It will affect adversely our image and influence in the third world and in particular the Gulf states. —It could lead to the disintegration of Iran with dire consequences for the region. —It can adversely affect our relationships with key Western allied nations and Japan. b. Gains/Losses in pursuing a military solution: Gains for the U.S.: —It might save the lives of some of the hostages. —It can restore a sense of stability in an area which is highly volatile. —It will seriously undercut OPEC. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Options Identified 2. Two days ago the Soviets advised us in an oral note that they had made a démarche to the Iranians urging the release of the hostages and expressed the hope that the US would continue to act with restraint in this matter.3 [portion marking not declassified] 3. Secretary Vance said that the US appreciated the cooperation of the Soviet Union in some matters pertaining to Iran and took note of the Soviet démarche to Iran several days ago. But the Secretary went on to say that the Soviets were now undercutting this kind of useful behavior with the Petrov article.4 [portion marking not declassified] 4. Dobrynin replied that he had not seen the article but from what he had been told it probably reflected anxiety in Moscow about reports of American preparations to take other measures. He said that military action by the US would create a situation in which the question would be raised about possible Soviet involvement. The Soviet side would want very much for that question not even to be raised. [portion marking not declassified] 5. Secretary Vance said that the President would exhaust all diplomatic means to resolve the issue, but that if any harm were done to the hostages that would create an intolerable situation. Dobrynin said that he understood that harm to the hostages would represent a kind of threshold for us (Although Vance was not unconditional or explicit on this point, it would not be unreasonable for the Soviets to infer from what he said that if the hostages were not harmed, the US would not resort to military force—ALH). [portion marking not declassified] 6. Dobrynin asked Vance if the US agreed that Khomeini may be looking for a face saving way out. Vance said that if that were the case, we had indicated that we would be prepared to work out something with the Iranian authorities (The context in which Dobrynin asked this question did not seem to suggest that the Soviets had their own source of information on Khomeini’s desires for a face-saving solution, but seemed rather to suggest a speculative line of inquiry intended to probe US willingness to compromise rather than employ force—ALH). [portion marking not declassified] 7. SALT—Dobrynin said that Vasev had reported to Moscow that the Administration would not push for SALT ratification. Vance said he was conveying to Dobrynin a decision by the President that the Administration would indeed push for SALT ratification and would

Options Identified —Some members of Iran’s leadership find it possible to interpret the resolution in a positive light. —The Non-Aligned clearly are on record with Iran’s leadership that they cannot argue publicly in favor of Iran’s revolution as long as Iran continues to hold hostages. Looking ahead over the next few weeks, I suggest that we work along a two-track strategy: 1. We should allow Waldheim, the Non-Aligned and other interlocutors to continue to apply pressure on Iran’s leadership. We should say nothing which would diminish the credibility of Waldheim’s diplomacy. In this regard, we should do everything we can to prevent press leaks about plans to “punish Iran.” Instead, our public visible effort should be directed at encouraging, reinforcing and cooperating with Waldheim’s diplomacy. It is only if we are seen to be pursuing honestly this track that we can have some hope of succeeding on the second track. 2. We would develop the second track leading to an effort at sanctions gradually. Thus, we would not jump immediately to Article 41 sanctions as some statements from the White House suggest. Rather we would first wait until the Iranians have rejected the current resolution (which we must hope they will not do). We would next move to have the Security Council formally declare a threat to the peace under Article 39.3 We would then await another Iranian response before proceeding to Article 41. In all of these steps we must recognize that only actual direct threats to the lives of the hostages are likely to induce the Council to consider seriously the grim prospect of sanctions against a country as important as Iran. For this reason, even when we invoke Article 41, I would argue against full sanctions. We should start with items which are serious for Iran but not dangerous for others. A cut off in air traffic is an example. In preparation for this we should quietly begin to plan on steps leading towards implementation of our policy, initially letting our friends know what we have in mind and seeking support in principle for invoking Chapter VII. While the fact that we are holding such discussions with other governments will become known, that in and 3 Article 39 in Chapter VII of the UN Charter states that after determining the existence of a threat to international peace, the Security Council would ask member states to implement measures as noted in Articles 41 and 42, as appropriate. Under Article 41 such measures included “complete or partial interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic relations.” Article 42 states that should the Security Council find Article 41 to be inadequate, “it may take such action by air, sea, or land forces as may be necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security. Such action may include demonstrations, blockade, and other operations by air, sea, or land forces” of member states. (“Imposition of Chapter VII Sanctions on Iran: Substantive and Procedural Aspects,” undated; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File,

Options Identified 3. The attached paper concludes that direct military intervention in Iran by the U.S. would provoke retaliatory intervention by the USSR and create a situation potentially more damaging to U.S. policy than that which faces us now. It also concludes that Soviet tactics will, for the time being, call for support of Khomeini. The Tudeh Party will accordingly continue its popular front stance in support of Khomeini. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) and the Deputy Director for Operations (McMahon)1 Washington, December 7, 1979 SUBJECT Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 6 December 1979 [portion marking not declassified] 1. I discussed the covert action situation and Secretary Vance’s trip and my concerns over it. I made it clear that we were in no position to decide with whom or how we would go about such a covert action. He understood that but will be looking for something more specific if, after Secretary Vance comes back, we decide to go ahead. I worked hard to persuade him there wasn’t much more specific that we could do and we needed flexibility to establish contacts and their confidence in us. We might be thinking, however, of what we could write that would be supposedly more specific, e.g., [less than 1 line not declassified] initial people we would contact until we saw where that led us (that was attached as an annex to the proposal but we could spell it out a little bit more including where they were and something about how we would make contact— [less than 1 line not declassified] with Bakhtiar, for example). In short, Dr. Brzezinski feels he’ll need something with a little more teeth in it to get the President on board. Among other things, I think we should be very lucid in stating that this is an effort to gain contact with these people so that we can assess what they are doing and what their potential is and so that we can gain their confidence. We should then state quite precisely what level of commitment 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Options Identified want to consult with some of his cabinet colleagues and expects to have a reply for us by the middle of next week. I asked the Ambassador to express our appreciation to the Prime Minister, and urged that the South African government make a positive decision as soon as possible. We have also gotten a reliable report that General Torrijos is prepared to issue an invitation to the Shah. The Shah had indicated that he preferred not to go to Central America but we have told one of his representatives that he must seriously consider Panama in light of Torrijos’ putative invitation. Torrijos apparently explained that the offer to the Shah was unconditional and that he would be able to provide adequate security. If other alternatives fail, we will push the Panama alternative hard.3 [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 3 Carter wrote “good” in the left margin. In a December 6 memorandum to Vance, Christopher summarized the status of negotiations for the Shah’s possible refuge in nine locations. Saunders traveled to Austria to discuss the potential consequences of the Shah’s moving there, and Jackson visited South Africa for discussions. Egypt remained willing to take him. Guatemala refused the Shah’s visa request, and Christopher categorized Taiwan as a “non-starter.” Argentina, Tonga, Iceland, and Paraguay refused.

Options Identified 2. Japan. Dr. Brzezinski briefly reviewed his meeting with the Japanese Ambassador,2 in which he had noted the rather weak UN statement and efforts by Japanese financial institutions to circumvent our restrictions on Iran. The Ambassador had agreed, noting that his country was very selfish, and promised to carry the message back. The Ambassador said he was certain the Prime Minister wanted to cooperate. (S) 3. Economic Steps. Mr. Solomon and Mr. Mundheim reported on their discussions in Europe. Surprisingly, the Swiss appear to be the most cooperative. They want any action taken to have the appearance of private actions by banks rather than a formal act at U.S. request, but they say they are prepared to act and will inform Solomon on Wednesday. Whatever action the Swiss take will be observed very quickly in the market and will have a desirable effect. The Germans were more reluctant, although they raised some “private” counterproposals stopping short of cross default. The Germans are evidently prepared to instruct their banks to declare default on Iranian loans within 24 hours of a missed payment, to accept no new deposits from Iran in currencies other than dollars, and to instruct their oil companies to insist on payment only in dollars.3 The Italians have many loans to Iran but few assets; they also have problems with oil deliveries and their large presence in Iran. They probably will have little effect on the situation. The British were very hostile to the idea of cross default. They would prefer to take measures which are directly linked to the holding of hostages and which can be lifted quickly once the hostages are released. They fear that cross defaults will get out of hand once begun and be difficult to unravel. The British tend more toward a government freeze or blocking of assets to complement our own actions. They were also not enthusiastic about intervening with the British courts. The French were neutral and cold.4 All agreed that there was reason to be hopeful. The ground had been prepared for Vance’s efforts, and if the Swiss in fact begin to move it could begin a cascade of actions by other European banks. Mr. Solomon of Treasury and Mr. Cooper of State will follow up on the 2 Memorandum of conversation, December 7. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated

Options Identified Political-Military Issues: 1. AWACS. For the moment, the AWACS will remain in Europe for several weeks. Talks are continuing with the Egyptians, but it is clear that their idea was for the planes to come only prior to a U.S. action. They may be amenable to some other form of cooperation. Secretary Brown is to write Mubarak. It was considered unwise to send a Defense emissary such as David McGiffert until a decision has been taken on the military cooperation program for Egypt. (S) 2. Huyser Mission. Because of the Shah’s book,8 as well as a political effort by certain individuals, attention is being focused on the Huyser mission as having permitted the collapse of the Shah’s regime. This is not receiving heavy attention at the moment, but it will be quite important in the post-mortem following the hostages’ release.9 For the moment, all agreed that it sufficed to take the position that Huyser’s mission was to hold the military together so it would be intact for whatever moderate government was likely to emerge after the Shah’s departure. His objective was to smooth the transition and keep the army from falling apart. (S) 3. U.S. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski drew attention to the story in the New York Times this morning10 suggesting that our strategy of exerting pressure on Iran in favor of a more moderate leadership was not working. Instead, the country is being polarized and pushed toward the left. Should we continue on the same path or should we force the issue to a head by a real jolt at some point? The Vice President agreed that we needed to take stock of our position and consider whether our strategy had any real prospect of achieving the release of the hostages. We should consult the most expert views available, not only in our government agencies but also in the academic community and among our allies. Mr. Carlucci observed that most expert opinion was agreed on the fact that Khomeini did not yield to pressure and that it promised to be a long process. All agreed that the question was fundamental and that a high-level review should be conducted as soon as Secretary Vance returns from his consultations in Europe. One of his objectives was to seek their best judgment on the evolution of events. (S) 8 The Shah’s memoir, Answer to History, was published in 1980. Excerpts appeared in London on December 7 and were subsequently reviewed by FBIS. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject

Options Identified latter was beneath his dignity and again expressed amazement, bitterness, and sorrow at Lopez-Portillo’s turn around. He was contemptuous of the Bahamas. He was negative on number 3 and 5 as well as on country number 2—in part on the grounds that these are places where “people go to hide”. I said there are no ideal solutions in a situation like this and pointed out the important distinctions between number 3 and number 5. He listened carefully to this and seemed uninformed about number 5. When we come to making the strong pitch on number 5, I could make effective use of some talking points from the Department, explaining the character of that regime, its standing in the hemisphere and in the Third World, and its relationship with the United States. 5. (S) The Shah raised the question of Switzerland but seemed to feel it is a non-starter. 6. (S) The Shah was very indignant at a comment which he said Andrew Young had just made to the effect that the Shah should go to country number 2 where he could “join his fellow fascists and racists.” Without commenting on this alleged remark, I said it was important not to rule out country number 2, even if it is the Shah’s last choice. 7. (S) The Shah’s wife had raised Canada with me this afternoon in a conversation reported septel,6 and I explained to the Shah that it would not be possible. He said the Canadians will do what the British do. He expressed interest in Australia and New Zealand, but dismissed them on the grounds that they too would simply follow the British. If either of these is a possibility, please advise. 8. (S) The Shah brought up the question of an international commission “to try me and America”. He expressed his contempt for it, he said that if it goes ahead, he would have to defend himself. He said the regime in Iran would presumably present documents covering the 37 year period of his reign and that in defense he would have to call witnesses, even including perhaps former Presidents of the United States. I said that whatever may eventuate with respect to an airing of charges, there was no relationship between this and finding another country in which he can reside. He agreed with this. I assume he was trying implicitly to point out the possible risks to us in the international commission approach. I expect him to raise this again and request

Options Identified a. He has been assembling a “staff” in Tehran to plan for his return. Among the members are military officers who can mobilize large groups upon which he can call for support in time of need. b. He is planning to return to Khuzestan in about a month if his planning permits. c. He has established contact with Admiral Madani, Governor of Khuzestan Province and Commander of the Iranian Navy. [3 lines not declassified] d. He has links to [less than 1 line not declassified] prominent Iraqi Kurdish factions, the [2 lines not declassified]. e. The National Front now completely supports him, and he considers this a solid political development. Karim Sanjabi has allegedly been thrown out along with others who oppose Bakhtiar. f. His staff in Tehran is now operating a small portable FM station broadcasting cassettes of his speeches. g. The Iraqis have offered him support in exchange for an agreement that he would not oppose their absorbing Kuwait. Bakhtiar believes that he can make this deal now but subsequently when in power in Iran ignore the part of the bargain concerning Kuwait. h. [4 lines not declassified] We lack corroborating evidence that would either confirm or deny that Bakhtiar has made as much progress as he avers. We will continue to check on his actual state of progress. 3. Our officer was also told that Bakhtiar is concerned about his contacts with General Gholam Ali Oveisi, former commander of the Shah’s army. While Oveisi is a highly competent officer and would be very useful to Bakhtiar, he feels that Oveisi’s contacts with Princess Ashraf and supporters of the Shah could cause trouble, and he emphasized that he wants nothing to do with the former royal family. [2 lines not declassified] 4. Our officer then asked Bakhtiar exactly what he wanted from the United States Government. Bakhtiar replied as follows: a. He would like us to influence other governments to support him. He would like favorable media coverage. He would like us to encourage some governments [less than 1 line not declassified] to provide financial support. b. He would like us to try and keep the Shah and his supporters from becoming involved. Bakhtiar said that time is critical because Khomeini will soon fall, creating a political vacuum that must be filled. He said that he is prepared to move and that if he gets the necessary financial support he has a reasonable chance of succeeding. While Bakhtiar’s requests for assistance are modest, we believe from other information that he feels without US support behind him, and without direct US guidance, he has little chance of success. He has said that while he would willingly accept material assistance from other nations, the “brainpower” must come from the US.

Options Identified Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 12, 1979 SUBJECT Iran—Next Steps The situation in Iran is building toward an explosion. Khomeini must take most of the responsibility for that, but our firm stance in the hostage situation and particularly our military presence has given heart to some who would not have been willing to stand up otherwise. Although an explosion of the internal situation is not without its risks to our interests and to the lives of the hostages, it is nevertheless true that the present impasse can be broken only by some significant change in the internal power structure of Iran. In a revolutionary situation, change is unlikely to occur peacefully or incrementally. The building pressures must therefore be regarded as an opportunity. The Constitution I continue to be persuaded that the central issue is the constitution. Not only does the constitution define the future shape of Iran and spell out in some detail what the revolution was about, but it has acquired special significance as Khomeini’s personal life testament. Very much in the sense of a biblical prophet, Khomeini is driven by a dominant inner vision—an idea to which he has dedicated his life. The peculiar expression of clerical rule under a sort of philosopher king (which is how Khomeini must see himself) is the outcome of a lifetime of cloistered thought in medieval settings. It is his divine destiny and he is willing to risk everything to achieve it. His technique has been very simple. At each turning point Khomeini has identified a tangible enemy which could rally public unity and deflect criticism. In the late summer, the enemy was the Kurdish rebellion and the threat of Soviet involvement. He used that as an excuse to proclaim himself commander in chief, to close down the press, to terminate all opposition political activity, and to attack the Soviets and their minions. At the same time, he packed the membership of the Council of Experts and, while people were distracted, mandated 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

Options Identified not want—in fact they fear—any direct action on our part which would make them appear to be imperialist tools. However, Khomeini’s henchmen are ruthless, the left is seeking an opportunity to assert itself, and they badly need evidence of support. The Saudis are contributing through Bakhtiar. The Iraqis have made an offer. The forces of moderation in Iran are now coming to us.2 If we merely equivocate, they may go ahead on their own; but we must realize that the absence of any policy decision on our part is going to make them more cautious and increase their proclivity to look for allies among the radical opposition. This is not a situation where outcomes are neatly predictable. However, the general trend of events is clear. If we sit on our hands and refuse to establish the beginnings of an operational relationship with those who hold the only promise of a moderate future for Iran, we must recognize—and accept responsibility for the fact—that we are prolonging Khomeini’s rule, the continued polarization of extremism on the left and right, and the likelihood that the left will increase its strength and legitimacy. We are coming to the point where no decision is in fact a decision.3 At this stage, what is required is a clear decision that we cannot accept Khomeini as the arbiter of our future relationship with Iran. We must be willing to recognize that the longer Khomeini remains as the supreme power in Iran, the more likely we are to have a takeover by radical elements of the left. We must be clear in our own minds that the risks of an early breakdown of authority and struggle for power are less than the risks of prolonged manipulation by Khomeini which will eventually lead him into a coalition with the left and with the Soviets in order to maintain himself in power. What is required is a quiet signal through available channels to the people who are beginning to act that we support their efforts and will quietly back them up through political efforts and with some financial support. We can put limits on our support, but we must declare our intentions.4 The very act of decision will free us to talk operationally with the Saudis and other friends in the region. It will give us the basis for a serious relationship with the Iraqis—[less than 1 line not declassified]. It will provide an order and structure to our actions. In short, it will provide a policy rudder to guide us through a dangerous and tumul- 2 This sentence was underlined. In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Who? When? How?” 3 The second half of this sentence was underlined. 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “This needs to be expanded & clarified.”

Options Identified First, after the passage of the UN Resolution in the Security Council,3 Waldheim got in touch with the Iranians to see whether he, Waldheim, should send someone to Tehran or whether they would send someone to New York. Waldheim thought of sending Rafiuddin Ahmed, his Chef de Cabinet. As an alternative, Ghotbzadeh said he would prefer that discussions continue with the man he planned to send as Iran’s new representative in New York. This man’s name is Mansour Farhang and he was the Cultural Attaché in Washington after the revolution, but really no. 2 in the Iranian Mission in Washington. The Secretary said that he knows that Farhang has always opposed the taking of the hostages and has argued strongly with his own government that this would only isolate Iran from the rest of the world. [1 line not declassified] For example, we know that when he was asked to take the job in New York, he said he would do it only if he were allowed first to return to Tehran and talk to the Revolutionary Council and go to Qom and talk to Khomeini. He only decided to take the job, he has said to his friends, when these conditions were accepted. He has said that he wanted to convince the people in Qom that the Shah would never be returned by the United States. Our current information on the hostage situation is ambiguous. There seems to be a move to assemble what has been referred to as a “grand jury,” which will examine US policy from 1953 to the present and “investigate the crimes of the US”. Farhang has reported that the question of trying the prisoners is “dead.” Our view is that if he gets to New York, it will be a plus rather than a minus. Waldheim has also authorized the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka to pick up again in Tehran talks he had on the way to the US and continue those discussions, once again looking toward the specific proposal of getting in to see the hostages themselves and verifying their condition. Waldheim is no longer considering sending his own representative to Tehran at this time. Second, today we have gone into the World Court asking that they grant us immediate interim relief by ordering the release of the hostages. We assume that Iran will boycott this proceeding and ignore its results. We will then face a situation in which Iran will have refused to obey a Security Council resolution and a World Court order—thus totally flouting international opinion. Third, we have been attempting to use the PLO. The Secretary said that he had been in almost daily contact with Arafat, who had been very helpful on gaining the release of the first thirteen hostages. We continue to work this channel and exchange views. There is still some

Options Identified dollar by the Iranian authorities. He asked Dick Cooper to explain these measures in more detail. Cooper explained the cross-default situation. He said that these clauses existed in one way or another in most of the loan agreements and permitted any participant in a loan to call for immediate repayment if evidence of a default on another loan was presented. We are not certain of the situation in all cases, but we do know that Iran is currently in default to American banks even though our freeze would have allowed them to continue payments under those loans. We carefully drew our regulations on blocking in order to permit such repayments and they could have been made to Chase and others. We know that these clauses exist in most of the international consortia loans. We are not sure whether the French are participants in these. If they are, the clauses could be used to trigger cross-defaults. This would snarl up even further the Iranian payment situation. The attraction of such a course of action would be that it would not require government action, but rather private or public advice to banks that they invoke these clauses. It would give the right signal and bring home to Iranian authorities that others are as concerned as we are over the taking of hostages and threats to the international monetary system. The Secretary said that the British were leaning toward a general freezing action. They were checking their law to see if there was a legal basis. At first, the UK Treasury thought there was not a legal basis, but we have presented an opinion to the Prime Minister from a top British lawyer saying that under a 1947 act the Treasury can freeze assets. There is as yet no firm British Government decision, however. The Secretary went on to say that the firmer and more tangibly we and our allies and friends act today, the more likely we will be able to get the hostages out and prevent a situation from developing in which military means might have to be used, which, of course, would lead to unpredictable and certainly serious political and economic results. He wanted to state quite clearly, however, that if any of the hostages were harmed, we would have to react and he would discuss the various possibilities for our action in a smaller group at the end of the meeting. If we want to avoid that situation, now is the time to act. The Secretary said he wanted to speak for a moment about the situation with respect to the Shah. He said that his treatment had been completed and that he can now travel. He wants to find a place where he can stay indefinitely. There seemed to be two realistic possibilities at the moment. One was Panama and the other was South Africa, where his father had lived for some time. Although Sadat continues to hold open his offer of refuge in Egypt, no one thinks that this is a good idea since it would present a real danger to Sadat and open up a whole new set of issues.

Options Identified specifically put to Dobrynin, who has now returned to Moscow, the question of whether the Soviets would veto a Chapter 7 action in the Security Council. He had in fact said to Dobrynin that we would assume the Soviets would not veto, and Dobrynin had replied that he would have to check this in Moscow.5 The Secretary said that he would like to discuss another aspect of the economic situation, namely, the effort of the Iranians to open new accounts and thus get around our blocking action. Dick Cooper explained in some detail the variety of means which this was taking. He had been surprised at the slowness of the Iranians in moving to get either new accounts in dollars or other currencies set up to make their payments. They were beginning to get cooperation from others and this was giving a mixed signal to the Iranians. What they were seeing on the economic front in many cases was business as usual. We know that it is being interpreted this way because, for example, the Daily Telegraph reported that certain British, French, Austrian and Japanese banks have cooperated and that the Iranians are concluding that, therefore, their governments are “with us.” It was important to eliminate this ambiguity. The Iranians are attempting to handle normal trade by the creation of new accounts, sometimes using coded numbers or false names. Francois-Poncet said that, as we knew, the French were not taking any more oil than they had normally from Iran and wondered what we wished them to do—not pay at all or only pay in non-dollar currencies or to open new accounts, the French should refuse. Then the Iranians will begin to get the right signal. The Secretary said that the lower level reaction in the Federal Republic was that they will insist on dollars and not allow any payment in Deutschmarks. Jean-Claude Paye said that he knows there has already been a request to pay in Deutschmarks in one case. Francois- Poncet concluded that perhaps this is something that should be discussed in the “four-power meeting” in Brussels later this week. [1 paragraph (11½ lines) not declassified] Both Cooper and the Secretary said that there were important risks to the international monetary system and, therefore, it was important to proceed. He has asked Mr. Carswell to go to Japan. We have already talked to the Germans, British, Italians and Swiss6 and he would be

Options Identified that his first problem was that from the French point of view they had no difficulty in talking about the necessity to modernize TNF, but they would have a problem of linking that with arms control discussions. Therefore, it was very important that the two parts of the communiqué be clearly separated. The French would only associate themselves with the general parts of the communiqué, leaving for the other members of NATO to discuss and agree on TNF and arms control. A second difficulty was with our desire to include Iran in the communiqué. Here Francois-Poncet suggested that a better way would be to have a separate statement by the fifteen Ministers on the occasion of their getting together in Brussels. He thought that this would give it added importance and avoid the NATO tag to such a position. (The Secretary agreed to this proposal and the Ambassador passed it on to NATO).8 Francois-Poncet also said that there would probably be the usual difficulty finding Middle East wording, but that they would find something. On the question of arms control in general, Francois-Poncet said that it was important for us to continue discussions on our approaches to these problems—this was later picked up by the President. The Secretary said that he had said in his Berlin speech, being read by George Vest, that we thought the French proposals on arms control were useful and should be pursued. End Memcon. Vance 8 The declaration on Iran issued by the Ministers attending the NATO meeting is Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1 No. 1293 Washington, December 13, 1979 IRAN’S POLITICAL PROSPECTS Key Judgments: —Khomeini is in a serious period of testing, as some of the regime’s weaknesses grow and may be tending to get out of control.

Options Identified —lack of full control over important sub-centers of power such as the students occupying the US Embassy and the ethnic and tribal minorities in Azerbaijan, Kurdistan, Khuzistan, and Baluchistan. The hostage crisis was originally a welcome opportunity for the regime to reassert its strengths in the face of mounting weaknesses. As it is developing, the crisis may actually have demonstrated a weakness, i.e., inability to control the hostages’ captors. Thus, Khomeini’s government is in a period of crucial testing. The situation is not out of control, but the trend is clearly in that direction. The Islamic Government and Its Tasks How much is accomplished over the next 6 to 12 months toward building institutions for the Islamic republic will determine its longevity. If little or nothing is accomplished, the relative strength of the opposition forces will be greatly increased. A significant amount has already been accomplished. The adoption of the constitution in the referendum sets the institutional shape of the Islamic republic. Elections for president and parliament will be held soon. Clerics and their allies will be the chief victors. But what the new government’s policies will be is not much clearer now than when Khomeini first proposed an Islamic republic. In theory, the regime seeks the elimination of Western cultural and social “dominance” and its replacement by Islamic values. Khomeini has been particularly interested in dismantling the Western-inspired legal apparatus. In general, though, the government must undertake a major effort before its policies will be fully defined. Two other tasks require urgent attention. One is the economy. We know little about what an Islamic economy would be. Iran’s leaders have suggested that all relationships which are not “beneficial” will be eliminated, without defining that key word. It will certainly involve a realignment of all international contacts, with a strong emphasis on self-dependence. The regime probably will curtail consumer imports and may be prepared to embark on fairly radical land and agricultural reform programs. Oil income will, of course, continue to be the essential ingredient to make the economy run. Even though economic policies may not be clear, the problems are. The food supply in the coming months is uncertain, unemployment is growing, and business and relevant government activity are stagnant. From what can be inferred from government policy, it appears unlikely that these difficulties will be improved soon. Prolonged failure to make progress in the economic realm would spur discontent with the regime. The other area where government action is needed is the reassertion of central authority over and the depoliticizing of ethnic and tribal minorities. Historically, Iran has always had strong centers of decentral-

Options Identified —Fedayeen-al Khalq: These secular Marxists have broken with Khomeini. Their activities are illegal, their headquarters has been raided and closed, and their leaders are underground. Individual members may be associated with the Embassy occupation. They may have connections with the Kurdish rebels. —The Tudeh (Communist) Party: This party, now open and legal, supports Khomeini and carries on various activities, such as organizing meetings and publishing a newspaper. Its membership strength is unknown, but it was quite small during the Shah’s period. —Mujahiddin-al Khalq: These Islamic Marxists during the summer became estranged from Khomeini. Like the fedayeen, they were attacked and criticized. They have not gone underground, however, and are trying once again to win Khomeini’s support. Many observers have suggested that if the Khomeini regime collapses, power will fall to the left. But the latter so far is not sufficiently organized or strong to assume power. For the longer term, the left breeds and grows on troubles and turmoil. If, however, there is real political power in the left’s future, it is a distant future. The Military. The Shah’s once-vaunted armed forces remain shattered. Personnel is at about half-strength; equipment suffers from lack of use; spare parts are in short supply. Competing armed groups, such as the Revolutionary Guards, exist in many key locations. The officer corps is well aware that the troops are more responsive to the religious leaders than to military commanders. Thus, for the present, the armed forces are not a potential source of anti-government activity. They do, however, contain important resources for the future: a tradition of backing strong leaders, an established institution in a country where there are few, and some remaining leaders of intelligence and ambition. The military could eventually be a force of real political significance, but first it must decide where it is politically. With the loss of the Shah, the armed forces lost their raison d’etre, and a new one has not reappeared. The Moderates. Most of Iran’s moderate, secular leaders (including those of the National Front) are in hiding or exile. They have been almost eliminated as participants in the current political process leading to the establishment of the Islamic republic. They will have little or no representation in the new parliament. What remains of their strength is among escapee groups, chiefly that of Shahpour Bakhtiar in Paris. But Bakhtiar is only beginning to organize and seems to understand that his problems far outnumber his realistic hopes. Thus, none of the opposition groups is likely to wield much power in the coming year or so. Their weakness is one of Khomeini’s main strengths. A nascent cooperation among some of these opposition groups is, however, developing. It involves Bakhtiar, other moderate secular

Options Identified regime’s support. However, Khomeini still retains much charisma, and none of these problems has yet gone past the point of no return. 4. Khomeini dies or is totally incapacitated. When Khomeini’s hand is no longer at the helm, the Islamic republic will have lost the man who has held the revolutionary cause together. His departure will not, however, bring an end to either the republic or the revolution. The momentum of the revolution, the strategic placement of his associates, the new constitution, and the dominance of religious figures in the new parliament and cabinet will give some shape to the successor regime. Khomeini’s assassination would add uncertainty, but the basic religious framework of the government would still be a major factor in determining the future. Khomeini’s death will most likely be followed immediately by the creation of an informal coalition of the most senior religious and governmental figures—held together at first by their desire to protect their power and the revolution. The Council of Guardians, the president, a few senior clerics, and one or two top military figures would keep the country going. But such a coalition would not last for long. It would contain too many ambitious men and too many political and religious schisms. As this informal coalition began to split, several successors would be possible: —One strong man could emerge to dominate the apparatus, but not with the stature of Khomeini. Ayatollahs Beheshti and Montazeri, Admiral Madani, and Foreign Minister Qotbzadeh would be leading possibilities. —A religious, but anti-Khomeini, coalition. This could be under the overall religious leadership of Ayatollah Shariat-Madari, but with day-to-day power in the hands of secular figures, such as Bakhtiar or Madani. —A traditional coalition of opposition forces: National Front (Bakhtiar, former Prime Minister Bazargan, and Hedayatollah Matin-Daftari), tribal leaders (Qashqais and other Bakhtiaris), and some moderate bazaar and religious figures. A broad coalition would make the most sense in terms of Iranian tradition and centers of power. But the pull of the Khomeini revolution would probably be too great for at least a while for such a clear break from the dominance of the religious establishment to occur. Thus, the first of the above possibilities would be the most likely one to follow the initial informal coalition of Khomeini’s followers.

Options Identified 3. Economic Steps. We still do not have detailed reporting on the talks conducted in Europe by Vance and Cooper.2 Cooper delayed another day for further talks with the British Foreign Office and will not return until late this afternoon. The fragmentary reporting which we have received indicates that the four foreign ministers agreed that they would support a U.S. move to invoke Chapter Seven sanctions as well as a number of lesser independent actions. Our understanding of the nature of these independent actions is sketchy. However, we know that they stop short of cross-default or freeze of Iranian assets. If our understanding is correct, they would be effective in supporting the dollar (by insisting on oil payment in dollars, refusing to accept non-dollar deposits by Iran, etc.) but would not apply significant new pressure on the Iranian government and economy. It is unclear whether these ideas merely constitute a European counter-proposal to our more ambitious request or whether they were accepted as an agreed package. Dr. Brzezinski strongly reiterated the urgent need for an options paper from Treasury outlining the maximum and minimum strategies available to us and how those strategies might fit together with a request for Chapter Seven sanctions. Treasury has delayed examination of the options pending Cooper’s return, but Dr. Brzezinski argued that regardless of what was accomplished in Europe, the President must be informed on what actions are available to him at this point and what kind of pressure might be required. Mr. Solomon therefore will prepare an analysis of the various economic options.3 An SCC meeting will be held tomorrow morning to discuss the options with Vance and Cooper after their return. The SCC was informed that the press stories indicating a decision to go for Chapter Seven sanctions remain as one option among several that are under serious consideration. (S) 4. Circumvention. [less than 1 line not declassified] certain banks in Germany, France, Canada and Switzerland have been actively assisting Iran in circumventing the effects of the freeze. [2½ lines not declassified] Treasury and CIA will work out the details and proceed immedi- 2 See Document 95. Cooper’s reports on his discussions with German and Swiss

Options Identified SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues 1. Economic Steps. Secretary Vance and Mr. Cooper reported on the discussions with the Europeans. The acceptability of various steps differs from country to country because of legal and policy problems. It was felt, however, that it is not necessary for all of our allies to adopt exactly the same posture. Dr. Brzezinski asked State to prepare a matrix which will show the position of each country on each of the prospective actions.2 (S) Secretary Vance reported that when and if we come to the point of requesting sanctions under Chapter VII, the Europeans are pledged to support us. We will have to decide whether to go for complete sanctions or in stages. We can initially request limited sanctions, e.g. denying military credits and military equipment deliveries; a second stage could be a selective trade embargo, excluding food and medicine, and termination of mail and rail links, which would involve removal of foreign nationals; the third stage would involve a total embargo. By Monday,3 State will be prepared to discuss options regarding resort to Chapter VII and the pros and cons of various strategies. Based on the discussions Monday, a recommendation will be prepared for the President. All agreed it would be premature to make a recommendation until we see what the reaction is to the World Court ruling. The European allies, however, have agreed to go ahead with sanctions if Chapter VII is defeated by Soviet veto in the Security Council. (S) State and Treasury will today prepare and send cables to the European allies which clarifies and ties down the specific commitments they have made. This will be necessary before the European finance officials meet on Monday. On Monday, follow up messages jointly from Secretary Vance and Secretary Miller will request immediate implementation of the measures as agreed. It was agreed that no immediate steps would be taken with regard to Belgium, the Netherlands and Canada until after the Europeans have had their meeting on A separate cable of instructions will be prepared for Mr. Carswell, who is on his way to Japan. These instructions will outline the various steps which the Europeans have agreed to and request that the Japanese accept those steps plus a few technical elements which are applicable 2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Prepare for UNSC sanctions. I prefer maximum trade interruption.” The matrix was discussed at the December 17 SCC Meeting; see Document 102. 3 December 17. 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “all ok.”

Options Identified U.S. commitments flowing from the discussions with the Shah and his representatives.10 We have agreed that: (1) the children can remain in the United States for schooling and the FBI will continue its liaison with those providing security; (2) the Shahbanou will be permitted to visit the children here from time to time; (3) the Shah will have access to U.S. medical facilities in Panama as required; the Shah’s doctors have advised that the necessary [operation] can be performed in Panama; one of the U.S. doctors worked in Panama for seven years; (4) the U.S. will provide transportation and assistance for a medical team to visit Panama for the operation as required. The deposition required in the legal case brought by Bell Helicopter can be taken in Panama. (S) 2. Palestinians. The PLO representative in Tehran has made a proposal which will be delivered to Congressman Findley today about a delegation to Tehran which could result in release of the hostages. State will follow up. (S) [Omitted here is information on Afghanistan.] 10 The report of the meeting with the Shah’s representatives is in a memorandum from Oxman to Christopher, December 18. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler, Box 12) Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) and the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Bowdler) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 15, 1979 SUBJECT Extraction of the Six Americans From Tehran The Canadians have conveyed to us their great nervousness and sense of urgency about taking decision on their houseguests. Essentially, the Canadians have two concerns: 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Options Identified 100. Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Status of Hostages [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] 1. The following conclusions about the condition of the hostages held in the American Embassy in Tehran are based on psychiatric debriefings of released hostages as well as general knowledge about how individuals react to similar captive situations. 2. Although bound, occasionally blindfolded, and kept in semiisolation, the hostages on the whole are likely to feel they have been fairly well treated. They have been fed regularly, kept clean and warm, and most importantly have not been killed. Since this treatment compares favorably to their probable expectations and/or fears, their perception is therefore one of good treatment. 3. The actual mental or physical condition of any one hostage will vary depending on his prior mental and physical state, his character, and his individual idiosyncrasies. The captive experience is extremely traumatic, and each individual will respond to this trauma according to his own resources. After over a month of captivity, these hostages have probably developed rather stable adaptive mechanisms, so that as time goes by one would expect relatively little change from their current behavior. 4. During any hostage-taking incident one can expect the adaptive mechanisms of both the hostage and hostage taker to lead to what may initially appear to be a paradoxical alliance between them. When people are together, especially under stress, relationships develop among them; similarly, hostages and hostage takers begin to form relationships that tend to unify them into a group. The interests of both the hostage takers and the hostages are served by giving in to the hostage takers’ demands; therefore, the hostage takers and hostages are natural allies. Also, as a means of coping with his helplessness, the hostage often unconsciously identifies with the more powerful hostage taker. 5. In this particular incident, there is inferential evidence that the captors are attempting to systematically influence their captives. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Options Identified 101. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 16, 1979 SUBJECT Decision on the Negotiating Strategy for Iran Because of the movement of events, we need in the next 24 hours to pull together (1) the substance of a precise US negotiating position and (2) the choice of negotiating tracks. Events are moving ahead as a number of our negotiating tracks have suddenly come alive again: —Farhang is meeting here in Washington over the weekend with a number of his American “advisors” to talk about the international tribunal and, presumably, how it leads to the release of the hostages.

Options Identified 102. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Options Identified of a total trade embargo which would involve extended debate and possible failure in the UNSC.10 (S) In order to maintain the public appearance of momentum, it will be necessary to publicize in some form the types of actions which our allies have agreed to undertake. Some will not object; others will wish to keep their advice entirely private. The SCC recommended that State contact the countries involved and determine what they would be willing to announce publicly. Depending on their reaction, we will probably want to do a careful backgrounder to get out the whole story. This can be linked to intelligence information on the decline of shipping into the Persian Gulf, to increase the appearance of effective disruption of trade. We would expect to do the backgrounder by Wednesday.11 (S) 2. Presidential Views. Dr. Brzezinski briefed the SCC on the President’s comments on the notes of Friday’s meeting.12 The President approved the proposed strategy on the White Paper (that the information be collected and papers prepared, but not to publish a formal document) but asked that the internal documentation be complete for selective use. Approval was granted for leaking information about certain banks’ circumvention of restrictions on Iranian assets. At this point, however, there appeared to be no flagrant cases to be exploited. (S) 3. Trials. The President noted that it is important that we do nothing which would lend legitimacy to any trials of the hostages by Iran. The question of the lawyers preparing legal support for the hostages will be raised at the meeting tomorrow. (C) 4. French. The Iranian case against U.S. branch banks in France has been refiled. The SCC agreed that Giscard should be reminded of his assurance to Vance that this case would be tied up in the courts and not be subject to an early court decision. (S) Political-Military Issues: [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 10 Carter underlined the phrase “except for humanitarian items” and wrote in the left margin: “define narrowly.” He approved this item with a checkmark. 11 In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “My guess: better for them after move in UN on sanctions.” Wednesday was December 19. Carter approved this item with a checkmark. 12 See Document 97.

Options Identified to respond in effective ways as quickly as possible. She had been asked about Chapter Seven sanctions against Iran this morning in a TV interview and had, of course, said Britain would support the U.S. in such action. It could never be otherwise. But it would be helpful if she knew the President’s mind on timing for next steps to increase the pressure on Iran. (S) The President responded that he would be brief since Mrs. Thatcher no doubt had been following the crisis in detail. Lately we had been reasonably encouraged. Initially the Iranian authorities had said that the hostages would be tried individually as spies. That theme had gradually diminished which was a good sign. The U.S. was prepared to use naval forces if the situation demanded it but certainly wanted to avoid such action. The President said that if there were public trials, the U.S. would interrupt commerce with Iran as had been made clear to the UK, France, the FRG, Italy, and to Khomeini. If any of the hostages were executed, we would reserve the right to take more forceful action. The President said he prayed that that would not be necessary and repeated that there were some hopeful signs. He said it was his sense that Khomeini had decided that holding the hostages was counterproductive. The President continued that Panama’s courageous act in accepting the Shah had also helped after Lopez Portillo had pulled the rug out from under us having given a firm commitment to take the Shah as late as the morning that Mexico announced the reverse. (S) The President said that Khomeini seemed to be shifting toward a multinational tribunal approach—not a trial but the equivalent of a grand jury. This was quite a change from Iran’s original position but it was hard to know how much control Khomeini had over the students. In a showdown, the President said, Khomeini could probably prevail, but Khomeini no doubt wished to avoid just such a showdown. The President noted that three of our people in Tehran at the Foreign Ministry, including Bruce Laingen, had been able to communicate with us. Laingen had felt that the departure of the Shah would help in defusing the crisis. Indicating that we must do everything possible to prevent the Iranian crisis freezing into a status quo, the President said that later today he would know more precisely the time schedule for our next steps to increase the pressure on Iran. He would discuss this privately tonight at dinner with the Prime Minister. Secretary Vance added that both Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and the Iranian Chargé had said that the Shah’s departure would be an important first step in beginning the process to free the hostages. (S) The President then noted that Sadat had always been forthcoming with respect to providing a home for the Shah, but we did not favor this solution to the problem. It would produce difficulties for Sadat in

Options Identified tion for the hostages in Tehran. She said that, as she understood it, the U.S. would neither oppose the Tribunal nor support it. (S) The President responded that in public we would oppose the Tribunal stressing that it had no legitimacy and no relevance to the central fact that Iran in holding the hostages was violating every norm of international behavior. At the same time, we recognized that the Tribunal could be a way to the hostages’ release. We had asked nations not to participate in this kangaroo court, but it was a delicate balancing act. The President added that if we do go for sanctions, we would like the UK unilaterally to impose them immediately rather than waiting for what could be a lengthy UN debate on the subject. Mrs. Thatcher wondered what sanctions we would be asking for at the UN. The President replied that he would decide this during the course of the day, but stressed that we would probably move in the UN before the end of the week. It was nearly inevitable. Mrs. Thatcher asked whether a naval blockade would be part of our action. Noting that such action posed some difficulties, the President said he would discuss this with her privately. In closing the discussion of Iran, Prime Minister Thatcher repeated that it would be easier for Britain to take certain economic and financial steps against Iran after a Chapter Seven finding rather than before.3 (S) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the hostage crisis.] Mrs. Thatcher said it was her impression that the U.S. public did not know how helpful the PLO had been during the Iran crisis. Observing that this was not the case, the President said that the positive PLO role had been much in the press. Secretary Vance added that all members of Congress knew we had been in touch with the PLO although they did not know the specific role the PLO had played in the crisis. The President said that we would wait until the next tranche of land was returned and the ambassadorial exchange occurred in January before taking a stronger lead in the Middle East negotiations. There had been indirect communication with Arafat on the hostages and Israel knew this. (S) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 3 Following their meeting, Carter and Thatcher spoke from the South Grounds of the White House. Carter thanked Thatcher for the “strong and unequivocal support” on Iran. She, in turn, stated that “when the United States wishes to go to the Security Council for further powers under chapter seven, Great Britain will be the first to support

Options Identified and Treasury said they had worked on it but they were not aware of the status. They said that in the absence of a clear decision by the Europeans on each issue, the letter will call for the allies to “agree and implement” the recommended voluntary steps. They said the letter would be provided within one or two hours for the President’s approval. Dr. Brzezinski briefed the group on the President’s comments on yesterday’s notes.3 Regarding the possibility of a Soviet veto of Chapter VII sanctions, he said we would go ahead in any case. The President indicated that he would prefer going for Article 39 finding at the same time as sanctions. We should not wait too long to proceed. Thursday4 was okay. Any exclusions from the trade embargo (e.g. food, medicine, etc.) should be defined narrowly. (S) Mr. Solomon noted that Iran’s only real vulnerability was on food, but that was probably not feasible to include in the embargo for a number of reasons. Mr. Newsom wondered about mail for the hostages. Mr. Aaron pointed out that it could be provided by diplomatic pouch of a friendly power. (C) The President approved a backgrounder on Wednesday to publicize the types of actions our allies have been willing to take. It was the President’s guess that the allies would be more willing to make their actions public after we had asked for Chapter VII. Mr. Eizenstat noted that the President had mentioned to the leadership breakfast that we were prepared to go to the UN to ask for an embargo to enforce UNSC decisions. There is a good possibility of leaks. (S) State will follow up the decision to move ahead. Don McHenry will begin consultations in New York, a message will be sent to appropriate capitals, and we will consult with the Soviets. All agreed we should protest strongly to the Italians about their intention to permit licensed helicopters to go to Iran in the next five days. At the same time, State and Defense will review the possibility of revoking the licenses.5 (S) The group reviewed briefly the results of the talks with the British.6 It appears they agreed to all the governmental actions we requested (short of a freeze, which they said required new legislation), but they have gone back to London to try and reverse the negative positions of the banks on those items which would involve only official government “guidance.” It is evident from intelligence that we may find it extremely difficult to get the necessary nine votes in the Security Council. Don 3 See Document 102. 4 December 20. 5 Carter underlined the words “revoking the licenses” and wrote in the margin: “Expedite.” He approved the item with a checkmark. 6 See Document 103.

Options Identified measures would follow certain actions on their part. That warning appeared to be credible, but now it seems to have worn off and they are convinced that we are unwilling to pursue non-peaceful options. Secretary Brown noted that if the UN does not support us on sanctions, we will be worse off since there will be a question of whether our cause is just and stronger measures are justified. Mr. Aaron and Jody Powell, on the contrary, felt that going to the UN established a record of exhausting all peaceful remedies. Dr. Brzezinski said that our statement should make clear that sanctions are the last peaceful remedy but that other remedies are not excluded if that fails. That will pressure others to support us. General Jones added that there are a number of minor military steps, e.g. SR–71 overflights, which would underline our ability and willingness to turn to other options. Mr. Newsom argued that Ambassador McHenry should be given 48 hours to sound out attitudes in the SC. Secretary Brown warned that one outcome of the SC debate might be to get a resolution opposing the use of non-peaceful means.11 Mr. Christopher observed that we could get a message back to the Iranians through the Swiss channel that our patience is running out. Mr. Donovan pointed out that we might succeed in getting Chapter VII sanctions then find that it produced no results while tying our hands from taking more vigorous action. (TS) 4. Covert Action. Dr. Brzezinski introduced the two papers (Plan A and Plan B) previously prepared by Stan Turner. Plan B was more modest. [3 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown said that Plan B was a logical first step toward Plan A. If we were not willing to go that far, we were abdicating our ability to influence events. [7½ lines not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski interpreted it to mean that we were opposed to a Khomeini-controlled regime, without specifying what type of government would emerge. We want a government we can work with, that is all. Mr. Christopher said he was prepared to support Plan B, but he found Turner’s description somewhat difficult. The SCC reviewed the wording of the specific proposed finding and agreed that it should be rewritten to be more in conformance with Plan B. A meeting would be held later with the Attorney General and OMB present to examine the finding officially. (TS) 11 Carter underlined the words “opposing the use of non-peaceful means” and wrote in the margin: “We would veto.”

Options Identified charge were critical to continued momentum and to keeping the initiative in our hands. (A singular example of what happens when your leadership is not directly asserted is the U.S.-U.K. communiqué. You might remember that I tried to get the British to support us tangibly while you were in the Cabinet Room.5 This was then left to Cy and Carrington to negotiate. Page 2 of the enclosed U.S.-U.K. communiqué indicates what was omitted.6 5 See Document 103. 6 Not attached. A December 14 memorandum from James Rentschler of the National Security Council Staff to Aaron contained a draft paragraph on Iran for use in a jointly approved press statement to be released after Thatcher’s visit. It stated in part that Carter and Thatcher “agreed that they would use every means at their disposal” to obtain the release of the hostages and “agreed on the need to apply economic measures” that would isolate Iran and would direct their respective financial institutions to take appropriate action. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 64,

Options Identified 107. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

Options Identified —ask for specific sanctions probably by Wednesday of next week;6 —force the issue to a head.7 In the meantime, it is OK for Salim to go as soon as he can. There was some further discussion of disruption of shipping to Iran (foreign ships in Iranian ports have dropped from about 50 in November to 30 now); about the need to gradually build up our forces, and about not letting the military option become dormant. The Secretary of Defense then asked for approval to replace the Kitty Hawk with the Nimitz; for E–3 flights over the Straits; and to explore the possibility of their landing in Saudi Arabia. This was approved. 6 December 26. Carter moved the last part of the previous point into this one and deleted “maybe.” After his changes, the third point reads: “—ask for specific sanctions probably by Wednesday of next week and the Secretary of state himself should make the presentation.” 7 Carter changed this point to read: “—subsequently force the issue to a vote.” 108. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 19, 1979 SUBJECT Force Posture During the Holiday Season (U) 1. (U) The purpose of this memorandum is to confirm our discussions of 19 December 1979 regarding force posture and response times during the holiday season. 2. (TS) Training for the rescue option is scheduled to be completed with a full-scale rehearsal on 21 December 1979. Following successful completion of this rehearsal, combined training would be suspended until about 7 January 1980 to provide the Delta team, Ranger and helicopter personnel with an opportunity to return to their home bases 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Options Identified of Iranian, Panamanian, and U.S. high-level representatives to discuss “the manner in which the hostages might be liberated.” Royo wanted to know what the United States thought of this proposal. (Telegram 10324 from Panama, December 19; ibid.) After consulting with Vance, Moss informed Royo that “the proposal had all the earmarks of a scheme to try to negotiate for the extradition of the Shah in return for the prisoners’ release.” Vance, he told Royo, thought that the “plan would be very counterproductive.” (Telegram 10330 from Panama, December 19; ibid.) However, Ghotbzadeh apparently had developed a specific plan. He told Professor Richard Cottam on December 21 that the Revolutionary Council had developed “a settlement scenario in which several things might appear simultaneously.” This involved the extradition of the Shah, some form of examination of the Shah’s crimes and U.S. policy toward Iran through perhaps a Senate-House Committee, and the coincidental release of the hostages alongside this Committee’s operation. (Memorandum for the Record, December 21; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for

Options Identified out that we are proposing to encourage actions which “could” lead to an alternative government. Dr. Brzezinski said that this finding also had contingency value since Khomeini may fall and we will need to be able to support an alternative grouping. The SCC(I) unanimously recommended that the President approve and sign the attached find- On December 21, the SCC agreed4 that together with the background and discussion of the issue as approved by the President, the finding provided the necessary authority to proceed with the necessary actions. All agreed that the finding did not indicate that we anticipated that Khomeini’s regime could be transformed into a “responsible and democratic regime.” [2½ lines not declassified]. The President’s approval of the notes would be important in dealing with the congressional committees. (TS) Attachment Presidential Finding5 Washington, December 27, 1979 Finding Pursuant to Section 662 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, As Amended, Concerning Operations in Foreign Countries Other Than Those Intended Solely for the Purpose of Intelligence Collection I find the following operation in a foreign country is important to the national security of the United States, and direct the Director of Central Intelligence, or his designee, to report this finding to the concerned committees of the Congress pursuant to Section 662, and to provide such briefings as necessary. SCOPE DESCRIPTION Iran Conduct propaganda and political and economic action operations to encourage the establishment of a responsible and democratic regime 4 The Summary of Conclusions is in Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 107. 5 Secret; Sensitive.

Options Identified signalling the downfall of the Shah. The people tend to be politically aware, activist, and tough fighters. [1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified] As we examine our options under the new finding,2 I recommend that we give this strategy more attention than it has received to date.3 2 Attached to Document 110. 3 At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “GS. The 2 are not incompatible. I like this. Feed it into your covert action/milit.group.” 112. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 21, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #122 1. Opinion Difficult Choices in Iran. Let me just add the following to our discussions this morning,2 because I know that this matter is very much on your mind. (1) It may well be that Khomeini cannot be moved by economic pressures in which case military action, which is merely an extension of economic pressure (blockade or mining), will not move him either. In the meantime such action could provoke widespread international reactions against us and thus be self-defeating. Because of that, we need to consider military actions which contribute to his downfall, and thus secure the release of hostages as a consequence of attaining the other objective: his downfall. I have set up a very small, tightly held group to see whether we could somehow mesh covert political action designed to create an alternative to Khomeini 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Options Identified 113. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, December 24, 1979 SUBJECT Covert Action and U.S. Military Contingency Planning (S) The meeting with CIA, Defense, and State, on the compatibility of our military contingency planning and our covert action planning, took place on Saturday morning, December 22.2 David asked for the following options to be developed: [4 paragraphs (6 lines) not declassified] 5. Political consequences of seizing the oil region in the south, in particular, what would it take to hold the oil, denying its production and sale by Tehran and Khomeini’s government? 6. [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA is producing a paper on five of the six points. I and Defense were to produce something on the fifth point, holding the oil fields. (S) Putting the Khuzestan Oil Fields in “Trust.” Occupation of the oil producing region in the south could be done one of four ways: —Iraqi Invasion. This might take them away from Tehran, but the Iraqi hand on the oil spigot would not be easy to control. The other adverse political implications for the Persian Gulf littoral states makes this something to be prevented, not encouraged. —Admiral Madani Turns the Region Away from Tehran. If Admiral Madani, whose power in the Khuzestan region seems strong, were to abandon appearances of support for Khomeini’s regime, this would certainly take the oil away from Khomeini and give us some chance of influencing the internal developments in Iran. No one, however, seems to believe Madani can be brought to do this. —U.S. Invasion of the Khuzestan Region to Control the Oil. This, of course, is not remotely within our military capability, even if we drew 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

Options Identified 115. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Options Identified from a round of consultations so it appears to be the result of consensus—even if everyone knows that the U.S. is the real author. Secretary Vance and Ambassador McHenry intended to consult immediately following the SCC meeting to decide on the list of specific sanctions which we would demand. This list will be prepared and circulated later in the day for comments before being sent to the President as an agreed recommendation by the SCC.6 The ambassadors of the nations represented on the Security Council are being called in to State today to make a firm request for their support for our efforts in the UN. They will not be briefed on the precise details of our proposed package, however, since questions remain about the desirability and legality of interrupting communications, for example. Dr. Brzezinski cautioned the SCC that the list of sanctions should be as stringent as possible. The President did not want us to look like a bunch of puffs. (S) 3. Iranian Diplomats. State will follow up on the President’s order that the Iranian diplomats who have been ordered to leave the country should get out. (C) 4. Iranian Monetary Transfers. Secretary Miller briefed the group on a series of proposed Iranian transfers of accounts from European and Japanese banks to alternative accounts of Libyan and Algerian banks. Some of these alternative accounts would in fact be held in Japan or France. It is doubtful that the allies would be willing or, in some cases, able to interfere with this type of transaction. Nevertheless, the SCC agreed that going to the allies on this issue would underline the fact that we are monitoring Iranian activities closely and would keep them alert to their commitments. It was agreed that Secretary Miller would send a message to the appropriate finance ministers. (S) 5. Unblocking Assets. Secretary Miller circulated for SCC comments a paper outlining procedures and options available to us in unblocking Iranian assets should that prove necessary or desirable at some point in the future. (S) 6. Public Posture. State will be in contact with the various clergymen and religious groups which may be involved in visits to the hostages over Christmas. They will be briefed to insist on seeing all the hostages, to take their time and not rush through a visit, and to protest publicly in Tehran if they are prohibited from fulfilling their objectives or if the 6 Brzezinski sent the Summary of Conclusions and the operative paragraphs of the proposed UN resolution on Chapter VII sanctions to Carter on December 22. He noted that the latter “has been checked and approved by all agencies.” Carter initialed his approval and made comments on the text of the operative part of the resolution. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 18, SCC Meeting #236A

Options Identified will try to give these countries a timetable for our work in New York as soon as the picture is clarified. There are repeated rumors that two or three hostages may be released in the next day or so. Thus far we have nothing very tangible to give us hope on this score. We have just had an authoritative report that Arafat has been in touch with Khomeini by emissary. According to the emissary, the thinking in Qom is that there will definitely be a trial of American policy at which the hostages would be present. No harm would be done to them and they would go home after the trial. 5. London Meeting. With respect to the secret London meeting with associates of Khomeini and Admiral Madani which you approved yesterday,3 Hal Saunders is now making plans to fly to London Thursday night for a Friday meeting.4 6. Australia. The Australian Cabinet agreed to support the U.S. to the fullest extent possible on Iran, but decided to continue existing plans for food shipments to Iran, principally wheat and mutton. Very recently, the Iranian Government food purchasing agency asked the AWB for an additional 400,000 tons of wheat. To try to head this off, I am writing to Peacock stating that while we appreciate the importance of food exports to Australia, I hope that nothing will be done that would seem to lessen the impact of measures being taken officially and unofficially in other countries. I pointed out to him that the U.S. would see any substantial increase in Australia’s food exports to Iran or the extension of government credits or insurance to underwrite such shipments as falling in this category. [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 8. Sanctions in the UN. Based on responses to your message to the leaders of Security Council member states and our talks with Ambassadors here, we have the following preliminary assessment of the mood in the Council. (We will know much more after we get reactions to our specific “operative paragraphs”.)5 —Great Britain, France, Norway, Portugal: While we will get some questioning of specific measures or language embodied in the resolution, we expect the full support of our allies. 3 Carter, who was at Camp David on December 23, spoke to Chirstopher on the

Options Identified 117. Memorandum for the Files1

Options Identified CIA Admiral Stansfield Turner Frank Carlucci Energy Secretary Charles Duncan* (Justice not represented) *Domestic issues only SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues: 1. Hostages. We are confident that our list of the hostages is accurate within one or two names. Fifty hostages is the best estimate, although it is conceivable that there might be another private individual who happened to be in the embassy at the time of the takeover whose name has not yet surfaced, or even that someone escaped and is in hiding. The clergymen visiting the embassy on Christmas had a number of different lists of numbers of hostages actually seen, but it is certain that they saw no more than 43 hostages, perhaps fewer.2 We will be able to tie this down more firmly once they have been debriefed. A student at the embassy last night on the telephone referred to 50 hostages. State will prepare a chart showing the most recent evidence we have about each of the hostages since the takeover occurred. It would not be advisable to base a public initiative too heavily on the clergymen’s visit until we have a better understanding of what they did and who they saw. We also wish to insure that the private nature of the clergy visit is understood. These men were chosen by the Iranians, they had no official status, and we have no control over what they may say on their return. Secretary Vance will talk to the clergymen as soon as they return. (S) 2. Economic Steps. Treasury will prepare an updated matrix for the President showing what each of the allies has agreed to and what steps are actually being implemented. We have full agreement on all items of the package except government guidance to private banks about Iranian defaults. Full implementation will begin on December 27, although the French say they will not complete their guidance to their banks until January 2. On the issue of public disclosure, the allies agreed that if and when leaks occur, the government would officially confirm that “measures of cooperation” had been implemented, without being specific. In some ways, a non-specific statement is preferable since the actions are primarily technical and would not have major public impact. France has insisted that it wants to say only that allied 2 See Document 117.

Options Identified Political-Diplomatic Issues:

Options Identified Next Steps We must find a way to relax the arms transfer restrictions, even if that means going to the Hill for an exception or a change in the law. [1½ lines not declassified] Once it is clear to Zia that we are prepared to move in that direction, that we will accept the damage to our relations with India, then we may find him willing to begin covert action, even before we have delivered arms. As we make decisions on covert action, it seems critical that we make them toward the proper end: restoring the “northern tier,” not only gaining the release of the hostages. We should make intelligence approaches at the highest level in Pakistan and Turkey for discussions about the future of Iran. The PRC on Pakistan this week,3 of course, could be the forum for recommending one of these steps along with significant changes in our overall policy toward that State. 3 The PRC met on December 27 to discuss Pakistan and the situation in Afghanistan.

Options Identified tion” have in fact been agreed upon. The French have not yet formally agreed to this, but Vance has sent a message to Giscard3 and believes that the French will agree. (C) 4. IMF. Mr. Solomon alerted the SCC to the possibility that the Saudis and others may vote against us—or at least abstain—on the question of whether or not our freeze of Iranian assets is permitted under the IMF Charter. The reason for the Saudi and Arab position is that Egypt made the same argument about paying interest to Saudi Arabia after the Arab cutoff of funds. Although this may be somewhat embarrassing to us, Mr. Solomon was certain that we have the necessary votes to win in the IMF. (C) 5. Hostages. State has prepared a chart showing when each hostage was seen or contacted since the takeover of the embassy.4 This is extremely sensitive, since it tends to identify particular individuals as suspect. A single copy was made to be attached to the notes of the SCC meeting. The seven missing hostages include [less than 1 line not declassified] four Foreign Service Officers. There is one hostage, a Mr. Blucker who was on temporary duty to Tehran as an economist, who has not been seen or heard from since the first day of the takeover. The fact that the students today claim that only 49 hostages are in custody—as opposed to our firm count of 50—is worrisome from that perspective. Hodding Carter at the noon briefing today will make clear that any confusion about the total number of hostages is not confusion on our part but rather because of the poor information coming out of the students5 and others in Tehran. Secretary Vance will meet with the American clergymen for half an hour after their return. (S) Political-Military Issues: 1. AWACS. Dr. Brzezinski informed the SCC that the President had approved the proposal from the previous meeting. The AWACS flew yesterday as scheduled and will return to the base in Egypt today. (S) 2. Intelligence Finding. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the intelligence finding as revised and approved by the President would be sent to the President for signature today. The finding is attached, with the President’s comments and changes incorporated.6 (S) 3. Covert Action. The SCC agreed that the small covert action subcommittee would meet on Monday7 to review options. The entire ques- 3 Not further identified. 4 Attached but not printed. In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Examined & returned.” 5 Carter underlined the word “students” and, at the top of the first page of the memorandum, wrote: “Zbig—Please do not call them students—otherwise ok. J.” 6 See the attachment to Document 110. 7 Monday, December 31.

Options Identified students function as personal guards of the hostages and as propagandists and ideologues trying to indoctrinate the hostages. The PLO function as observers, advisors, and propagandists. The Fatah trained militants supervise security, interrogation, and document exploitation. The Pasdaran, besides providing external security, maintain a presence within the compound, primarily providing sentries. Within the buildings, the students typically carry pistols or G–3 rifles. Those on duty outside typically are armed with G–3 rifles. Guards carrying rifles have not been observed carrying any spare magazines for their weapons. (B) (TS) The number of personnel present seems to vary according to the occasion and day of the week. Other factors being equal, the number of personnel in the compound drops on Thursday and Friday (the Islamic weekend, when some leave to visit families). The number rises again on Saturdays and Sundays when there are typically a lot of meetings held, according to a released hostage. There is another reduction when some members of the occupation force (students) leave the compound to attend classes. (C) (TS) Guard force distribution is estimated as follows with a day/night duty ratio of 60/40. Amb residence 10–14 DCM residence 8–12 Servant quarters 12–16 Consulate 8–12 Chancery 8–12 Staff cottages 18–20 Warehouse 8–12 Interior perimeter 10–12 (D) The general pattern of guard positions within a hostage location is 1–3 guards per room. The guards seem to favor positions in doorways vice protected corners. Outside hostage locations, single sentries walk beats which generally parallel building walls and extend the length of the building protected. (E) Within the compound several defensive construction measures have been noted. The athletic fields have been blocked to helicopter traffic with parked cars and 6–8 foot stakes which have been driven into the ground. Anti-helicopter stakes have also been placed on the roof of the warehouse building. The probability exists that mines or demolitions have been positioned around the athletic fields. One hostage mentioned trip-wires connected to bells or other noise makers in his debriefing statement, and other hostages have mentioned hearing buzzers before people entered their area, possibly as part of a warning system of some sort. The students have installed additional lighting and loudspeakers in several locations. They are reportedly using some

Options Identified [Omitted here is discussion on Afghanistan and Pakistan. For portions on Afghanistan and Pakistan, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan, Document 107.] Secretary Vance reviewed for the President what is happening with respect to Iran. Ambassador McHenry joined the meeting. The EC–9 nations have begun a drawdown of their personnel in Iran, including their nationals. As a whole, they believe that an affirmative vote for sanctions in the UN will subject them and their nationals to danger in Tehran, including a possible takeover. The UK is now removing nearly all of its people, and the French, Germans and Italians are considering a move. The ambassadors of the EC–9 in Tehran are going to Qom today if they can, or else will approach the Revolutionary Council. They will weigh in on the new circumstances in Afghanistan and try to persuade the Iranians that the Soviet actions are the real issue. They will argue that Iran should settle the problem with the U.S. and begin to focus on the real danger. They will deliver this as a message from the European Community. Ambassador McHenry said that consultations at the UN have been proceeding over the past several days. In addition, there will be an informal meeting of the Council this afternoon and a formal meeting tomorrow morning. We need to have a resolution by tomorrow if we are to have a vote on Monday2 and avoid the change in composition which will occur at the New Year. The present group is better since we have long worked with them on this issue. There are potential difficulties associated with a delay; for one thing, if the Cuba-Colombia dispute over seating is not resolved, we could have a 14-member Council. Although there is no question of the legality of functioning with only 14 members, it does raise political question. We would lose the Bolivian vote, and we would still need nine positive votes. The French would be in the chair. It is doubtful that the Soviets, Czechs or Kuwaitis could vote for any resolution based on Chapter VII sanctions. They may be willing to imply such support if they can change the resolution to a lesser first step with sanctions to follow, but he believed that this was merely tactical and we would not in the final analysis get those three. Indications are that the Soviets would abstain. The Norwegians, British, Portuguese and French are prepared in principle to be supportive, but at least the British and French have suggested changes in the description of sanctions which are extensive enough to require some time to work out. He did not believe this could be worked out this month. The British changes would provide no automatic default on existing credits, approval of credits for items, e.g., 2 December 31.

Options Identified Ambassador McHenry said the British first called and said they had some “minor changes,” but when he saw them later he realized they were not minor at all. They subsequently indicated that they could not support sanctions unless all three of the changes outlined previously were included in the resolution. The President thought that would be good, but it should not delay our preparation of the second vote on sanctions. We need to get the British and French on board. Dr. Brzezinski wondered how sure we were of getting a favorable second vote. Ambassador McHenry said it would still require a Presidential effort. The President said he was ready for that. Dr. Brzezinski said he was worried about the public perception. We had planned to ask our Allies to impose sanctions even if the vote failed at the UN. Would it not be better to go for sanctions and at the same time to make an approach to the Iranians about the Afghan situation. He did not think the U.S. public expected a vote immediately. Mr. Powell disagreed. He said a vote was expected very soon and this would be seen as a classic case of legislative impotence if we could not deliver. Dr. Brzezinski wondered still if we would be better off to go for sanctions directly. The President said he thought it was more important to get something before January. He noted that the Iranians had in any event refused to meet with Waldheim. Ambassador McHenry agreed and noted that a two-stage process was a way of getting around the red herring that somehow Waldheim could produce a solution. Waldheim had called him at midnight the night before about a call he had received from the Pakistani Ambassador relaying a message from the Pakistani Foreign Minister in Tehran. The Iranians had reiterated the view that they did not want to see the Secretary General right now. The Pakistanis wanted his reaction to a proposal that the Secretary General go to Iran with the advance understanding that nothing would come of it. Would that help, defuse the situation? Ambassador McHenry had told Waldheim that we would not buy that, and Waldheim agreed that it did not sound like a good idea. The President said he was not embarrassed to get a positive vote on Monday which would give Waldheim a week to arrange release of the hostages and provided that at the end of that time the Security Council would be committed to act on articles 39 and 41. Mr. Powell observed that the story would still be that we did it because we did not have the votes to win.

Options Identified approach would not be a combination, playing off the Afghan theme and offering some kind of concession at the same time. The President said that the concessions we had drafted previously were still available. He thought Dr. Brzezinski was right—Khomeini would like to see all Western influence in Iran ended. Any military action by us would simply play into his hands. He would say, “We would have a great situation here in Iran if it were not for the American mining, or bombing or whatever.” He guessed that Shariat-Madari and Beheshti and perhaps others have influence on Khomeini as potential alternatives to his rule. Khomeini is not so solidly in power as to be able to ignore the Revolutionary Council entirely. As far as he knew, Bani Sadr was the only officially announced candidate for President of Iran. Secretary Vance said there were some indications that the Iranian Government was more coherent now with the Revolutionary Council under Beheshti. He has shown himself to be careful and strong. He has never put himself in the position of having his position immediately reversed. The President noted that the students are now reported to be forming a coordination committee with the Revolutionary Council. On the UN resolution, he would like the triggering device to be the release or non-release of the hostages. We need a vote by the first of January. If Secretary Vance did not mind, would he please go up to New York. The President was prepared to help. Secretary Vance said the real problem for the British was the question of the five ships with Iranian flags. The extra-territoriality question is one that we will not be able to resolve. It has been a problem for years. The President wondered if we could not find language which would permit the operation of those ships. Secretary Vance said we should be able to come up with something. He noted that the British were backing away from their position on credit because of the position taken by their Treasury. The President said the British were the only obstacle. Ambassador McHenry said he would want to study the proposals the French had put to us only this morning.6 (Ambassador McHenry then left the meeting.)

Options Identified in finding a solution acceptable to Khomeini and the students. Reverend Coffin was critical of American policy and urged statements which would “transcend” the present stalemate and respond to the Iranian need for understanding of their grievances. Reverend Howard did not believe that any dramatic proposals by the U.S. would yield results. All three agreed that additional U.S. pressures through sanctions would only harden the Iranian position. I. The Hostages: The three clergymen believe they saw 43 hostages:

Options Identified to be concerned that the USG would somehow manipulate the question of the discrepancy in the numbers in a way that would escalate tensions. It was pointed out to Coffin that the students have now admitted that there are 49 hostages and that the clergy did not see all of them. The discrepancy question is now narrowed to one hostage. The Secretary suggested that the clergy say that they had seen 43 hostages and had given the names to the Department and talked to the families. The Department would note that there were 50 hostages on the compound and that clarification has been requested from the Iranians. The clergy appeared to accept this formulation. 124. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 28, 1979 This memorandum suggests possible steps to be taken on Iran, covering the three tracks we have been pursuing: —pressures on Iran; —public statements on our position; and —private approaches. It draws on a number of thoughts suggested by Dave Newsom, and is based on a meeting he held with Iran experts from various bureaus and with Dr. [name not declassified]2 It does not look at Iran in the context of our concerns on Afghanistan. We should, however, in making decisions on our military posture—and on our longer term relations with Iran—bear the Afghanistan angle in mind. The course we have been pursuing in Iran has positioned us very well, both domestically and in international opinion. We have shown 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Options Identified A. Diplomatic: We can progressively restrict Iranian diplomatic and consular activity in the U.S.3 through closing some or all of the consulates, concluding by breaking relations. The continued Iranian diplomatic presence in the U.S. has two major roles: to provide assistance to Iranian students in the U.S.; and to communicate public and private views and messages both to Iranian officials and to the hostages. While closing the consulates and/or severing diplomatic ties may effectively signal our growing impatience to Iranian moderates and to Khomeini, breaking relations also could cut off one communication channel, could aggravate the student captors and could undermine the efforts of Iranian moderates.4 A break in diplomatic relations could be important symbolically. We might want to use it later, however, if there is a worsening of the hostages’ situation and at a time when we may want other governments to intensify their pressure through a parallel severing of diplomatic ties. Severing diplomatic ties now or in the immediate future could also deprive Iran of one element of a face-saver in the final resolution of the crisis. At this point in the stalemate we may instead want to advise Agah to look for a protecting power, without giving him a deadline. This move would underscore our growing impatience without incurring the costs of an actual break in relations. We could send a visible emissary to Iraq to consult on regional developments. This may serve to increase Iran’s concern about its own security and feed the reservations of those in the Revolutionary Council and around Khomeini as to the impact on Iran and on the revolution of Khomeini’s policies. Our interests would in any event be served by a further effort to strengthen our dialogue with Iraq, even if this does not lead to normalization of relations. B. Economic: Beyond the economic measures we are now taking with our allies, and beyond limited UN sanctions, we could: 1. Move to intensify pressure on Iranians in the U.S. by eliminating the present assets freeze exemption for students. This might be welcomed by the public but may also be open to challenge in the courts. Indigent students might be forced to stay in the U.S. and fall back on local 3 On December 29, Carter sent a handwritten note to “Cy and/or Warren” that reads: “Push to legal limits the immediate expulsion of Iranian diplomats in accordance with my previous directions. J.C.” Copies were sent to Powell and Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran

Options Identified age Iran’s oil production capacity. The impact on the Iranian economy and the future recovery of Iran would be serious. This might bring home to Khomeini and the students the costs to the revolution of the present policies; but it would also be damaging to the international economy. An international oil surplus in the next two months might make possible a reallocation of crude oil and facilitate gaining international support for a boycott, but it would be very difficult to achieve under any circumstances. Success would depend on the cooperation of other major OPEC producers in not shutting down production or increasing prices. If Iran decided to sell its oil below the general market price in an effort to break a boycott, it would be difficult to sustain any common front we might manage to create and severe tensions could be created in relations with several of our key allies and third world states. 7. A naval embargo of shipments to and from Iran would enforce not only an oil boycott but all trade sanctions and intensify economic pressures on Iran. It would provide visible evidence of U.S. power which could have a major impact in Iran—both in reminding the ordinary Iranian of U.S. strength and in emboldening those who oppose Khomeini’s policies, including the military, to attempt more direct action. An embargo would probably be welcomed in the U.S. At the same time, it could be difficult to enforce, given the heavy commercial traffic in the Gulf and Arabian Sea; could result in tense exchanges with other countries whose commerce was affected; and potentially could lead to a military confrontation with Iranian or other naval forces which might attempt to force a blockade. It might also galvanize Iranian nationalism against the U.S., including the military. While I cannot judge this in technical terms, there are a number of advantages to mining the harbors and perhaps channels rather than imposing a blockade with our ships. C. Political 1. We could intensify current efforts to convey the message that Iran is being weakened by its present policies. Aside from VOA, we could ask cooperating governments, particularly those in Middle Eastern countries and Europe, to include this theme in radio broadcasts in Persian and Arabic. The object would be to strengthen internal doubts in Iran as to the wisdom of holding the hostages and confronting the international community. We could urge all cooperating governments and groups to seek to convey the same message directly to Khomeini through every channel of communication available. [1 paragraph (18 lines) not declassified] D. Military: Finally, there are the whole range of military options which are not reviewed here. One early measure could be a display of force but without the actual use of weapons. This could include high-

Options Identified If we decide to address Iranian concerns more fully we need to a) define our position and b) find a way of conveying it that does not also convey a weakening of our position. Bearing in mind the concerns listed on page two, I suggest you consider the following approach. A. Our Position We cannot, in any way, condone the involuntary return of the Shah, from Panama or elsewhere. This leaves five issues: —A hearing on the “sins” of the Shah and the U.S.; —Trials of the hostages; —The Shah’s assets; —U.S. intervention in current Iranian affairs; and, —Our future relations. On the first three, we must not appear to accept the principle of hostage trials or our culpability for past events in Iran. Nor should we imply that, once the hostages are released, we can wipe the slate clean in our relations with Iran. Within these constraints, however, the following message could be passed to Khomeini and members of the Revolutionary Council: “—No one should doubt American unity and resolve on this issue. —But the elements of a resolution of the crisis are available. It is certain that if the hostages were released, the U.S. would: • Cooperate with the Secretary General in the simultaneous formation of, and subsequent work of, an international commission ‘to investigate allegations of grave violations of human rights and other illegal acts in Iran’ under the Shah. (Note: Ideally the commission should also investigate violations under Khomeini, but this is a non-starter.) • Also cooperate with Congressional hearings on U.S. relations with Iran. The U.S. would grant visas to representatives of Iran who wished to present their case at such hearings. • Continue to recognize the right of the Government of Iran to assert in U.S. courts its claims to assets which, in Iran’s view, have been illegally taken out of Iran by those connected with the former regime, as well as Iran’s claims to all other such assets as might later be transferred to the United States. The U.S. would not interfere with this process and would to the extent possible support it by providing information in accordance with U.S. laws under the Freedom of Information Act. The U.S. would not interfere with an attachment of funds but would indicate, if requested by the court, that such a measure was appropriate. The U.S. would also assist with accounting actions in other countries as appropriate. • When the hostages have been released, the U.S. would lift its freeze on all Iranian assets held overseas by U.S. entities and all assets in this country with the exception of central bank funds. The latter

Options Identified I would suggest, therefore, that a non-American of standing in Iranian eyes (McBride? al Madhi?)8 be asked by Waldheim (not by us) to see Khomeini, Beheshti, and other leading members of the Revolutionary Council. He should make it clear that he has an important message for Khomeini himself. Of course, if Waldheim himself goes to Iran, he could convey such a message. Alternatively, an American with standing in Iranian eyes, either a clergyman or a prominent private citizen, could deliver such a message. The advantages of having an American transmit our views would be that the message would have greater credibility in Khomeini’s eyes. (Khomeini is more likely to be responsive to a clergyman than to a private citizen.) The disadvantage of having an American deliver our message is that the more the message is specifically American, the more we appear to be the demandeur. For this reason, I believe a non- American is far preferable. To support such an approach, we could make a greater effort to ask concerned Europeans to seek out their own channels to Iran and especially Khomeini to emphasize, on their part, the grave danger to Iran and to the peace of the area of the prolongation of this conflict. The French, for example, might approach Benjadid to suggest a renewed Algerian/Muslim/Arab effort to talk with Khomeini. Now is the time for us to pull out all stops in getting to all the members of the Revolutionary Council that we can, with a special focus on Beheshti. We could also make a special effort to encourage Islamic representatives to get to Khomeini or those about him. The emphasis in such messages should be on the damage Khomeini is doing to his own revolution and the opportunities he is providing for the left. C. Public Statements Such a private approach could be reinforced by a calculated series of public statements by US officials. These public statements should not concede any points in advance of a decision that the hostages will be released—for example, by simply ruling out interference in Iran’s internal affairs. They should avoid specific threats as well as characterizations of the Iranian position on specific issues, which almost automatically produce denials. And, while never in any way granting the legitimacy of trials or tribunals, they should not focus primary attention on the kinds of general “investigations” the Iranians are hinting at. To do so may only lock the Iranians in. I believe it is better, tactically, to focus our pressures on the main issue of release, and to belittle non-trial “investigations” as charades. 8 Possible channels are being reviewed for you today by NEA. [Footnote is in the original.]

Options Identified about an irrational situation. But, if conveyed in the manner suggested, I don’t think we would lose anything by trying. And whatever happens, we might later feel remiss not to have made such a move at about this stage. 125. Handwritten Note From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 29, 1979 Cy— Because the imposition of sanctions appears to be such a watershed, I did some brainstorming with our analysts on other approaches to securing release of the hostages. Attached is a 1¼ page think piece— it’s all policy and your business—accordingly I drop it with you and let it go at that— Stan Attachment Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency2 Washington, undated Breaking the Logjam Objective: • Secure timely release of all hostages. Means: • Secret negotiations with key Revolutionary Council members (Beheshti and/or Ghotbzadeh). This meeting to take place with foreknowledge of Khomeini. • Use individual with acceptable credentials (e.g., Prof. Richard Cottam). 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Options Identified 126. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, December 29, 1979 Under Secretary Newsom met with Swiss Political Counselor Simonin at noon on December 29. Mr. Newsom gave Mr. Simonin a message for Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran. Mr. Simonin in turn provided Mr. Newsom with a copy of a cable from Ambassador Lang.2 Mr. Newsom reviewed with Mr. Simonin the message for Ambassador Lang. Mr. Newsom pointed out that in regard to Ghotbzadeh’s complaint that the U.S. was not publicly responding to “positive” Iranian moves, the national mood in the U.S. is such that it is difficult for the USG to comment favorably on anything short of the release of the hostages. Mr. Newsom emphasized our need for a list of the hostages in order to straighten out the confusion about the number being held. Mr. Newsom told Mr. Simonin, for his information only, that the clergymen who visited the hostages had not been able to come up with a precise list of the 43 that they met with. Mr. Newsom underlined the importance of the point that the USG is not seeking to claim a victory over Iran or to suggest Iranian weaknesses. The U.S. media tends to see everything in terms of winners and losers, and we cannot control this. Mr. Newsom said that he realizes that our request that Ambassador Lang try to make sense of the confusion among the Iranian leaders is a tall order, but that we would very much appreciate any input that he might have. Mr. Simonin asked if the U.S. could offer any further clarification of statements by the Panamanian President on extradition of the former Shah.3 Mr. Newsom said that in our view, President Royo is playing a risky game. Royo has made it clear to us, and presumably the former Shah, that Panama does not intend to extradite the former Shah to Iran. Royo seems to think, however, that he is playing a useful role as far as the release of the hostages is concerned by saying that Panama will carefully consider an extradition request by Iran. Royo has not wanted to imply that the former Shah will in fact be extradited if the hostages are released. General Torrijos has given us firm assurances that the former Shah will not be extradited. 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Options Identified 128. Editorial Note On December 29, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed the United Nations Security Council, asking that it adopt the U.S. draft resolution for economic sanctions against Iran. (Department of State

Formal and Informal Negotiating Channels 129. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 1, 1980 SUBJECT Iran—Next Steps The SCC on January 2 will need to examine the covert action program being worked up by CIA and the diplomatic/economic strategy we intend to pursue over the coming weeks. The first objective of the SCC meeting—and the NSC meeting to follow—should be the establishment of a policy framework with clear objectives which are agreed at the highest level. The second objective should be to insure that the package of proposed overt and covert actions are mutually reinforcing and consistent with the policy objectives. U.S. Objectives We have two principal objectives: (1) the release and safe return of the hostages; and (2) “to encourage the establishment of a responsible and democratic regime in Iran.” Although we have tended to regard these as separate, in fact they are two sides of the same coin. Khomeini is not going to accept the political costs of giving up the hostages until he is persuaded that continued holding of the hostages is more costly to him than giving them up. That means that Khomeini must see his internal power base eroding, with the risk of losing control over the revolution. No other argument or scheme is going to tempt him to change his mind. Our strategy, therefore, must concentrate on making the present situation as costly politically as possible for Khomeini and his followers. We can do that by maintaining maximum pressure on Iran through a diplomatic-economic offensive, combined with a vigorous covert action program which undermines Khomeini’s effective control. We should beware of various proposals which would have us make a new set of offers or concessions to Khomeini as a face-saving device. These will not work and could make things worse, rather than better. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

Negotiating Channels Khomeini has all the face-saving devices he needs, and he will use them when he decides to pay the political price. He can use Waldheim, the PLO, Syria, Algeria, or any number of other intermediaries who are waiting anxiously in the wings with visions of being tapped as the “savior” of the hostages. He has no shortage of strategems available to him domestically, including the possibility of a quick trial and expulsion of the hostages, or any number of other schemes combining maximum U.S. humiliation with the freeing of the hostages. What is lacking is the will to use one or more of these possibilities. We should not underestimate the effectiveness of the steps we have taken to date. Despite the brave rhetoric of Khomeini and the Iranian media, the leadership and much of the population is aware of the isolation of Iran, the damage to the reputation of the revolution, the economic complications for Iranian companies and individuals, the threat of shortages of key parts and basic necessities, the stagnation of the economy, and even the danger of U.S. military intervention. None of these is so severe that it is likely to reverse the course of events in the immediate future, but the cumulative effect is visible in the highlevel infighting among Khomeini’s followers, the increasing readiness of individuals to criticize the present leadership, and outright insurrection in key areas of the country. We must not permit ourselves to become victims of Iranian propaganda. Our most effective weapon is holding firmly to a course of steady and persistent pressure. That course may be frustrating to us when it fails to yield immediate results, but it is the only realistic option available to us which is likely to produce the desired outcome. We must grit our teeth and persevere. Diplomatic/Economic Options The following is a list of actions available to us at present: 1. Sanctions. We must continue to press with all our resources for a UN vote on sanctions and effective implementation of its provisions. The sharp reaction to the threat of sanctions in Tehran is the best indicator of their unwillingness to be only the second nation in recent history to have been branded an international outlaw. The fact that the economic effects will be slow in coming should not mislead us about the psychological impact. The practical complications for ordinary Iranians in terms of travel, credit, imports and routine communications should also not be underestimated. 2. Drawdown of Foreign Personnel. There is considerable alarm in Tehran today as word spreads about the withdrawal of personnel from foreign embassies and commercial representatives. We should encourage this and try to accelerate it. A limited military show of force, e.g. overflights, could be quite effective in helping some nations make up their minds.

Negotiating Channels a plan include a heavy dose of propaganda, plus some careful advance planning/consultation with political opposition groups. Timing The evolution of political events in Iran continues to be dominated by the constitution. The next key event is the election of a president on about January 25. I have two observations: —We should encourage the political opposition groups with whom we are in contact to boycott the presidential elections. If they attempt to run their own candidates, they will merely fail, while lending legitimacy to the election process. By boycotting, they probably cannot prevent the election of a candidate of Khomeini’s choice (which may be some nonentity subject to Khomeini’s personal control), but they can maintain a strong position of objecting to the legitimacy of the entire process, thereby strengthening their own hand for rejecting the outcome. —The fortieth day after Ashura, known as “Arba’in,” falls on January 19, just prior to the presidential elections. We should use whatever influence we have with opposition groups to promote open resistance to Khomeini’s rule and the proposed constitution on that occasion. If something dramatic could be arranged, e.g. the departure of Shariat- Madari from Qom to the holy city of Najaf in Iraq, it could detract from the election process and spark increased resistance to Khomeini throughout the country. 130. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Negotiating Channels It was a close judgment call whether this helped or hurt the hostage situation. He tended to believe that it may make it worse. However, we should recognize that Khomeini is already convinced that we are supporting Bakhtiar and others—on the basis of information captured at the embassy, among other things. So our efforts in this regard do not really change his perspective of our role. Secretary Vance noted that we should tell Bakhtiar either to shut up or have his water cut off. [1½ lines not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski noted the tremendous impact of government support on emigre organizations—they place great importance even on limited shows of support. Mr. Carlucci agreed that it is a dilemma; however, we do want to achieve the psychological effect of stimulating their action through our support. Mr. Carlucci added that we will “not be dealing with boy scouts” in this operation. [5 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown noted that the magnitude of our efforts should be governed by what we really know about what we are trying to do. At the moment, we are only starting and do not have as much information as we would like. We must wait and see how it goes. Dr. Brzezinski asked if we were in touch with Iranian military leaders; do we have an inventory of the military leaders who remain from the previous regime? Secretary Vance said we would be in touch today with someone in New York who is reputedly in contact with Admiral Madani. Mr. Carlucci noted that [less than 1 line not declassified]. We do not have an inventory of present military leadership. Our information is scanty, but we are trying to build it up. Secretary Brown said he had directed contact with a group of Iranian naval officers who are in this country as a purchasing mission, but he was not aware of what had come of this. Mr. Christopher said we should be focusing on the labor organizations in the oil fields. Mr. Sick noted that Hassan Nazih, former head of the NIOC, was now out of the country, and we should have contact with him soon. He probably has the best understanding of the possibilities there. [5½ lines not declassified] Secretary Vance agreed that we need more information before moving to that stage.5 (TS) The SCC then turned to the second CIA paper (Tab B)6 which addresses various options developed by the small subcommittee chaired by David Aaron. Mr. Carlucci noted that operations such as those discussed in this paper were of a different order of magnitude from the political action options discussed above and would require substantially more resources. Mr. Aaron noted that these had been identified as possible contingent actions for consideration. This was 5 In the left margin next to the last sentence of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “I agree.” 6 Tab B, an untitled and undated paper, is attached but not printed. Annex A to this paper describes various tribal groups in Iran.

Negotiating Channels 1 line not declassified] which are only now beginning are the necessary first step in any event. Secretary Vance noted that there is no requirement to [less than 1 line not declassified] in order to proceed with this option. The SCC agreed that pursuing [less than 1 line not declassified] was the appropriate action for the moment.8 (TS) 3. Contacts with Iraq. All agreed that this was already being pur- 4. Seizure of oil fields. Mr. Aaron noted that the objective of this option was to examine [5½ lines not declassified]. The SCC noted that the examination revealed that such an effort would require direct action either by us or the Iraqis, and the prospect of Iraqi control of the oil fields was not significantly more attractive than Khomeini’s control. Secretary Vance suggested that this option be put on hold.9 5. Blockade. Dr. Brzezinski noted that this had been covered in the discussion of option 2 and that we should go ahead with planning.10 (S) The SCC then took up a series of brief items: [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 7. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that Iran will be the first topic on the agenda of the NSC meeting this afternoon. At that time, the President will want an update on our present status and the items discussed here this morning. However, the central question will be how we can continue to exert pressure on Iran after we get sanctions (or do not get sanctions) next week. (S) 8 Carter underlined the phrase “pursuing [less than 1 line not declassified]” and wrote “no more” in the left margin next to the Approve line, on which he placed a checkmark. 9 Carter double underlined the word “hold” in the last sentence, then placed a checkmark on the Approve line. 10 Carter indicated neither his approval nor disapproval of this item, but he initialed in the right margin.

Negotiating Channels but we would lose Gabon. Niger will replace Nigeria and he thought that we will probably have their support if the French will help us. He said we will lose a vote on Bolivia since there is still an impasse over whether Cuba or Colombia will get that seat. He added that the Eastern Europeans, East Germany and Czechoslovakia, will, of course, be of no help. With the Europeans and ourselves, we have five votes. If you add Niger, that is six; the Philippines, that is seven. He said Zambia is questionable; however, Manley will stick with us and that will make eight votes. However, we could not be certain until we have the text of the sanctions resolution in front of the delegates. The Secretary of State thought the big question was whether the Chinese would stay with us. In his judgment, if we have nine votes, China will join us; but if China is to be the ninth vote, we could have some difficulties. The Secretary of Defense asked what the chances were that Secretary General Waldheim would say that we should keep negotiating rather than voting sanctions. The Secretary of State responded that Waldheim is likely to say that there has been some progress and that there should be a few more days permitted to see if diplomacy could achieve more substantial progress. The Secretary of State confirmed the Secretary of Defense’s assessment that therefore the vote on sanctions might stretch a few days further, but not for several weeks. The President asked whether there had been a report from Waldheim. The Secretary of State said no. Indeed, we still do not know if he will be seeing Khomeini. In any event, he did not believe that much would come out of the Waldheim visit. The President agreed. He doubted whether the Iranians wanted to resolve the crisis at this stage. The Secretary of State said that he believed the Afghan situation is the only thing that might change the attitude of the Iranian authorities. The Iranian Government has made two statements critical of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and they have indicated that this is supposed to be a signal of the congruence of their view with that of our own. The Secretary of State noted that the Saudis were interested in putting together an Islamic Foreign Ministers meeting and the Secretary of State said that he had encouraged the Saudi Foreign Minister in that regard. He concluded by saying that it is clear that the Iranians see the Soviet move into Afghanistan as a threat. This is where we must place the weight of our argument. In response to a question as to the contacts we have with the Iranians on this, the Secretary of State said that we were in contact with them through the Swiss.

Negotiating Channels Council chamber for his office he engaged in a highly emotional exchange with Amb Naik (Pakistan). Waldheim was still worked up when we began our conversation. Probably only Mrs. Waldheim would believe how emotional and angry he was. 2. Waldheim began with sharp criticism of Naik, Pakistan FM Shahi and all others who offered him advice without knowing what they were talking about and with only the objective of getting a piece of the action. Shahi had misled him, had told him that he would be welcome and received by the Revolutionary Council and Khomeini. Instead of a welcome he had barely managed to escape with his life. 3. Waldheim then went on to describe the harrowing scene at the cemetery. He recalled that for a brief period he [was] left alone in the car with an angry mob outside and made it to the waiting helicopter by directing the non-English speaking driver down a sidewalk and between rows of tombstones. In Waldheim’s view the demonstration was not accidental [and] consisted of hystericals who had been bussed to the cemetery even though his appearance was unexpected (the visit, although previously scheduled, had been publicly cancelled after an assassination plot was discovered.) 4. On his visit to the Revolutionary Council, Waldheim said he was forced to walk 200 yards in darkness through a threatening mob. On his departure the mob knocked Ghotbzadeh to the ground while pushing Waldheim ahead alone. 5. With regard to his discussions, Waldheim said he spent most of his time listening to Iranian charges against the United States. He said he found an unreasoning hatred against the United States and against the United Nations, which the Iranians believe to be under American control. 6. Waldheim said that all of the familiar names were present at the Revolutionary Council meeting. The Council was made up of wellmeaning but naive and powerless men. Only Khomeini exercised power; but Khomeini’s power was certain only if he took no action which might meet with the opposition of the “students” at the Embassy. The “students” were “a state within a state.” Khomeini is a weak fanatic who refuses to do what he can to save his country from an abyss.3 7. Waldheim said that he saw no hope for progress toward release of the hostages and, given the chaos in Iran, was concerned for their safety. In the circumstances, President Carter had an extremely difficult decision to make. Sanctions would have no effect and were even wel- 3 The word “weak” is circled and, in the right margin of the telegram, an unknown hand wrote: “weak? A different assessment from ours.”

Negotiating Channels 133. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 7, 1980 SUBJECT Iran I spent Sunday afternoon2 in New York for a four-hour meeting with my Iranian contact. One part of the discussion involved various operational matters which I have already dealt with through Frank Carlucci’s shop. Specifically, [name not declassified] is to meet with Bani Ahmad in Paris tomorrow morning. This will be our first direct operational contact with the Shariatmadari organization, and if it is successful it can lead us to a series of contacts with people who are engaged in more than talk. I am particularly hopeful that [name not declassified] will soon establish contact with Hassan Nazih. Nazih is apparently considering returning to Iran in the near future. Moghadem Maragei, the other key Azerbaijani leader, is now reported to be in Kurdestan in hiding, after his office was ransacked by Khomeini followers. Most of the time was spent in an exchange of views on the general political situation and a discussion of the ideas he is putting together on a possible long-range strategy. The essence of his concept is as follows: —It is pointless to try to pretend that Khomeini never happened. Rather, it is essential to accept the positive accomplishments he has made (given dignity and sense of purpose to lower classes; reversed trend toward materialism; injected sense of moral values; given sense of purpose to Shia Islam; reduced expectations of Iranian society) and build on those while rejecting the many negative aspects. —We should do nothing to interfere with Khomeini’s self-discrediting actions. We must avoid making him into a martyr at all costs. —Among the various groupings that now exist, there is no likely leader who can replace Khomeini. In fact, to search for a single leader is an error. Shariatmadari carries his own “Islamic” baggage which would be troublesome in a post-Khomeini Iran. A military dictatorship, in a replay of 1953,3 will only set the stage for another round of repres- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Negotiating Channels promote. I suggested that he take the Iranian New Year (Now Ruz) on March 21 as a hypothetical starting point for such a movement and work backwards to see what steps would be required operationally to set such a process in motion. I suggested that Now Ruz would not be a bad name for such a political movement. He thought that was a good idea. This man is not an idle dreamer. He is a hardheaded, even ruthless, pragmatist. But what he is developing in a careful and systematic way is nothing less than a new structure of Iranian politics. In its breadth of vision, it is far more attractive than the traditional games being played by Bakhtiar, Oveissi and company. The bottom line, of course, is whether or not he can deliver. He has demonstrated convincingly that he has excellent connections with the various key opposition groups. He has personally provided us with the best contacts we have with Madani and Shariatmadari. I suspect that his list of 200 key individuals will be imaginative and useful. It is increasingly clear that he sees himself as the key element in preparing such a program, selling it to the various opposition groups, and organizing the new movement. In order to do so, he will have to come out of his closet of security and involve himself directly with the various political groups and leaders. He says that he has no ambition for political office and that he intends never to return to Iran. I take that with a large grain of salt. Even if he believes it now, the appeal to someone as dynamic as he is would become almost irresistible if such a movement caught fire. If and when he comes out of the closet and begins serious organizational efforts, he will increasingly come to rely on us for security and direct support. At this point, I see no reason not to encourage him to develop his ideas. The kind of list he proposes would in itself be invaluable for us. But he is a shrewd bargainer, and we must expect to start hearing more explicitly what the price will be for us. That moment may not be far away.

Negotiating Channels over to the kidnappers. In particular, the Spanish have reportedly been told by Ghotbzadeh that he will probably be unable to resist the request that Laingen be turned over. One way to counter this is publicity. (S) [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] Intelligence Issues: 1. Exfiltration. The restricted group briefly reviewed the status of our people who are in hiding in Tehran. The Canadians believe that as long as they can maintain an open embassy, our people are safe in their custody. The Canadians are worried about the risks of an attempted exfiltration. Much has been accomplished on the planning side partly as the result of Peter Tarnoff’s trip to Canada. We have prepared both American and Canadian passports for their use. The Canadians prefer that American passports be used. The Canadian ambassador in Tehran will have the final say on this. A message is being sent to our people in Tehran via the Canadians.3 (TS) 2. Delta Team. There was a brief discussion of the present status of planning and training of a possible Delta Team operation.4 General Jones had spent most of Saturday in Fort Bragg reviewing the training. Admiral Turner said that they had had people inside the embassy compound but not inside the areas where the people are actually being held. He continues to believe that all the hostages are at the embassy, but he cannot prove it. The level of vigilance at the embassy appears to be tapering off somewhat. General Jones felt that the risk of a rescue operation was somewhat less today than it was before. The biggest risk is that our preparations would be picked up before we could act. There will be a more detailed discussion of this after the regular SCC meeting tomorrow. (TS) 3 A copy of the note was attached to a January 3 memorandum from Tarnoff to Vance and presumably discussed with Carter at the Friday, January 4, foreign policy breakfast. The note states that the United States and Canada agreed that the six Americans would be provided with Canadian non-official passports and that Canada would close down its Embassy in Tehran right before the exfiltration to avoid reprisals. (Department

Negotiating Channels group of amateurs, I am convinced that the team will succeed, if we will— —Give the team leader the resources, responsibility and authority to get the job done. —Give the team a clear mission, without a list of restrictions, that effectively limit or freeze the plan. —Give the leader on the ground the freedom to alter the plan, based on actual conditions, since the situation is changing daily, or even hourly. —Get the team into position quickly. —Resist the temptation to over-control the team from Washington. Some senior people are overreacting to the possibility of failure. Guessing at the odds of success is meaningless, except to make other senior people comfortable enough to approve the mission. Preparation, positioning, judgement, timing, execution and good luck will determine the outcome. For those who require an indication of the probabilities of success— there is only one way to get a meaningful forecast. Talk with the team leaders who will be going in on the ground. No one is more sensitive about success than the men who are going to be shot at. If they believe the mission plan is sound, and if they are free to use good judgement in executing it, that is the best advance indication we can have. The organization weaknesses we discussed in our first meeting still remain. Everyone working on this project should report to one person. Departmental jealousies, arguments over roles and missions, turf disputes, etc. should be dealt with firmly. A large part of the total effort on this project is still wasted in these nonproductive areas. This is inexcusable when you consider that fifty lives, plus the lives of the rescue team members, are at stake. The United States has completed its peaceful efforts to free the hostages through the U.N., World Court, Waldheim visit, and intermediaries from other countries, all without success. The Russians have taken Afghanistan, further destabilizing the Middle East. Today, Khomeini announced that he is going into seclusion for fifteen days. If he isolates himself from contact with the students at the compound, this introduces a number of new variables for consideration. The probabilities of using the rescue team are increasing, and yet a team is not in place in Tehran, or in a nearby country. In contrast, we put a team into Tehran in twelve days after first consideration, and kept it hidden for thirty-five days. The real test of advice on a mission involving possible loss of human life is—are the advisers willing to go on the mission? I will repeat the offer I made five days after the hostages were taken—“If our government feels it should not field a rescue team, because of the

Negotiating Channels with Iran.3 The key item is the fourth column which expanded the previous U.S. position to be more forthcoming. That position was approved by the President and was prepared in a paper at Tab B. The position paper was given to Waldheim on January 7 and has also been sent to Sadiq al-Mahdi in London for his possible use. The present channels of contacts being pursued by State are the following: 1. Waldheim. He is authorized to use Tab B in whatever efforts he may wish to undertake. 2. Hashemi. He is reputed to be the intermediary for a Reza Pasimdideh who is said to be the son of Khomeini’s older brother. Hal Saunders recently met Hashemi in New York, and he has agreed to try to set up a meeting between Hal and Pasimdideh. Reportedly, Khomeini’s brother has sent the Ayatollah a note asking his blessing on this, and all concerned are waiting for the reply before going ahead. 3. Sadiq al-Mahdi. He recently visited Tehran. As a highly respected Moslem leader, he has the kind of credentials necessary to get attention there. After his trip, he met with Vance4 and Vance found him impressive. He has proposed the possible terms of a settlement as outlined in the last column of the spread sheet.5 He is now in London and will be returning to Tehran with the position paper in Tab B to see what he can do. 4. PLO. They are milling about. Arafat is eager to be the one who finally succeeds in freeing the hostages. He has been holding off going to Tehran until he is convinced he will succeed. So far no dice. I have qualms about Tab B. It goes rather far in meeting some of the Iranians’ requirements, although there is nothing in it which would be more than embarrassing to us. If we were involved in a serious negotiating process, this would be a reasonable offer. However, we seem to be negotiating primarily with ourselves. People go to Tehran, listen to various officials who speak only for themselves, then come back and ask us to meet hypothetical demands with absolutely nothing 3 The spreadsheet compares McBride’s position; Hashemi’s position; the U.S. position, as given to Waldheim; possible expansions of the U.S. position; and Sadiq al- Mahdi’s position. According to Saunders, Vance asked him to prepare this spreadsheet. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 106) The discussion with Carter presumably occurred at the January 4 breakfast meeting; see footnote 3, Document 134.

Negotiating Channels 4.) Once the hostages are safely released, the US is prepared to lift the freeze of Iranian assets and to facilitate normal commercial relations between the two countries, on the understanding that Iran will meet its financial obligations to US nationals and that the arrangements to be worked out will protect the legitimate interests of US banks and other claimants. The US is prepared to appoint members of a working group to reach agreement on those arrangements. 5.) The United States is prepared to appoint a representative to discuss with Iranian representatives the current threat posed by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and to recommend to their government steps that the US and Iran might take in order to enhance the security of Iran, including the resumption of the supply of military spare parts by the United States to Iran. 6.) The US Administration is prepared to make a statement at an appropriate moment that it understands the grievances felt by the people of Iran, and that it respects the integrity of Iran, and the right of the people of Iran to choose their own form of government. The United States Government recognizes the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran as the legal government of Iran. The US reaffirms that the people of Iran have the right to determine their own form of government. 138. Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, January 11, 1980 SUBJECT Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 9 January 1980 [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 4. I then delivered my paper on possible resolution of the hostage issue.2 I emphasized that the main line of action in it that was somewhat 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Negotiating Channels talk about the carrier plan and see if I could get them working on it. [portion marking not declassified] 8. I asked if we had a plan as to what we were going to do if there were executions. He indicated yes—bomb. I said I hoped that they had really thought that one out; I didn’t think it was a good response. My preference would be: a. Mining; b. Alert and mobilization efforts for deployment of a ground force to the area—something that couldn’t happen for some time but would be a very clear threat; c. I said I thought that bombing had no great advantages in terms of doing damage and putting pressure on Iran, and it would highly inflame Muslim world opinion against us. (I’d like at some meeting of a small group to get someone to do (quickly) a paper on what we see as the alternative responses to execution of any hostages and their pros and cons.) Dr. Brzezinski asked whether I had any intimation that this was a more likely prospect. I said only the FBI intelligence report of yesterday which had not come through.5 [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner 5 Not found. 139. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Negotiating Channels Mr. Christopher said it would be difficult to get the nine votes. The key nations are Zambia, Tunisia and China. Calls are going out from the President this morning. If we get the nine votes, there is no certainty whether or not the Soviets will veto. The chances of a Soviet veto have noticeably increased. However, if we get sanctions, we should press ahead with implementation. If we fail, it will be a blow, and we must work hard to get our allies to assist us in keeping up the pressure. Economic pressures, withholding of spare parts and the like have an effect on the Revolutionary Council, but they do not have much effect on the students4 or Khomeini. (S) The present state of the Iranian economy is rather pitiful. The imposition of sanctions would be felt immediately in terms of its psychological and political impact. Some say it will merely stiffen their backs, but that is far from certain. The economic effects will be slower in coming, but will impact on their ability to maintain their military forces. Admiral Turner added that it will also affect the oil sector and manufacturing due to lack of spares which are running down. CIA has examined the effects of sanctions, but they would take another more detailed look at the implications.5 (S) Dr. Brzezinski noted the ability of the Rhodesian whites to withstand sanctions for ten years. Even if sanctions are voted, this precedent will be cited to undermine our public credibility. We need the means to counter this. Admiral Turner said that a study would not provide the kind of ammunition which could effectively counter those arguments. Secretary Klutznick observed that there was also a question of how many nations would choose to impose sanctions, even if voted. Mr. Cooper replied that our first priority would be the major Western European allies plus Japan and Canada. That covers most of the commercial relations and spare parts on which Iran relies. Our second priority would be the smaller European states, and third priority would be the Third World—largely for show. (S) Mr. Christopher agreed that we need to have a contingency plan on how to proceed if there is a veto. It will require a lot of arm-twisting on our allies. Perhaps we will need a team of emissaries to go out to the major nations. State will start work on developing such a team, possibly including prestigious private individuals, and directed at Western Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada and the ASEAN nations. 4 Carter circled the word “students” and wrote “They’re not” in the left margin. 5 Turner sent the January 10 paper, “Economic Sanctions Against Iran,” prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, to Brzezinski that afternoon. (Central Intelligence

Negotiating Channels to have them here. All agreed that we did not have to take a decision on this until after we see what happens with sanctions at the UN. Depending on that vote, this action might be included as part of a package. The issue will be reviewed again on Monday. (C) Political-Military Issues: 1. Shah. We have reports that he wants us to locate a different country of residence for him.7 What are our responsibilities? Mr. Christopher noted that the complaint was registered by the Shah’s staff, specifically Armao, who has been plagued by poor relations with the Panamanians. It was not clear whether this request came from the Shah or from Armao and others. The Shah may want to move off the island, and he might be happier doing that, or perhaps he would feel less bilked by the Panamanians. Our information indicates that relations with Royo and Torrijos are at least superficially good. We need to take a hard line.8 Until the hostages are released, we have no capability to find another residence. The Shah is going to have to learn to live in a country where he is not king. He was unhappy in Morocco, in the Bahamas, in Mexico and now in Panama. We have no alternatives available. It was agreed that Lloyd Cutler and Mr. Christopher will talk to Armao when he comes to Washington this weekend and see what can be worked out. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Shah might pick up on the President’s statement to congressional leaders that, in the event of a threat of extradition, the President would accept the Shah back to the United States. However, this situation appeared to be more of a case of being dissatisfied with his accommodations. (S) [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 4. Senate Select Committee. Mr. Aaron noted that there are reports that the SSC on Intelligence had requested declassification of the CIA analysis on the effects of permitting the Shah to return to the United States. Admiral Turner said he was unaware of this, but no action would be taken without a high level review. (S)

Negotiating Channels 141. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Negotiating Channels 4. Farhang described the proposal as follows:3 A commission would be formed and sent to Iran; meanwhile action in the SC would be postponed. The Commission would return after a week in Iran and there would be a “symbolic” resolution adopted by the General Assembly that would “recognize” the Iranian grievances and claims to assets removed from Iran by the Shah. Once this resolution were adopted, the hostages would be released.4 Farhang expressed the view that the situation in Iran was more favorable for a solution than ever before. It was important to delay any action in the SC on sanctions, as there were elements in Iran that wished to exploit it. It was a war of nerves. 5. Amb McHenry pointed out that the proposal was vague and did not guarantee immediate release of the hostages. Moreover, there were procedural problems, as the GA was not in regular session and could not be convened easily. The current emergency session, he noted, had been called under a very special procedure following a veto in the SC.5 He saw other practical problems. Once the commission were formed it would have to arrive at conclusions regarding the claims to assets. Moreover, in order to delay action in the SC on the basis of such a proposal it was necessary to have confidence in the authority of those making the proposal. He was afraid the FonMin did not have the necessary authority. It appeared to us that only Khomeini and/or the group holding the hostages had the necessary authority. 6. McHenry suggested that it would be useful for Farhang to work out a package proposal with the SYG and then have it announced as having been approved by Khomeini. In the absence of something tangible we could not pull back from our sanctions proposal. Otherwise those in Iran who opposed the GOI policy and had been predicting its adverse effects would be undercut. Pointing out that he had in the past several times persuaded his govt to delay action, McHenry said he had difficulty now in convincing himself personally that further delay was warranted. 7. McHenry said he would inform Secretary Vance of the proposal and fully protect the confidentiality of Farhang’s direct approach to him. He repeated that he saw both substantive and procedural problems with the proposal, however. Moreover, if the commission idea

Negotiating Channels —Another possible channel [less than 1 line not declassified] is the PLO and Arafat. Arafat is expected to visit Tehran in the near future but has been waiting until he had some indication that his visit would result in something substantial. —The “new plan” which was conveyed to Waldheim by Farhang was in fact nothing more than a clarification of what Waldheim had been told in Tehran. Specifically, it provides that a Commission of Enquiry be formed by the UN, that it travel to Iran for investigation of the Shah’s crimes, after hearings of several weeks it should return to the UN and report to the Security Council and/or the General Assembly. Following that, the SC or GA are to vote a resolution expressing the legitimacy of Iran’s grievances. At that point, Iran would be prepared to “start” releasing the hostages, before the resolution had been implemented. The only new element in all of this is the fact that Khomeini has apparently blessed it. However, the fact that Ghotbzadeh was unwilling to put it in writing may mean that Khomeini’s approval is less than absolute. Despite the brave rhetoric in Iran, I believe they are beginning to feel the many pressures on them. Kurdestan is very close to declaring its independence, the tribal areas in the south are in turmoil, and the situation in Azerbaijan is assuming the proportions of a major revolt which is dangerously close to civil war. At the same time, Khomeini and others are probably much more troubled by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan than they are willing to show in public. The prospect of being branded an international outlaw by the UN is unattractive, and this has been made much more striking in the minds of those in Tehran recently by the series of messages they have received from Third World nations pleading with them to change their position. In my view, the moment is coming soon when they will conclude that the hostages are a liability rather than a benefit. One possible signal to that effect was the visit of the students to Qom several days ago. There has been absolutely no mention of the results of that meeting in any public media in Iran, which suggests to me that the students and the Ayatollah were not entirely in agreement or that they could not establish a common plan for next steps. I expect the real movement, when it comes, through some channel other than the United Nations. I think in the UN they are merely playing for time, trying to avoid imposition of sanctions. I suspect that the real bargaining—which may not be too distant—will be accomplished through the PLO or some other channel which is untainted. I strongly believe we should press ahead with the vote on sanctions. If we start a process of delaying at every new report which emanates from Tehran, we will lose credibility, and our support will start fading. We could, however, proceed with the vote on the understanding that

Negotiating Channels nians at the request of General Torrijos was worth while.4 I returned to Washington, was briefed by Henry Precht on the status of our negotiations with the Iranians through the Secretary General and prepared to take off for Panama City to see Torrijos. I called Torrijos to tell him of my plans but was informed that after a night’s sleep and some additional thought, the General was worried that my coming to Panama might be noticed and alarm the Shah as there was a large press contingent covering the country since the Shah’s arrival there. For that reason he said that it would be better for him to meet me halfway or to send a “personal representative” who could convey to me “the very important message” that had prompted his Friday night call to me. He said that he was also worried that his absence from the country might be noticed so that he was generally inclined not to go himself. We agreed to meet at 3 o’clock at Homestead AFB. I got there by three, checked in with Warren to see if there were any new developments, made a few calls to Iowa and spent some time reviewing the materials that the State Department had given me. The Panamanians arrived about 4:30. There were three persons in the group: my old friend Gabriel Lewis, the Panamanian Ambassador to the United Nations5 who hardly spoke during the three hours we spent together and Marcel Saliman (sp?) who was the person who did most of the talking. At the outset Gabriel pulled me aside and said that Marcel was very close to Torrijos and very shrewd. Gabriel said that while he is “too much of a leftist for me” that he had great credibility among the students in Panama and had been instrumental in representing Torrijos with the Sandinistas. I stated at the outset the posture that I was in—that I had conveyed to the President the request of General Torrijos that I fly immediately to Panama to receive some news about the hostages. That because of the President’s friendship and respect for General Torrijos, he was anxious to honor his request that I come to Panama. I also told them that I was involved only on the periphery of our foreign policy process as related to Iran and the hostages and had been even less involved in recent weeks due to the pressures of the campaign. I told them that I was authorized by the President only to listen and report back immediately the information that they had and that I could neither speak for the President nor make decisions. I told them that I intended to listen, ask questions and take very careful notes, and that the essence of what was said would be passed on directly to the three of you. 4 Saturday, January 12. 5 Jorge Illueca.

Negotiating Channels meetings and read from them to me, saying that “Ghotbzadeh said . . .” and “the Foreign Minister told me . . .” Instead of trying to retrace chronologically what was said at each meeting, I will try to relate the essence of their meetings and discussions with the Foreign Minister. I made comments throughout the presentation in an attempt to clarify different things that were said to the Panamanians and also to draw Marcel out. Marcel said that at the beginning of the first meeting the Foreign Minister said that he wanted to explain to them the background on the embassy takeover. He said that the plot to overthrow the American Embassy was an “American conspiracy” involving Rockefeller, Kissinger and others who had a dual purpose: First, to create an international crisis that would undermine the Ayatollah’s efforts to establish an effective and strong Islamic Republic; and second, to create a crisis of great magnitude for President Carter that would lead to his political defeat and would result in the election of a Republican that was controlled by Kissinger and Rockefeller who would work to have the Shah reinstated as the leader of the Iranian people. The Foreign Minister said that because of the “American plot”, everyone was now in a very difficult position. He said that the Panamanians were respected throughout Latin America and the Third World, but their acceptance of the “criminal Shah” at the insistence of the United States had done great damage to their image in the world. He said that President Carter was in danger of losing his Presidency if he did not successfully resolve the hostage situation. He said that the Ayatollah was in a very difficult position in Iran—he said that while he and Khomeini had no hope or desire to recover the Shah, that the students had become an increasingly powerful and difficult group with which to deal and that some way had to be found to resolve the crisis that did not make it appear that Khomeini had given in to U.S. pressure. He said that the Ayatollah had resorted to trying to substitute students totally loyal to him for the “regulars” holding the hostages, but that once inside the compound they all behaved the same way. Ghotbzadeh talked quite frankly about his own political plans, but often invoked Khomeini’s name to suggest that the future of the Islamic Republic was in the hands of both men, not just Khomeini. He said the greatest threat to their “moderate” position was the sanctions vote which was presently before the Security Council. He said that if the vote was taken and the United States was successful in obtaining the necessary nine votes, that this would make it much more difficult to resolve the hostage situation at an early date. Also, he said that the Soviet veto which was anticipated on the sanctions vote would be a tremendous propaganda victory for “Communist elements in the compound and in Iran”. (I interrupted here to point out to Marcel that

Negotiating Channels and the right of Iran to seek extradition was recognized, the American hostages would be released. The “New Panamanian Channel”. He said that the third possibility was the “Panamanian channel” which was opened by the visit of the Panamanians to Iran. He said that they recognized the great pressure that Panama was under from the United States to accept and protect the Shah. He said that he and Khomeini realized that it would be impossible for them to extradite the Shah. He said that his own lawyers had researched the Panamanian law and found six separate legal arguments that would prevent the Panamanians from actually extraditing the Shah. But, Ghotbzadeh argued that it was the “principle of extradition” that was important to he and the Ayatollah. And that if the Panamanians could begin the legal process of extradition, that would be enough for the Ayatollah to go [to] the students and insist that they release the hostages. Ghotbzadeh said that he wanted to go to Panama to personally deliver the papers of extradition. He said also that he wanted to meet with me (Jordan) secretly as I had two of the three important relationships—a relationship with President Carter and General Torrijos, but not with him (Ghotbzadeh). He said because of the Waldheim trip and the upcoming elections, he did not know if there was time for such a mission now. It is late—almost 4:00 a.m.—and I need to wrap this up and give you some thoughts and recommendations. I was skeptical at the outset about Marcel and his visit to Iran, but the more I heard the more realistic and plausible it all sounded. Specific things that Ghotbzadeh said to him all seem to reinforce things that we had heard through other channels. The larger question relates to the fact that for better or worse, the Iranians have opened a channel of communication with the Panamanians. At best, I think you could argue that the Iranians did this consciously to have a second channel open to them to pursue in a serious way negotiations leading to the release to the hostages and/or to reinforce the contacts that they are having with Waldheim. At worst, and much more likely, the Iranians have made contact with the Panamanians to see if they can use the leverage of the unrest in Panama and their (Torrijos’) relationship with us to soften our negotiating posture on the critical questions. You might speculate that while the UN channel might be producing enough for Ghotbzadeh to live with, it was not enough for the Ayatollah, and the Foreign Minister is hoping to move the thing further along with the Panamanians. This contact between the Panamanians and the Foreign Minister is both an opportunity and a potential problem. To the extent that we

Negotiating Channels 145. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, January 13, 1980 SUBJECT Cottam/Ghotbzadeh Conversation PARTICIPANTS Henry Precht, IWG Richard Cottam, University of Pittsburgh Cottam reached Ghotbzadeh early this morning after considerable difficulty. The conversation was hard to follow as Ghotbzadeh insisted on speaking in “code.” Ghotbzadeh insisted that it was possible to reach a settlement before the Iranian presidential elections. In fact, he thinks a settlement would assure him of victory. He believes he has Khomeini’s backing in reaching a settlement. In the past, “85 different people” in Qom were telling Khomeini how to handle the crisis. Now he (Ghotbzadeh) is “in control.” Cottam interprets this to mean that Khomeini nods affirmatively when Ghotbzadeh puts an idea to him. Ghotbzadeh’s principal point was that he had great confidence in Waldheim and was anxious that we allow Waldheim to set the pace for a settlement. Our pressure for sanctions was making it very hard for Ghotbzadeh to maneuver. We should listen to Waldheim, the Iranians were taking their lead from him. Cottam said he had the impression that Waldheim was developing proposals which included a delay on the vote on sanctions but we were not listening to Waldheim and the effect was to restrict Ghotbzadeh’s freedom of maneuver. Ghotbzadeh said he had complete confidence in Farhang who spoke for him. A second principal point was Ghotbzadeh’s emphasis on extradition from Panama. Cottam said he questioned him sharply asking him whether extradition was a realistic consideration or just something in Ghotbzadeh’s mind. Ghotbzadeh replied that he was very confident of what he was saying because he had spoken directly to Panamanian leaders. Nevertheless it was not clear to Cottam whether Ghotbzadeh was talking about extradition or an extradition trial. Ghotbzadeh made two comments to Cottam on Panama. First, all the Americans have to do “is to give Panama the green light and they will go ahead as planned.” Second, perhaps the U.S. should send “the same man” down there to 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Negotiating Channels during a recess because of the urgent nature of these programs and their far-reaching consequences. As a result of the meeting, the Committee is of the view that the decisions to seek an alternative government in Iran and to send increased support to the Afghan tribal groups in Afghanistan, in different ways, mark a crucial turning point in U.S. foreign policy. The Committee decided that it is necessary to understand the overall strategy of the United States before a fully reasoned judgment can be made concerning the wisdom or efficacy of the covert action programs for Iran and Afghanistan. Some members were of the view that they did not understand how these programs fitted into an overall strategy. Indeed, the political action program was described by the CIA as only a part of a larger policy on Iran. It is clear, however, that such a significant decision to seek an alternative to Khomeini will set forces in motion which the United States will not be able to control fully. Although there is no present intention of supporting opposition groups with military assistance or in any way encouraging the use of violence, both of these may result because of movements now underway. Because of these concerns, the Committee intends to invite Secretary of State Vance and Secretary of Defense Brown to meet with the Committee in the near future to discuss with the Committee how these covert action programs in Iran and Afghanistan fit in with our broader foreign policy. All of the members of the Committee, without exception, fully support the desire of the Executive branch to work for a stable, pro- Western, democratic Iran. The Committee is cognizant of and sympathetic with the Administration’s frustration in dealing with the Revolutionary Council and the Ayatollah Khomeini. The Committee is, of course, fully in support of efforts to obtain the release of American hostages held by Iranian students at the American Embassy in Teheran. Some members, however, were concerned that the risks attendant to this covert action program could place the hostages in greater jeopardy. [1 paragraph (27 lines) not declassified] Another point of view which was expressed, urged the development of stable long-term alternatives to the Khomeini government through friendly third parties such as Turkey. It was argued that Turkey and the United States have a number of common interests in working towards a more stable friendly Iran. Further, it was argued involving Turkey in such an effort could lead to more support from Congress, to better, more stable relations between the U.S. and Turkey, as well as a stronger Turkish government. The Committee requested the Intelligence Community to keep it advised of the steps taken in this project. It is the particular desire of the Committee that it should be advised of the principal figures and

Negotiating Channels of our intention to work with you in a responsible way to strengthen our nation’s interests. Respectfully, Birch Bayh Chairman Barry Goldwater Vice Chairman 147. Editorial Note On January 13, 1980, the United Nations Security Council voted on the U.S. draft resolution proposing economic sanctions on Iran (Resolution S/13735) that the United States believed was required by

Negotiating Channels CIA Vice President’s Office Admiral Stansfield Turner Denis Clift Justice NSC Benjamin Civiletti David Aaron Colonel William Odom Energy Gary Sick John Sawhill Tom Thornton SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Cooperation with Allies. Mr. Newsom reviewed the results of Mr. Christopher’s consultations in Europe thus far. In general, the prospects of imposing sanctions on Iran do not look promising. The British are taking a firm line that they lack the legal authority to do it, and it is also evident that they do not believe politically that the sanctions will be effective. State is working on a spread sheet of what the allies are doing and what they are likely to do—both on Iran and with regard to the Soviet Union.2 (S) Treasury will circulate today draft regulations on our own legal steps on sanctions. Mr. Christopher believes that publication of our own regulations could be marginally helpful to him in his efforts with the Europeans. The group discussed the desirability of including extraterritorial scope in our own regulations. This is a sensitive point with the Europeans and is likely to bring us into direct conflict with them if we attempt to extend our own regulations to cover the activities of U.S. subsidiaries abroad. A committee composed of Treasury, State, Commerce and Agriculture will meet today to analyze the effects of actions by U.S. subsidiaries on sanctions and the steps we can best take to increase the effectiveness of our own actions.3 (C) The SCC generally believed that our best approach would be to call in the principal companies and inform them that it is U.S. policy to deny shipments to Iran and that we will publicize activities by U.S. subsidiaries which are not consistent with that policy. Mr. Claytor felt 2 The spreadsheet, “Economic Measures Related to Iran and Afghanistan: Draft

Negotiating Channels will examine the chronology of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the actions the Soviets have taken thus far on Iran with the Tudeh Party, past involvement with the Kurds and Azerbaijanis, etc. The theme would be that the Soviets are the real enemy of Iran and that they may be preparing to move there next. Another CIA paper will examine the persecution and exploitation of Moslem minorities in the Soviet Union itself. There was a discussion of how to play the story regarding the presence of Soviet troops on the Iranian border with Afghanistan. It was agreed that we could publicly note that we are aware of Soviet forces deployed in that area, including some elements along the border directly. We would not speculate on the objectives of these forces. (C) [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 149. Memorandum by the Executive Assistant to the Deputy Secretary of State (Oxman)1 Washington, January 15, 1980 SUBJECT MEETING WITH SHAH’S REPRESENTATIVES 1. Lloyd Cutler and I met today at the Metropolitan Club with Robert Armao, advisor to the former Shah of Iran, and William Jackson, the former Shah’s attorney. Armao and Jackson had requested the meeting for the purpose of discussing certain aspects of the Shah’s stay

Negotiating Channels thinks that with Armao out of the way no one at the Shah’s party will complain about the bills and other financial issues. Armao said the Shah told Noriega that he could not do without Armao. Noriega then dropped the issue, according to Armao. 8. Armao’s other complaints included the following: —the hotel bills for the security personnel are inflated and these personnel are charging various luxuries to the Shah’s account; —a large number of expensive items (such as silver flatware) have been ordered for the house, without consultation with Armao or the Shah, and the bills have been presented to Armao; —the hotel bill has included a charge of $10,000 for two small “shacks” on the property where the Shah is staying (Gabriel Lewis property), even though these structures have no apparent connection with the hotel; —Armao’s access to the Shah has been impeded. 9. Bill Jackson said that in addition to these annoying “local problems” on Contadora, there was the more troubling issue of whether Torrijos intended to extradite the Shah. 10. Lloyd said that as to the “local problems” it would make sense for the Shah to raise them with Torrijos or President Royo, since his relations with them, according to Armao, are excellent. 11. Armao interjected that the local problems seem to have gotten very much better in recent days after he had brought some of his complaints to the attention of General Torrijos’ doctor (whom Torrijos had made available to the Shah for medical consultation). Moreover, Armao went on, now that he has left Panama and intends to stay in New York for some weeks, he thinks the friction with Noriega and his personnel will diminish considerably. 12. On the issue of extradition, Lloyd stated that we do not see any risk of Torrijos allowing extradition to occur. Not only is it not legally possible, in view of the absence of an Extradition Treaty between Panama and Iran, but it would be contrary to the assurances we received before the Shah left for Panama. Lloyd noted that President Carter had recently said publicly that he would not permit the extradition of the Shah. Armao conceded that Royo had told the Shah that Panama would deal with the Iranian extradition request in accordance with Panamanian legal procedures, and would then deny the request. 13. The larger problem, Armao said, is that “we simply cannot trust Torrijos”. Jackson said he agreed, that the situation was “insecure” and that “somehow there has got to be another place” Armao complained that of the 80 security personnel assigned to the Shah, the overwhelming majority are blacks who are not literate. Lloyd noted that our original understanding was that the Panamanians would pro-

Negotiating Channels Shah’s ‘billions’”. He said that while no one has specially asked the Shah to invest in Panama, Gabriel Lewis has offered the Shah financial advice, and he suspects that the Panamanians will become more specific over time. 20. Lloyd said he would review the points that had been made with Hamilton Jordan.4 He reiterated that his instinct was that the Shah should raise the “local” problems with Torrijos and/or Royo, or even Lewis. 21. Jackson asked what the USG’s position is on the “Waldheim proposal” concerning a tribunal to hear charges against the Shah and the United States. Lloyd said we are prepared to go along with some such formula provided the hostages are released before any tribunal begins its proceedings. Jackson inquired as to the legal foundation for any such tribunal. Lloyd responded that the Secretary General has authority to appoint committees or commissions to look into various matters or interests, and that the only nation in a position to object to any inquiry into its internal affairs (Iran) was unlikely to do so. 22. Armao raised two housekeeping problems. He said the private security personnel protecting the Shah’s children in the U.S. need a special radio frequency. Lloyd asked that Armao put this request in a letter and said we would pass it along to Henry Geller at Commerce. Second, Armao asked for the status of the visa applications by family members or individuals in the Shah’s entourage. Jackson cut in to say that Rocky Suddarth on David Newsom’s staff and John Dean in Jackson’s office were handling these matters and that everything seemed to be in order. 23. Lloyd concluded by saying that we would stand by the commitments we had made in Texas5 and that Armao and Jackson should let us know what they would like us to do. Armao responded that the Shah does not want us to raise any of the foregoing problems with the Panamanians. Armao said he wanted to emphasize this point to us. Lloyd said we would not do so unless Armao requested it. Armao said that it might be helpful if Hamilton Jordan could ask General Torrijos on the phone “how things are going” with the Shah. Armao said there was nothing else that he or the Shah want us to do at this time. Jackson also said that “we” (i.e. the Shah’s representatives) are going to look quietly into alternative countries, but did not ask our help. 24. Armao and Jackson said they were very grateful for the opportunity to meet with us and would be back in touch as the situation develops. 4 See Document 144. 5 See Document 98.

Negotiating Channels a trial, not actual extradition. They hoped the U.S. would not block their plans. He offered to give Cottam further details later. Farhang summed up saying that U.S. impatience on sanctions had destroyed the atmosphere. The issue of the timing of release of hostages and the wording of a resolution could have been worked out if Waldheim had been more forceful in presenting Iranian views. Those two issues should not have proved to be obstacles in reaching a settlement. The U.S. must realize, however, that in any deal there would be a large element of risk that it might be rejected by Khomeini. Ghotbzadeh’s mood was completely different from Farhang’s. He told Cottam that the crisis could be solved in one week. It would not be solved at one swoop, but there would have to be movement day by day. Cottam said it was clear that Ghotbzadeh was counting on a settlement to advance his own presidential ambitions. Cottam asked what the U.S. should do. Ghotbzadeh replied that he was sending letters to European countries. He hoped the U.S. would help assure that the replies were favorable. Cottam speculated that the letters might request the Europeans to hold off on sanctions. If the Europeans agreed to do so there might be another opportunity for pushing for a settlement with Ghotbzadeh. Cottam asked Ghotbzadeh about plans for Panama extradition. Ghotbzadeh merely said we are “continuing with that.” He did not seem particularly interested in Panama in this conversation. The conversation, which had taken Ghotbzadeh out of one meeting, ended when he was called away to something more urgent. He clearly wanted to continue with Cottam and said he would telephone him later. COMMENT: Cottam and I speculated that presidential politics may influence the views of Farhang and Ghotbzadeh. Ghotbzadeh seems to be counting on a settlement to the crisis on his terms to advance his fortunes. Farhang, who strongly dislikes Ghotbzadeh, may be just as happy to see the opportunity for a settlement deferred until his favorite, Bani-Sadr, is elected president.

Negotiating Channels man” down there. At that point, I began to take all that I had heard about the Panamanians and even my own role in this a bit more seriously. Both Hal Saunders and I agree that we have no choice but to keep the Panamanian channel open and nurture it. As he says, the UN channel could close up or something could develop in the Panamanian channel—“we have pursued vigorously and seriously leads that were on the surface much less substantial than this one”. Probably Ghotbzedeh will not be elected and we will be dealing with an entire new cast of characters. Even if he fails to win the election, there is always the chance that Khomeini will insist that he continue as Foreign Minister and/or as the person to try to resolve the hostage situation. Even if we assume on the frontend that nothing will come of the Panamanian channel, it is in our own interest to keep them generally informed and involved as they have one very critical piece of the puzzle—the Shah. The few times that I have been actively involved in foreign policy matters—the Panama Canal Treaty, the Mideast arms package, the Middle East, etc.—I have bent overboard to operate in tandem with the State Department, usually with Warren Christopher. But I got the distinct impression from Cy on my latest trip that the Panamanian contact was not serious, that he is suspicious of Torrijos and that the whole thing was resented because it had been done out of here and by me. In reaction to that, I got Ambler Moss involved, passing a message from you to Torrijos through him. Cy insisted that I restate in that message the fact that we assumed that we continued to have their firm commitment not to extradite the Shah.4 My only point in telling you all of this is that there is absolutely nothing to be lost by keeping the Panamanians generally informed and involved in this process. I don’t have the time or inclination to fool with this, but it is going to require someone at a high level treating it in a serious way. To date, that has not happened. I have spent a lot of time in the past few days thinking about the hostage situation. I really haven’t given it much thought in human terms for the past few weeks. I know that it is a heavy personal burden for you and Cy. I have no wife or children, and should the time come that you needed someone to take considerable personal risks in pursu- 4 Jordan had given Carter’s message to Moss by telephone, and Moss then relayed the President’s message to Torrijos and Royo, January 13. Torrijos dictated a “note verbale” in which he expressed Panama’s desire to be more involved in UN deliberations and reiterated his promise that the Shah would not be extradited. (Telegram 352 from

Negotiating Channels request that the regulations not be issued until after his return from Europe this evening. The SCC agreed that it would review the regulations and the declaration at the meeting tomorrow, probably for issuance later in the day. The one remaining issue of contention within the government is the extent of extraterritoriality to be built into the regulations.3 (C) 2. Iranian Assets. The President also approved the SCC recommendation that Treasury be permitted to immunize from attachment new Iranian funds brought into the country to cover the obligations of companies such as Iran Air, NIOC and the Iranian Shipping Company. Treasury will proceed.4 (U) 3. Economic Warfare. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he had asked Henry Owen to head a small group to examine what is required to carry out the kind of economic warfare in which we are increasingly engaged. The group will be asked to make its initial report to the SCC on Fri- 4. Cooperation by Allies. Secretary Vance circulated a spread sheet showing the various actions in the economic sphere which we have taken, what we have requested of our allies, and what their response has been. The paper is attached.6 At this time, the foreign response must be treated as preliminary since it does not have the benefit of Warren Christopher’s talks in Europe except for the indications we have received from message reporting. (S) Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the U.S. should do something more dramatic to galvanize the allies into action. Secretary Brown observed that, in his view, the Europeans might take actions together but not separately. Their public opinion was out ahead of the governments themselves, and we could perhaps shame them into doing more. He cautioned, however, that taking some public action without an assurance of results could hurt more than it helps by dramatizing the absence of European cooperation. This could then be exploited by the Soviets. 3 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Europeans a disappointment on Iran & Afghanistan—We must maintain leadership. We should push in every case to the limit that is practical. Even if allies are discomfited.” 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “What about Japan? See NY Times p. 1 & W. Post A19.” The articles covered Japan’s decision to oppose the imposition of economic sanctions against Iran and the USSR, and its fear of retaliatory oil cuts if it sided with the United States. (Reference is presumably to Henry Scott Stokes, “Japan Indicates It Would

Negotiating Channels was only a high, political-level decision which would have any real effect. Dr. Brzezinski observed that, on the basis of some talks he had yesterday, the one thing which seems to get their attention is the risk of U.S. unilateral action. We can also publicize instances in which U.S. companies and perhaps other countries are evading or circumventing our policy. He noted that the President had concurred with the SCC recommendation to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to publicize offenders, noting that we should “block other sources if possible” on grain transfers. Mr. Cutler noted that Luther Hodges was conducting a survey of major U.S. companies to see what their overseas operations were likely to be and to make our policy position clear. Secretary Miller felt that we would find most American companies already in compliance with the policy and prepared to be cooperative. Secretary Vance cautioned that we should be very careful about publicizing unhelpful actions by other countries since we could create the impression that our policy is not working. (S) 5. Implementation Group. Dr. Brzezinski noted that much of the effort of the SCC recently had been occupied with questions of implementation of economic policies. It was essential to have close coordination on these issues, but in the meantime we should also be thinking about our longer term strategy and next steps. He proposed that a separate Implementation Coordination Group be formed which would meet in parallel with the SCC. This group could look at public posture, the nature of the sanctions, and how to put teeth into our efforts. The group should include State (Warren Christopher), Defense (Graham Claytor), Treasury, CIA, and NSC (Henry Owen). Secretary Miller offered to host the meetings at Treasury. (It was subsequently decided that the first meeting should be held at the White House.)10 (C) [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.] 10 At their first meeting, the group discussed their mandate, whether the SCC would take economic decisions without the guidance of the Implementation/Coordination Group, and economic issues related to Iran and Pakistan. (Minutes of SCC Implementation/Coordination Group meeting, January 18; Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 108)

Negotiating Channels into Iran and of possible U.S. countermeasures. A draft of the current outline is attached at Tab 4.4 7. Panama and the Shah. The two Panamanians—Gabriel Lewis and Rory Gonzalez—are on their way to Tehran following their meeting with Ham Jordan and Hal Saunders Wednesday.5 There have been press stories each of the last two mornings indicating exchanges between Royo and Ghotbzadeh, although Royo has not publicly acknowledged that the subject is the extradition of the Shah. In two recent conversations, Dick Cottam has expressed his concern—without our having referred to the Panamanian track—about the increasingly “desperate quality of Ghotbzadeh’s actions.”6 Cottam also specifically cited Ghotbzadeh’s desire to begin the extradition trial of the Shah before the elections and his anger that the Panamanians want the hostages released first. Ghotbzadeh said the hostages could be released only after the trial started. Cottam pointed out that Ghotbzadeh is uncertain whether he will have any role in the new government if Bani-Sadr is elected. It looks as if chances are less than even that the Panamanians will be able to bring off the release of the hostages in this pre-election environment in Iran if they hold to their position. Even if Ghotbzadeh were prepared to try, other Presidential candidates might block him if it seemed he would reap political benefit from that step. Our only course at the moment on this track is to wait for further word from the Panamanians, who will be in Tehran over the weekend. [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Negotiating Channels on an informal basis. Our efforts on Afghanistan have to some extent eclipsed those on Iran. (S) Cooper summarized: the UK and France have juridical problems. They needed the UN sanctions in order to take national action. The allies generally doubt both the efficacy and political wisdom of sanctions. They will continue to cooperate on an informal basis, and, if pressed, might institute a selective trade embargo. The EC mechanism might furnish the juridical umbrella they all need; the French do not favor this approach. (S) Christopher noted that his trip was untimely in that it coincided with the UN vote. Still the allies were reviewing their laws. We should continue our efforts but try to keep the debate private. Aaron stressed the President’s desire that we emphasize to the allies the importance we attach to these issues. We should stick to the line that our allies are considering appropriate measures, that we are in continuing consultation, and that we are urging them to do what they can. He said that the President was unhappy with European efforts to date. He wants us to push them to the limit, even if uncomfortable and costly. Further, the Japanese must understand that we are upset by their lack of cooperation. We should communicate that point to them before it becomes a domestic political issue. (S) [Omitted here is material on Pakistan.] The group then briefly discussed procedures for future meetings. It was agreed to meet daily at 10:00 a.m. (U)

Negotiating Channels was helpful and should lend support to our efforts. The stories (e.g., Gwertzman in the New York Times)2 which suggest that sanctions are a lost cause should be corrected. Secretary Vance will be seeing the British Ambassador today, and a message from Vance to Carrington may be required to keep up the pressure on the British. The Japanese are primarily concerned about the security of their oil supply, and they are asking again for access to Alaska crude. The Implementation group will look into this, recognizing that we were previously unsuccessful on the Hill. (S) 3. Military Options. Mr. Aaron suggested that it might be useful to increase our military activity enough to make the point that we still have other options. This could give the allies an incentive to look harder at economic sanctions as the lesser of two evils. The SCC discussed possibly increasing the level of our naval patrols in the Persian Gulf, possible flights by carrier aircraft into the Persian Gulf, and possible SR–71 overflights of Iran. Mr. Newsom said that any military activity which appeared to be directed against Iran would be a mistake in this period just prior to the elections since it would only tend to heighten the anti-US feeling and unite people behind Khomeini. Instead, he thought it would be preferable to conduct some kind of military operation which could be explained and understood in the Afghanistan context but which would also send a signal to Iran. (S) General Jones suggested that a B–52 flight into the Indian Ocean to surveil Soviet naval units might be appropriate. The aircraft could fly out of Guam on a long round-robin trip without landing in the area. They could surveil Soviet units and could also link up with the carrier forces in the region. Such a mission could be flown on Sunday and become known on Monday.3 The only obstacle would be the request for overflight clearance from Thailand. In order to avoid premature announcement of the flight, the clearance request would be submitted as a C–5; however, we would go privately to the Thais through our Ambassador and inform them of our intentions and get their approval at the political level. Such a flight would be seen as a major new development by the nations in the region. The Indian reaction would be negative, but the strength of their feeling would depend on how close the aircraft came to their shores. The SCC unanimously recommended a flight by two B–52s, and the JCS began work immediately to get the clearances in the event the flight was approved. State checked with Secretary Vance immediately 2 Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Plans Embargo on Iran on its Own as Allies Shun

Negotiating Channels 156. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 18, 1980 SUBJECT U.S. Reaction to Possible Soviet Military Intervention in Iran I see possibly three strategies for dealing with a Soviet military move into Iran in the near future;2 none of them are very attractive: 1. Rapid Escalation to a “CRICON” (Crisis Confrontation). We can follow the traditional pattern of 1962 and 1973 of escalating rapidly to the nuclear level and then negotiating de-escalation to a status quo ante-CRICON. You will recall that Kissinger told Sam Huntington and you in the early days of this Administration that we can no longer follow this strategy in light of the Soviet strategic force buildup. The Soviets are in much better shape to maintain domestic cohesion and implement mobilization and civil defense measures required for a credible crisis posture. I find it extremely painful to admit, but we are forced to recognize the strategic and political implications of the new military balance. The PRM–10 CRICON paper, in retrospect, is sharply to the point.3 2. Contain the Conflict within the Region. This strategy would require some upgrading of strategic forces alert levels, but its major military component would be projection of U.S. ground forces and air forces into the region. The only feasible deployment would be as a defense of the Saudi Arabian peninsula. That is what we are “organized” to do and therefore most likely to do successfully. We would have to evoke a Saudi invitation. The next 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

Negotiating Channels 157. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State and the White House1

Negotiating Channels 6. Following our conversation, they called Ghotbzadeh from the residence. The Foreign Minister was reluctant to have a direct conversation but realized the need for him to demonstrate their seriousness. The two lawyers are going to Tehran Sunday.4 We said that it would be useful for Ghotbzadeh to say publicly that the Iranian Government wants an early peaceful resolution of the hostage problem but more important it would be a sign of seriousness if he would designate someone to negotiate directly with a U.S. representative. They agreed to urge continuation of the dialogue in this way. If that is impossible, we said contact through a third party is better than no contact at all. If they decide to designate a negotiator, they will send his name through today’s channel and have him contact Hal. 7. Among the interesting points of general information raised were these: A. Ghotbzadeh reports that a decision is now being considered on delaying the date of the Presidential election, and a decision will be made by Sunday night. One reason is that, with Farsi dropping out of the race, the Islamic Party wants a chance for a new candidate to have time to campaign. B. The central political contest in Iran is between the religious elements and what they called the “European group,” i.e. those like Ghotbzadeh who were with Khomeini in Europe. They described the takeover of our Embassy as designed by Ayatollah Khalkhali and his followers to force the revolution toward the religious right. Khomeini had countered by introducing all political elements into the compound to the point where even Khalkhali no longer saw advantage in keeping the hostages. C. The Frenchmen reported that in the recent meeting between Khomeini and representatives of the captors, Khomeini told them that Laingen would not be turned over to them and that they had to begin preparing themselves for resolution of the hostage problem. Khomeini is reported to have told them he did not want anyone hurt because the honor of their nation is at stake. 8. The general and specific information provided by the two Frenchmen either reinforced our own analysis and information or shed new light on some dimension of the problem in Iran. And while there is good reason to believe that the Frenchmen’s primary personal relationship is with Ghotbzadeh, their political and financial interests and their history of working with the group that had been in exile with Khomeini would leave them in the posture of wanting to help resolve the crisis regardless of who is elected President. If someone other than Ghotbza- 4 January 20.

Negotiating Channels and Carrington tells the Turks sanctions against Iran will not work. As a piece in the German press said on Friday, “even though he publicly calls him his friend, Schmidt’s doubt in the leadership qualities of the most powerful man in the Western world have increased rather than declined. On this point, Schmidt sees eye to eye with French President Giscard d’Estaing.” (S) Much of this on the Europeans’ part is sharply self serving. They are dependent on Iranian oil. Schmidt does want to protect FRG relations with the East. Giscard does want to maintain an independent stance and France’s special relationship with Moscow. Thatcher does think she understands the Soviets far better than Jimmy Carter, and the Tory banking community in Britain is opposed to sanctions against Iran. Nonetheless, our inherently conflicting objectives—to weaken Iran and to strengthen regional opposition to the Soviets—give the Europeans the perfect excuse to dismiss our entreaties for coordinated action against the Soviets. (S) What to do. First, we should not publicly rule out the use of force against Iran because that threat may have some utility in the Revolutionary Council. But we should send the most private Cabinet Line messages to Thatcher, Schmidt and Giscard telling them that we have drawn the proper strategic conclusions about the relationship between the hostages and Afghanistan, and that as long as our people in Tehran are not harmed, we will not use military force against Iran because we recognize that this would gravely undermine Western efforts to make the Soviets pay for the invasion of Afghanistan. And, although we cannot suddenly reverse ourselves on Allied sanctions against Iran, we should certainly not get into a fight with the Europeans over this, a fight which would lessen the likelihood we can get them to address the strategic implications of Afghanistan. (S) My Sunday paper has just hit the porch and I read John Goshko’s story2 that we are privately softening our position on Iran because of Afghanistan. Perhaps somebody should tell Warren Christopher and the Allies. In my judgment, the President’s comment on Meet the Press yesterday that Afghanistan and Iran are interrelated3 was not specific 2 John Goshko, “Stance on Iran Softening in Face of Soviet Threat,” New York Times,

Negotiating Channels This means that we need to make an all-out effort to beat Kennedy in both Maine and New Hampshire. I will be working with Kraft and Strauss2 on this. It will not be easy but can be done. Secondly, and a much more difficult goal is to find some way to resolve the hostage situation in the next 30–45 days so that we can begin to build a relationship—however tenuous—with the Iranian government that undermines Soviet influence in the country and discourages Soviet military intervention. I would not want to imply in any way that you, Cy, Zbig or the excellent team that has been working on this matter have not done everything humanly possible to obtain the safe release of the hostages. Our position which was developed at the Camp David meeting3 was correct both substantively and politically. Based on my own recent involvement in this matter and discussions with both the French contacts and with Professor Cottam, I have concluded that the situation does not exist now nor will it exist in the near future whereby the hostages are released simultaneously with the other steps we are willing to take. For that reason, it seems to me that we have to at least consider taking some risks in obtaining their release that were neither feasible or advisable before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. This is not to suggest that we have to abandon any of our basic principles, but that we are going to have to consider modifying our tactics. The substantive gap between the Iranians and ourselves is significant. The internal political situation is so fragile and fluid that no present or future leader of the civilian government will be able to agree in advance to the simultaneous release of the hostages. Rightly or wrongly, they will argue that to create the proper political atmosphere for obtaining Khomeini’s blessing for the release of the hostages, there must be some actions taken that can be used with Khomeini and by Khomeini as evidence that he has won the battle with “the U.S. imperialists.” If this analysis is correct, it would mean that we would need to develop a scenario that included the early release of the hostages after some steps that tested each other’s seriousness of purpose. I doubt very much if Ghotbzadeh or the future leadership of the government would be able to agree in advance to a scenario that had Khomeini’s blessing. Professor Cottam says that Khomeini does not think or operate in that way. 2 Tim Kraft resigned as Carter’s campaign manager in September 1980; Robert Strauss replaced him.

Negotiating Channels tion and that it will be referred to their Attorney General in accordance with Panamanian law. As I wrote this, I was just thinking out loud. It would probably be better to use the Panamanian “card” earlier and also to build in additional steps and gestures to safeguard this process. But, it is my opinion that some scenario like this will have to be worked out before our people are freed. I believe that U.S. public opinion would support our taking such a chance although it would look bad if we failed. 2. If such a scenario is developed, what is the best way to present it—through Waldheim, the PLO, direct contact or other means? Since there are several parties involved—the Panamanians, the United Nations, etc., it seems that we would have to make a decision as to how to present this. 3. Thirdly, and of critical importance, when would we present this? A basic decision would have to be made as to whether or not it would be best to pursue this during the run-off or after the election of a new President. Assuming that Ghotbzadeh does not make the run-off—and you can see from the attached “Memcon”4 that he no longer thinks that he will—a critical question would be whether or not the contacts that we have had with him could be transferred to the new leadership. We should do what we can to encourage Ghotbzadeh to transfer these contacts to the new leadership. This could also be a way that he could keep himself involved and possibly ingratiate himself with the new leadership. Another thought is that if Ghotbzadeh is a lame duck, possibly he and/or Khomeini would be willing for him to take the heat for resolving the hostage situation. I am just thinking out loud, but it seems after your State of the Union Address, you should spend some time with Zbig, Cy and his excellent team talking these things through. I strongly believe that we do need a new approach that is inherently risky for both our country and for you politically. Also, you should review the attached “memcon”.5 Our trip was taken seriously. I hope that we are not undercutting Waldheim’s credi- 4 Not attached. Reference is to a January 22 memorandum of conversation in which Ghotbzadeh told Cottam that he “had no chance to win in the elections” and that “he was sick and tired of being Foreign Minister and he wanted out as soon as possible. He would remain, however, until the hostage crisis was ended.” Cottam noted that it was his impression that Ghotbzadeh “was counting exclusively on the French channel to Jordan.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State

Negotiating Channels i.e., to arrest the Shah and to initiate the extradition process, Lewis said he would call back in three hours as he had to locate Royo. He asked Ghotbzadeh that, if Royo were to agree, would this help in the release of the hostages, and Ghotbzadeh replied affirmatively. 4. Following this call, Col. Noriega spoke with the PN Ambassador in Paris, who had been in communication with Tehran and had been told that such steps were necessary “to prepare the Revolutionary Council” (ie, for release of hostages). He also reported that Ghotbzadeh was sending an “intermediary” to Paris early Wednesday morning,3 who could then travel to Panama at the right moment. 5. Following this conversation, the PN Ambassador to Paris called Ghotbzadeh and said that Royo was presently in a meeting with his top advisers considering the matter. 6. Royo called Ghotbzadeh at approximately 6 p.m. (I heard the tape which was made of the conversation, held in English; Ghotbzadeh’s voice was not always intelligible.) Royo said he agreed to receive the request for extradition of the ex-Shah. He said the GOP would initiate procedures for extradition when it received the formal documents required by Panamanian law, i.e., copy of the Iranian order for arrest, documents evidencing crimes, and applicable laws of Iran. Ghotbzadeh asked repeatedly whether Shah would be arrested, whether he could say order for arrest was issued, etc., and Royo ducked the question each time. Royo stated only that the Shah was “in a safe place,” that he was “well protected by our security forces,” etc. He promised to send Ghotbzadeh a telex early Wednesday a.m. confirming the agreement. Ghotbzadeh indicated he would make such communication public and said: “I believe what you are doing (word missed) toward a peaceful solution to the problem.” Royo said: “I hope our response under international law can be a help.” 7. Royo and Torrijos discussed the telex Royo should send early Wednesday (Royo promised Ghotbzadeh it would be sent by 7:30 a.m.). He said that it would consist of three paragraphs: in the first he would state that the Shah was under the “protection and care” of the GOP and that “his movements were subject to previous authorization of the security forces of the country.” The second para would state that the GOP was prepared to receive the formal extradition request, and would describe the documents required under PN law. The third paragraph would appeal to the GOI to release the hostages and say, in effect, that he hoped the example of Panama’s fulfilment of the law would help the GOI take measures to free the hostages and bring about respect for international law. The implication at least would be that the GOI’s 3 January 23.

Negotiating Channels ary as having said previously that he would be willing to meet with U.S. officials (he said Hamilton Jordan) any time. I told Lewis the question of a timetable for any action plan was of major concern to us, as well as an assessment of the chances of success based on conversations with different leaders.5 Moss 5 According to the New York Times Tehran radio reported Ghotbzadeh spoke by phone with Royo regarding extradition. (“Panama tells Iran that the Shah is in Its ‘Care’

Negotiating Channels 162. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 24, 1980 SUBJECT Iran We are approaching a new point in our relationship with Iran where some fundamental choices must be faced. Our basic dilemma can be defined as follows: —With the Soviet threat to Iran growing more explicit (and given our new level of commitment in the area) we will have a greater interest in propping up any anti-communist regime in Tehran, and there will be a growing inclination to try to fashion a cooperative relationship with the Khomeini regime after a new president is elected; —But the very presence of the Khomeini regime lends itself to continued collapse of the society, the danger of civil war, and the very real risk that the left will capitalize on the foibles of the present leadership to strengthen its position for a takeover from within. The questions we must ask ourselves at this point are: 1. Is the Khomeini regime salvageable? Is it capable of evolving over time into a government which provides even the minimal level of internal stability and self-defense capability? 2. Is the risk of a communist takeover in Iran greater from an actual Soviet intervention, or is the greater risk an internal growth of leftist power? 3. How can we simultaneously seek to get the hostages back, bolster an anti-communist regime, and strengthen Iran’s capability to resist a possible Soviet intervention? In my view, the regime in Iran is perilously close to total collapse. Khomeini is committed to an unrealistic vision of a pure Islamic society, but he is leaving the organizational work to God. He is an old man, physically unwell, and totally lacking in any practical sense of how to manage anything, let alone a major nation. The people of Iran were thrilled at his leadership in bringing down the Shah, but fundamentally they do not share his vision. As time goes on, the gap between his image and the reality of governmental chaos have become increasingly 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Negotiating Channels everyone shuns responsibility and all the “officials” of the government and the Revolutionary Council spend all their waking hours (and probably their nightmares as well) scheming about how to maintain Khomeini’s personal support. This is about the best we can expect so long as Khomeini is alive. Ironically, if he dies, the game will return to square one and it will be every man for himself. In the meantime, the left is organizing itself. The Tudeh Party expects Khomeini’s imminent collapse and is positioning itself to inherit as much of the wreckage as possible. If the present chaos drags on, the left will continue to ingratiate itself with Khomeini as one of the few reliable bastions of support, and he will be forced to rely on them more and more heavily. The presidential elections will probably change very little. The election will be boycotted by major sections of the population, and the remainder will probably split according to personalities. Any president, even if elected by a genuine majority, will find himself in the same position as poor old Bazargan—and the new president’s fate is likely to be about the same. Khomeini will not brook real independence, so the new president will either have to be a total rubber stamp or he will have to set about building an independent power base. The latter is more likely, but it is also dangerous to the health—politically and otherwise. The threat of internal collapse and the emergence of the left as the dominant power strikes me as much more imminent and likely than an actual Soviet military intervention. Any prolongation of Khomeini’s faltering regime only increases that risk. Our objective should be to hasten the downfall of the present regime. We need not do much actively, for it is falling of its own weight. But we should beware of taking tactical steps in the context of the Soviet invasion which artificially breathe new life into the present leadership and give the Iranian public the false impression that there may be more there than meets the eye. They are troubled by sanctions. We should use that weapon, and reinforce it with some hype and propaganda. It undercuts the credibility of the mullah rule and it puts pressure on them where they feel it—in their domestic support. We should continue with our contacts with dissident groups. Our objective should be to encourage those groups who have real influence—particularly those in Azerbaijan which stand between Tehran and the USSR and who have the manpower, talent and political determination to provide some kind of alternative regime. They also have an invaluable religious asset in Shariatmadari, and a network of fellow Azeris in key positions throughout the country, including the military. We need not delude ourselves into thinking that we can mastermind a countercoup. That would be both infeasible and historically

Negotiating Channels SUMMARY Per your instructions, we met to review our Iran strategy.2 We reviewed the key channels which are now being used: the United Nations; the PLO, which may be useful again in the future; the Sudanese Sadiq al-Mahdi; Professor Richard Cottam who talks directly with Ghotbzadeh; Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran, who has access to key individuals for relaying messages; the Egyptian journalist Heikal; and the French lawyers who will see Ham and Hal Saunders again tomorrow.3 All agreed that we should keep all of these channels open and exploit any others which may become available. However, none of them have any immediate prospects of producing significant movement toward release of the hostages. The key problem remains that we do not have an authoritative individual with whom we can negotiate. The elections this weekend may produce someone who will be willing and able to take more direct action. Some believe that once the new President is elected, Khomeini will accept a less active role and turn over greater authority. However, this may not occur until after the legislative elections in late February, and there is considerable skepticism that it will happen at all. The French lawyers told Ham that a new President will immediately be faced with a challenge from the clerical elements on the Revolutionary Council and will be unable to take independent action. The French lawyers felt that the runoff period after the preliminary balloting this weekend may provide the most promising window for a U.S. initiative, by approaching opposing candidates with a U.S. plan. Three basic strategies were examined, which are not mutually exclusive: 1. Accept a high-risk strategy in which we agree to take a series of steps unilaterally, with some corresponding steps by the Iranians to confirm acceptance at each point. This would mean we would have to give up our present position of demanding release of the hostages as a starting point. We would have to be willing to play some cards without real assurance that the hostages would be released at the end 2 Brzezinski told Turner the meeting was necessary because he was “having difficulty keeping it together.” (Memorandum from Turner to Carlucci, McMahon, and Cogan, January 24; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-

Negotiating Channels All agreed that we should not make any concessions unilaterally until we have an authoritative interlocutor on the Iranian side. That will almost certainly not occur until after the elections. In the interim, our present negotiating position should be maintained. 164. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Meeting with B and V—the French-based lawyers Friday, January 25 in Hamilton Jordan’s office V said he and B had been very impressed with the seriousness and honesty of the presentation by Jordan and Saunders in London.2 This allowed V and B convincingly and strongly to defend the U.S. position in Tehran. They had argued that while Iran’s point of view had to be listened to, international standards of human rights came first. V and B asked for a sign of similar seriousness and honesty from the Iranian side. (Ghotbzadeh had Richard Cottam call Hamilton Jordan to endorse the talks V and B would have with us.) V said that on arriving in Tehran they had a four hour meeting with Ghotbzadeh, which was adjourned to allow him to report to the Revolutionary Council. They reconvened with him at midnight to hear the Council’s reaction. There were three decisions: —Henceforth the only negotiator for Iran would be the Foreign Minister. All information on the crisis should be conveyed to the Minister, not to members of the Council. (In effect the Council is taking itself out of the decision chain.) —The Foreign Minister will immediately report all developments to Khomeini and keep him thoroughly informed in a timely fashion. —The two leading candidates for the Presidency—Bani Sadr and Habibi—would be kept fully informed of developments by the Foreign Minister until the runoff elections were held. B had later briefed each of them. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Negotiating Channels The next move of the religious right was to try to manipulate the elections in their way. Khomeini, whom B described as a master political leader, had again thwarted the hard-liners by eliminating their candidate, Farsi, as well as the candidate of the extreme left, Rajavi. The students had then eliminated Admiral Madani. That left two candidates trusted by Khomeini in the field, Bani Sadr and Habibi. B, who knew all of the Iranian revolutionaries in Paris, had the highest regard for Habibi. He described him as very solid, a man of principle, culture, moderation and dedication—a man without enemies and probably Khomeini’s favorite. Because the religious right had lost their candidate they were forced to back Habibi. That assured him a victory but would not make him beholden to them. It was Khomeini’s plan to take the position of “religious guide,” dealing only with general policy questions and leaving the details of running the country to the President. B anticipated that the next stage of the struggle for power after the Presidential election would be a fight between the religious right and the secularists for the control of the Majlis and the Prime Ministry and cabinet positions. In an aside B described how Habibi had been the principal author of the draft constitution which Khomeini had accepted. Later Khomeini agreed to submit the draft to a constitutional assembly when Bazargan demanded that as part of the democratic process. As Khomeini feared, the religious right dominated the assembly and redrafted key articles of the constitution to their liking—seeking to impose the theocracy which Khomeini did not want. The scenario for ending the hostage crisis which Ghotbzadeh and possibly the Revolutionary Council appeared to have worked out with B and V follows: Waldheim acting on his own authority will appoint a commission of inquiry, chaired by someone like Sean McBride. The U.S. will oppose the commission on technical grounds. Our opposition is essential, if the commission is to be accepted in Iran, particularly by the militants. The commission will have as its purposes the inquiry into Iranian grievances and, secondly, into the conditions of the hostages. After a week’s investigation the commission will report its findings to the Iranian government. The findings concerning the hostages will describe their inhumane treatment and the commission will recommend the hostages be released. This part of the report will be transmitted to Khomeini who will recognize that, although the taking of hostages was an acceptable form of pressure on the United States by Iran, the conditions under which the hostages are held are not acceptable in terms of Islamic standards. Khomeini will then order the hostages released to the Iranian government which may remove them to a prison. V believes it essential that there be an intermediate stage in which the

Negotiating Channels 165. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, undated As I told you, Secretary Vance has taken the position that he does not want to hear the tape of the Waldheim meeting with the Revolutionary Council2 or hear [read] the transcript. You may want to defer reading the transcript until you confer with him. I believe that even if you don’t read it, it is important that you know what actually happened. Let me begin by saying that I know that the Secretary-General was trying to identify with the Iranians, appear neutral in his role as Secretary-General and create an atmosphere that might result in progress on the hostage issue. He also was under a certain amount of pressure due to the fact that his life was in danger several times.3 Having said that, let me make these observations: 1. The Secretary-General did not present on behalf of the world community the view that Iran was in violation of international law. This should have been stated in a tactful way during his meeting with the Revolutionary Council. 2. He tried to identify with the Iranians at the expense of representing the world community. 3. Because he did not clearly state the U.S. or United Nations position on the situation, the members of the Revolutionary Council were left to draw their own conclusions about where things stood. 4. The tone of Waldheim’s remarks was apologetic, defensive and at points obsequious. There is no way that the Council—particularly the religious, non-secular members—could have concluded that they were dealing with either a strong man or a strong organization. Consequently, while recognizing the critical role that the United Nations and the Secretary-General have to play in resolving the crisis, I believe that you should consider reading the transcript just so that 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Negotiating Channels Mr. President, I had a hunch last week that this might turn into something. Because of Bourguet, I am increasingly convinced that it can and will. 166. Memorandum From the Director for Operations, Joint Chiefs of Staff (Shutler), to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones)1 Washington, January 28, 1980 SUBJECT Conditions for Hostage Rescue Attempt 1. (TS) The attached paper by the JTF explores the factors affecting a decision to rescue the hostages. The summary on page 8 gives a good thumbnail sketch of the analysis.2 2. (TS) It appears to me that three external conditions can apply: a. Hostages secure. Negotiations continuing as at present. b. Hostages gravely threatened by current captors, other competing politically oriented terrorist organizations, or mob action during chaos. c. One or more hostages injured or killed.

Negotiating Channels The Time Frame The time frame is set by the series of elections which began with the first round of the Presidential elections on January 25. Bani Sadr appears to be the winner. The Assembly elections are scheduled for February 15 but may be delayed until later in the month. The next step will be appointment of a Prime Minister by the President and the selection of a Cabinet by the Prime Minister, but none of them will have authority until approved by the newly elected Assembly. During this transitional period, a major religious celebration is scheduled the week of February 10 to commemorate the 15th centennial of Islam and the anniversary of the Revolution. These dates could provide an occasion for releasing the hostages if the way is paved. The new government will take office only when the Assembly sits and gives it a vote of confidence, presumably around the end of February. Analysis of the Present Negotiating Situation We have been frustrated until now by the absence in Iran of a firm decision to resolve the crisis and negotiating partners who could with authority negotiate with us directly or designate a particular intermediary to negotiate for them. If the word brought by our French contacts is correct, Ghotbzadeh and the President-elect may now be receptive negotiating partners. We are told by our visiting French contacts that, before the election, Khomeini and the Revolutionary Council placed the hostage problem in the hands of Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh, who was to keep the President-elect and Khomeini informed. (A summary of the January

Negotiating Channels to Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr and they are trusted by the Iranians. Although we cannot be entirely sure they are trustworthy, they have already provided evidence that Ghotbzadeh is willing to deal with them. They are workmanlike, and one of them from a human rights background seems to have a genuine personal interest in a solution and in the long-term success of Iran’s Revolution. —The PLO. There are two lines: (1) through Arafat and (2) through a senior official close to the PLO representative in Tehran who has offered mediation. The PLO has excellent access to Khomeini, but they are hesitant to commit themselves until the conditions for settlement are almost perfect. They are now talking of February 15. They are also very self-interested and slow in communicating results of discussions. We do not know the extent of their influence with key Revolutionary Council members. —Richard Cottam, Professor at Pittsburgh, is excellent in learning Ghotbzadeh’s views and in communicating ideas from us. But communications via telephone and Ghotbzadeh’s “code” are not efficient for active negotiations. —Waldheim is not entirely trusted by the Iranians. He will inevitably play a role in implementing and possibly in working out the final details of a settlement because there seems to be a growing consensus that the commission of inquiry will be appointed by the Secretary General. —Mohammed Heykal, renowned Egyptian journalist who is writing a book on Khomeini, is in London awaiting word from Hosain Khomeini (grandson) on a date to come to Tehran. He has received one message from Khomeini inviting him to come as soon as Khomeini leaves the hospital. —Sadiq al Mahdi is a religious leader and the former Sudanese Prime Minister who visited Iran in the late fall and is ready to go back when told by the Iranians that the time is ripe. —Mansour Farhang, Iranian Ambassador at the UN, is apparently trusted by Ghotbzadeh but said to have better ties with the chief presidential candidates. He is not above putting his own interpretation into the negotiations. —Delegation from the Islamic Conference. We hope they will act to persuade the Iranians but we cannot expect them to negotiate on our behalf. —Swiss Ambassador Lang has been excellent at communicating with the Iranians in a timely fashion, but using him as a negotiating channel might jeopardize his usefulness in humanitarian support.

Negotiating Channels dence of good faith. The Iranians also regard your written message to Congress as a positive step on our side.5 —To establish the channel, at least in the next stage, we could send a message via Cottam to Ghotbzadeh from Hamilton that we have taken the Washington talks with the Frenchmen seriously and are sending a message to Tehran with them. They could also carry a letter from Hamilton. —To establish the procedure we could send a message via the Frenchmen to both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh that we are prepared to begin a series of reciprocal moves. We would start by removing our objection to Waldheim’s appointment of a commission of inquiry provided Ghotbzadeh (a) will ask Waldheim for a commission “to hear Iran’s grievances and to help achieve an early end to the crisis between the U.S. and Iran” and (b) will assure Waldheim in writing that the commission will, in the course of its investigation, meet with each of the hostages. —Since we would be changing our position to allow the commission to go to Tehran and begin work before release of the hostages, we would need to be able to say publicly that the commission is going on a fact-finding mission to Tehran to hear Iran’s concerns, to meet with each of the hostages, and to report on the present situation to the Secretary General. We would object publicly to any contact with the hostages for interrogation in connection with the inquiry. We would say it remains important for us to determine the well-being of each of the hostages. The Iranians, of course, would play the appointment as a victory and the visit to the hostages as part of the inquiry into Iran’s grievances. —We would need to assure ourselves that Waldheim is prepared to cooperate with us on this basis. I would send Hal Saunders to see Rafi Ahmed and perhaps go to talk with Waldheim myself. We would need to assure that Waldheim puts a responsible person in charge of the commission and that Waldheim has some agreed control over the limits within which the commission will operate. We would want to work with him on its terms of reference. Because the Iranians have stressed that U.S. objections on technical grounds to the creation of the commission would enhance its credibility in Iran, we would have to work this out with Waldheim. —Step 2 would bring the commission of inquiry into being only when the Iranians had made their formal request to Waldheim under Step 1: —Waldheim would announce appointment of the commission. He would act using his good offices authority and referring to his talks

Negotiating Channels the U.S. and Iran, including lifting the freeze on Iran’s assets and resolving claims. The recommendation could stipulate a period within which work should be completed. —Khomeini would “pardon” and expel the hostages in connection with Iran’s religious celebration. —The U.S.-Iranian talks would not start until the hostages are released. While key Iranians would know the entire proposed scenario, we would have to start not knowing that they could deliver in the end. But each step has built into it a step that the Iranians would have to take before that step is completed or the next step taken. One other factor could figure into the above scenario. If it seemed useful at some point, we could delay implementation of economic sanctions. Monitoring and Negotiating the Detailed Scenario Implementing this scenario would require someone on the ground in Tehran to reach an understanding on the scenario as an objective, to keep it on the tracks, and to make necessary adjustments as it evolves. The Chairperson of the Commission would have to be involved, but someone else would also have to be involved. We would also need rapid communication. To begin with, I think we should send our French contacts back to Tehran with the above scenario refined to reflect your views. If Bani Sadr agrees to proceed, when the commission goes to Tehran we would have to set up quick communication with the Frenchmen or, more likely, station one of our own people—with Bani Sadr’s agreement— in the Swiss Embassy in Tehran or in a place like Paris or Kuwait with quick access to the Frenchmen. Recommendation: That you approve our exploring the possibility of reaching an understanding with the Iranian authorities on a scenario along the lines of the above.6 6 A handwritten note on the first page reads: “Note: This approach approved in principle by the President Jan 28.” As Saunders later recalled, once Carter approved, he and Vance went to New York on January 28 to brief Waldheim. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 122)

Negotiating Channels preparations—including terms of reference—which would have to precede it. Step Three (the game with the Panamanians) is irrelevant. Step Four (hearings by the commission in Tehran) is allotted a week, but almost certainly could be accomplished no faster than two weeks or more. Step Five (commission report to the UN with a simultaneous resolution and release of the hostages) would add at least another week, which almost certainly puts us into March. Yet Step Five is supposed to take place during the week of February 10. That is simply impossible. —The scenario being proposed sets up Ghotbzadeh as the goat. He is designated as the sole negotiator or point man. That probably suits his amour propre, but it also leaves him increasingly exposed as the logical fall guy when the knives come out in Tehran—as they will. It bothers me not at all to contemplate Ghotbzadeh’s sacrifice in a noble cause, but I doubt if he will stand still for it. He is crafty and very much concerned with his political skin. He is not going to give Bani Sadr the perfect excuse to fire him after first destroying his relationship with Khomeini. A double cross is virtually inevitable at some point. With those cautionary notes in mind, I believe this strategy is worth pursuing, but with some precautionary modifications: —We should view Step One as the process of smoking out the new political relationships in the post-election environment. Therefore, we should establish a concrete test which will require a real decision from Tehran without tipping our entire hand from the start. —The memo indicates that “key Iranians would know the entire proposed scenario,” presumably from the start. I do not believe we should spell out the entire scenario at the beginning, but only indicate that we are prepared to proceed with a series of concrete steps (unspecified) once a reliable channel of communication has been established. —In Step One, we should ask that a reliable interlocutor from our side be established in Tehran—or near Tehran if that is preferred— before we can proceed. We should identify an American (Cottam?) or a third country national to establish himself in the Swiss Embassy or some other location with good and reliable communications to pursue the negotiations. They may wish to suggest an individual, and we should be flexible. —If both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh can agree on this, we would have some indication that the process had promise. If they cannot agree, we would have a better idea of what to expect. —Only after a mutually agreed interlocutor was in place should we undertake detailed discussion of a scenario. By then we would have some tangible evidence that practical decision-making was possible on the Iranian side, and we would have removed the negotiations from

Negotiating Channels would be pleased if you could continue and expand on this informal dialogue. Sincerely, Hamilton Jordan Chief-of-Staff to the President 171. Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, January 30, 1980 SUBJECT Conversation of 29 January 1980 1. We talked about the Canadian Six operation2 and I gave some details on how that went. There was obvious pleasure at the success of this operation. [portion marking not declassified] 2. I discussed the other hostages and, in connection with this, [less than 1 line not declassified] I urged more attention be given to the plight of the hostages in our public releases. [portion marking not declassified] 3. I then expressed my concern that, despite our hopes, Bani Sadr’s election did not necessarily mean that he would be able to take charge and work a release for the hostages. I felt that we needed to have a rescue operation capability on standby for situations such as the killing of some hostages, a prolonged stalemate for all of them, or the release of most but continued detention of the others for an indefinite period of time. I said that the key risk in the present operational plan was loss of surprise. I had rather good confidence once the rescue force reached the walls of the Embassy compound. The weak points were the number of aircraft that had to surreptitiously enter Iran and the capture of the airfield at Nain. I pointed out that’s why we wanted to 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Negotiating Channels JCS Stuart Eizenstat* General John Pustay Henry Owen* CIA NSC Frank Carlucci Colonel William Odom Treasury Gary Sick Secretary William Miller* Thomas Thornton Justice Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti* Energy John Sawhill* Agriculture James Williams* *Domestic Issues Only **Departed at 9:30 a.m. ***Chaired from 9:30 a.m. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues: 1. Sanctions. Dr. Brzezinski reported that the President will sign the Executive Order on sanctions against Iran.2 It will be handled without fanfare and simply published in the Federal Register. We will inform the allies and ask them for acts of solidarity. We will not twist their arms. [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] Secretary Miller noted that the regulations as now drafted call for U.S. subsidiaries abroad to be included in the Iran sanctions. He thought this would create problems with a number of our friends who are concerned with the extraterritoriality question. For example, Ambassador Brewster in London reported yesterday that the extraterritoriality issue would cause problems with the UK. There was some discussion about the pros and cons, and the SCC agreed unanimously that the provisions should be removed from the regulations and that this would be consistent with the President’s decision not to expend political capi- 2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Monday ok.” Monday, February 4. According to an undated memorandum from Cutler to Carter, which transmitted a draft of the Executive Order and the related Report to Congress, Cutler wrote: “Because of possible adverse reaction from our allies, the SCC decided not to apply the sanctions to the foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies not engaged in banking. The sanctions would, however, apply to the foreign subsidiaries of banks.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Iran 3/80) As to whether the announcement would be low-key, Carter wrote, in the left margin of the Summary of Conclusions of the January 29 SCC meeting: “We should impose them & let it be known that they have, in effect, already been in effect.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Negotiating Channels 2. Having read the message (our appeal to limit the reaction to the Canadian affair),2 he erupted, saying that the conduct of the Canadian Government was scandalous and that the affair risked blowing everything up at a time that he was making slow but sure progress. Not only did they commit illegal acts, but, moreover, they claimed victory and the government sent congratulations to the Canadian diplomats. This affair is going to have disastrous consequences for the hostages. (His remarks correspond more or less to the press conference that he gave yesterday morning. Swiss journalist Hottinger was there.) I told him that the affair was unfortunately exploited by the mass media. Ghotbzadeh immediately contradicted me, saying that it was not true. The Canadian Government had exploited the affair for reasons of internal politics.3 There had been a declaration by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I gave him some information then to show him how the press had behaved reasonably, quite differently from what he believed. He remarked that if only there had not been this publicity and these governmental declarations that obliged him to make a violent counterattack. 3. While agreeing completely with him on the need for discretion and silence that was broken by the mass media, I put to him some arguments recalling what he had said in his press conference. What would he have done in the place of the Canadian Ambassador if he were faced with the following questions? What was the status of the six in Iran? Clearly, they were diplomats living on Iranian territory with the agreement of the Iranian Government and therefore enjoying privileges and immunities which would permit them to leave the country. What would you have wanted them to do? That they should go politely to ask the students on the compound with whom Ghotbzadeh himself has had little evidence of cooperation? Would anyone have given them passports and their personal effects? Should the Canadian

Negotiating Channels 174. Draft Message From the Department of State to the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Washington, February 3, 1980 1. We would be grateful if Ambassador Lang could deliver the two separate messages contained in this telegram to Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and to President-elect Bani-Sadr or his associate, Salamatian. We very much hope this will give Ambassador Lang occasion for direct meeting with Bani-Sadr himself. 2. The first message is a statement of the U.S. position which was communicated to Secretary-General Waldheim by Secretary Vance for Ambassador Farhang early in January.2 We are uncertain whether the statement reached Tehran. The last point in the statement would appear to be responsive to Iranian desires for an expression of the attitude of the U.S. towards the revolutionary government. (In the meeting with Bani-Sadr, Ambassador Lang might make specific reference to paragraph 6 in relation to Bani-Sadr’s call for a U.S. expression of views towards Iran during his American TV interview on February 3.)3 Begin text: (insert from attachment) End text. 3. The second message presents information on Soviet military deployments relating to Iran. Begin text: In the current circumstances of tension in the Middle East and combat in Afghanistan, the American Government has tried to keep thoroughly abreast of the disposition of Soviet forces in the region. Besides following Soviet moves related to Afghanistan, there has been high interest in the status of Soviet ground and air forces adjacent to Turkey and Iran. Until January, Soviet units in the Transcaucasus were essentially quiet with no change in their normal state of very low readiness for action. During January this changed. Steps have been started to raise manpower and readiness levels for all of the approximately one dozen Soviet divisions stretched out between Tbilisi and Baku. A number of these units have begun training 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Negotiating Channels 175. Message From Iranian President Bani-Sadr Transmitted Through Egyptian Journalist Mohammed Heykal1

Negotiating Channels 176. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, February 4, 1980 I hope that you will have a chance to review this before our 2:00 meeting on the hostage situation.2 It may be a bit disjointed, but analyzes frankly the situation that we face. Our objective continues to be to get the hostages out safely at the earliest possible date without having to take risks that are unacceptable. If anything, our objective has been modified since the Afghanistan invasion to include, “and in a way that does not jeopardize the possibility of a reconciliation of US-Iranian relations”.3 Politically, I believe that we continue to have some flexibility on what we are able to do in the course of working toward the release of the hostages. The American people will tolerate a good deal more now than they would have before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan IF we have the successful resolution of the hostage situation. Let me review briefly what we know for a fact and those things that we are not sure of: 1. That in the final analysis, only Khomeini can insure the safe release of the hostages. It is doubtful that Bani-Sadr can get the militants to release them and very, very doubtful that Ghotbzadeh can get them released. 2. That a large number of the Revolutionary Council—possibly all—see the need to resolve the hostage situation, and that this includes the clerics as well as the “European group”. 3. That at least among the European group and other members of the Revolutionary Council, a clear consensus is emerging as to how the 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Negotiating Channels 1. We cannot make a conscious decision to wait until after Bani- Sadr takes office in late February to try to resolve the present crisis. 2. The delay also risks the chance that something could happen to Khomeini, who by all accounts will have to be personally involved in freeing the hostages from the compound. 3. That Bani-Sadr does not know what the political situation will be when he takes office. It could very well be that resolving the hostage situation will be more difficult for him then than it is for Ghotbzadeh now. It might be possible through the French contacts and the political leverage of the Revolutionary Council to create a situation where Bani- Sadr has no choice but to tolerate/actively cooperate in pursuing a strategy of early release. In fairness to Bani-Sadr, he may think that only he will have the muscle and the influence to resolve the crisis, and that it is less a matter of who gets the credit but more a matter of who can pull it off. Finally, you should read the enclosed Memcon from Cottam.5 Cottam says that Ghotbzadeh could not risk direct contact with us without the knowledge of Bani-Sadr, the Revolutionary Council and even Khomeini. He says that if we had an opportunity for direct contact, we would have to take advantage of it. One final comment about our French contacts, particularly Mr. B. They are not the stooges of Ghotbzadeh. One preferred Habibi for President and the other Bani-Sadr. They have been dealing with the Foreign Minister because they have been told to by the Revolutionary Council and by Ghotbzadeh. They told me last weekend that if Ghotbzadeh tried to block them from seeing Bani-Sadr or the other members of the Revolutionary Council, they would “wash their hands of this matter”. The Iranian experts at the State Department who have seen a flurry of stories and hints coming out of Tehran and the UN think strongly that the French proposal which we were involved in has been seen and is being discussed and debated by different members of the Revolutionary Council. They assume that Bani-Sadr would have to be a part of any such discussion. All of the various stories coming out which contain precise details are generally compatible with the scenario that we jointly evolved. 5 Not attached.

Negotiating Channels 177. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, February 6, 1980 Over ten days ago, you and Secretary Vance signed off on the proposal that we developed with our French friends.2 Based on all that we have seen in the past 48 hours, we have good reason to believe that Bani-Sadr and the Revolutionary Council have accepted the bulk of our proposal. We are awaiting a response through the Swiss3 which we should get by mid-morning. Once we agree to this scenario, we will have to live with it and had best all understand it and the accompanying risks. A few points that should be made: 1. This whole effort is foolish and suicidal unless you accept/believe that the leadership of Iran desires to resolve the hostage crisis peacefully. I believe that they do, although no one knows the real feelings of the Ayatollah Khomeini. The indications from Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, and the Revolutionary Council are certainly positive in this regard. I am assuming that they will inform Khomeini at some point of their intentions and he will avoid responsibility for the plan (which might be an admission of a mistake) by taking the position that it is a decision which will have to be made by the Revolutionary Council and the elected leadership of the country. 2. While the scenario that has been developed is precise in terms of reciprocal steps, we have to realize the good possibility that Ghotbzadeh or Bani-Sadr will deviate from the scenario along the way for personal or political benefit. We should not forget that this whole 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Negotiating Channels which is important—but also so that we take the proper public posture that takes into account the risks that we are taking but also does not undermine or complicate the scenario that we agree upon. Since so much is happening today which may prove important and relevant to that discussion, possibly tomorrow would be better for a meeting. 178. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, February 8, 1980 Based on both events of the past three days2 and also the information that has been developed by our French friends, I believe that you can conclude that Bani-Sadr is taking on the militants for one or both of the following reasons: —He cannot let their challenge to him go unanswered. If he did, whatever hope he has to be a strong and effective ruler of Iran would be sacrificed. —“Taking on the students” has the support of the vast majority of the Iranian people. He probably considers his election victory a mandate for resolving the hostage crisis. Because of political circumstances there and Bani-Sadr’s own personality (he is known for being impetuous), it could easily develop that he would see an immediate need to resolve the hostage situation outside of the scenario that we have been working on and that is presently being negotiated. It would seem to be in our own interest in furthering that possibility to give him the assurances that the various steps of the scenario which are politically important to Iran would take place anyway and that we would be reasonable in dealing with our other bilateral problems. 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Negotiating Channels retaliation for the Canadian affair.3 He would be allowed no letters, telex, telephone calls or visitors. Laingen asked in the first call that the US administration should protest against this treatment and, in the second call, that they should authorise him to request formally to be permitted to leave Iran. 2. The Danish Ambassador is naturally passing this on to the Americans through his channels (but not, I think, to other community colleagues here) and it is not for us to intervene. Nevertheless he and I have discussed the question. We wonder whether it would in fact be wise to make an oral protest. There is the problem of how the US authorities would have come by the knowledge on which the protest was based (though their own direct telex and telephone links with Laingen have presumably been cut off, which might be enough). It would be tempting, and perhaps more effective, to place restrictions on the Iranian Chargé and staff in Washington without explanation, except reciprocity. Nor are we sure what Laingen has in mind in making his second request, since it seems out of character for him to be ready to abandon his staff in the Embassy. We can only presume that he wishes to put the Iranian Government in the position of refusing his departure, thereby making clear that he is a prisoner. (Ghotbzadeh referred to him the other day after the Canadian affair as a hostage, drawing a distinction between him and the six Americans who escaped, a change from the MFA’s earlier claim that he was a guest who was free to leave, although his safety outside the MFA could not be assured). If that is Laingen’s intention he may have in mind that such clarification would strengthen the grounds for protest or, as a pure speculation, he might regard it as releasing him from his de facto (underlined) parole and freeing him to attempt an escape. Alternatively he might be courting removal from the MFA to the Embassy to join his staff. 3. I suspect that these restrictions are a piece of spite by Ghotbzadeh who, when he saw the press after the Canadian affair, was clearly very angry. If they were to be effective as retaliation, he would surely have to publicise them but he has not. Ghotbzadeh may well also have seen ill-judged and, I presume, untrue accounts in Time magazine and Newsweek suggesting that the Canadian Ambassador used visits to the MFA to study its visa and passport procedures. However Ghotbzadeh may well not last long under Bani-Sadr. It might be as well to wait a bit to see. Graham Ends. 3 Danish Ambassador to the United States Otto R. Borsch discussed Laingen’s situation personally with Constable on February 9 and with Clement on February 10. (Memoranda of conversation; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Negotiating Channels may leak, but we recommend that it take place in order to assure ourselves on the release of our people. It will be in the mutual interest of both parties to keep this secret. Since we have asked for direct contact and they have responded positively, it might be a setback if we shied away now. 4. We propose the following immediate steps: —Jordan and Saunders would arrive in New York by 0900 Monday5 and see Waldheim as early as possible, with Secretary Vance if at all possible. (If this is approved, we hope the Secretary might call Waldheim Sunday and arrange this appointment secretly at Waldheim’s residence.) —Precht and interpreter would move to Paris as point of communication with our French contacts throughout the week and to arrange the Sunday meeting. Our contacts will be on the phone to Tehran from Paris daily, and direct communication may be essential in keeping this scenario on the tracks. —It would be extremely helpful if Hamilton could call around midnight here (1800 Washington time) to determine whether or not to proceed on the basis of this message. 5. We want to emphasize that it is essential to do everything possible to limit knowledge on our side about the meeting next Sunday. 6. Begin text. Revised Scenario I. Principles and Procedures (no change from earlier draft) The United States and Iran agree: 1. To accept the principle of the establishment of a scenario, the first stages of which would be defined precisely, and the subsequent stages would be defined in detail as events evolve; 2. To manage this scenario with the help of persons agreed to by both sides; 3. To proceed, within the framework of this scenario, by stages each involving reciprocal actions to be defined in advance; 4. That these points are intended to allow the earliest possible resolution of the present crisis by peaceful means. II. Establishment of a Commission of Inquiry (changes show detailed sequence of events—all times below are New York time) 1. It is agreed in the approval of this scenario that the Secretary- General of the United Nations should establish a Commission of 5 February 11.

Negotiating Channels the Commission as a fact-finding mission (not a tribunal) to help end the crisis and (b) recommend the membership of 5–7 for the Commission. In proposing the membership, the Secretary-General would propose

Negotiating Channels (b) The U.S. statement will: (1) accept the principle stated in 3 above (2) express understanding and regret for the grievances of the Iranian people, including the widespread perception of U.S. intervention in Iran’s internal affairs; (3) affirm the right of the Iranian people to make decisions governing their political future and the policy of the U.S. to respect that right; (4) affirm a desire for normal relations based on mutual respect, equality and the principles of international law. 6. Establishment of a Joint Commission to resolve all unresolved bilateral problems. (On a date to be determined by Iran and the U.S. within one month after day 1.) Vine 181. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 13, 1980 SUBJECT Our Options if the Soviets Intervene in Iran I want to provide you with some anticipatory thoughts on our options for reaction if the Soviets intervene in Iran.2 Soviet activity and capabilities. [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] (TS) Some capability factors are useful to hold in mind: Approaches. [3½ lines not declassified] (see Tab A for a map).3 (TS) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

Negotiating Channels 477

Tab A

Map of Iran°

> Secret.

Negotiating Channels with Barzani, half-brother of President Saddam and Chief of the Iraq Civilian Secret Service. 183. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 Washington, February 14, 1980 SUBJECT Conversation of 14 February 1980 [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 5. We then discussed the Iran finding.2 I showed the list of the people we were building contacts with and described the idea of a substitute national front. I pointed out that this clearly did have some risk for the hostage negotiations but that was the nature of political action. We had to deal covertly with people who were unacceptable to the establishment which the government was dealing with overtly. We can’t turn these people on and off like a spigot. There was recognition of this. I pointed out we were slowing things down. Though there was some risk that Bakhtiar was dealing with the Iraqis, we didn’t think he was ready to move nor would any of them be ready to move without our energizing it. I pointed out that we needed to keep the overall effort going, however, because of the danger that a power vacuum would develop if Bani Sadr could not take hold. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Negotiating Channels 184. Handwritten Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Undated I will try to divide this report into several sections: 1) Meeting with Mr. S 2) Future relations with Iran 3) Report on Scenario/Implementation 4) Draft statement 5) Where do we go from here? Meeting with Mr. S: Prior to my meeting, I asked that our French contacts meet with me to discuss how to handle Mr. S. We spent a couple of hours on this subject. Their joint recommendation was that I should regard his desire for such a meeting as an opportunity for Mr. S. to convey directly to the President the thoughts and feelings of the Imam. He said that Mr. S.’s presumption was that Carter did not understand the meaning of their revolution and that his meeting with me was a way to penetrate the “wall of people” responsible for the past 30 years of U.S. policy. Conversely, they suggested to me that I convey back to the Imam thru this man a sense of understanding and a desire to have a better relationship. I showed them the letter addressed to me from the President containing the assurance on the scenario2 and said that this would be very helpful with Bani-Sadr and Mr. S. as it could be used as a written promise to follow the scenario if an early release seemed desirable/ feasible. I met alone with Mr. S. for 3½ hours, during which we had a leisurely dinner. We started off by exchanging pleasantries. I kidded him that his face was better known in the United States than Walter Cronkite. He laughed and responded that while his face was well 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Negotiating Channels He responded, “I believe that President Carter is a good man and well intentioned President who does not understand our history or our revolution. His sending you here is the first indication we have had that he wants to understand.” I then presented our case. I said that President Carter is the first American President in a generation who understands both the influence we have in the world, but also understands our country’s limitations. I said that he was not an “interventionist” in the worst sense of that word, indeed, that he had resisted intervention and military action both during the time of the revolution and since the seizure of the Embassy. I told him that there were many people inside and outside of government who wanted the President to take unilateral action in late ’78 and early ’79, ranging from urging the Shah to “crack down” to direct U.S. military intervention. I told him that you rejected such ideas. I told him that at the time of the capture of the embassy, public opinion supported extreme measures, including punitive military action, but that you had shaped and sustained a mood of restraint. He acknowledged that these were sound arguments and said that as counterproductive as the sanctions had been, any type of military action or blockade would have resulted in the death of our people. He then said, “Now, let’s talk about the hostages, and I’m in a better mood to talk about them since you have heard our case.” He went on to say “President Carter wants the hostages out for the sake of those people and so that he can be re-elected—I want them out so that we can turn our full anger and attention toward the Soviet Union.” He then made some philosophical comments about the United States and Soviet Union. “While you have a better country, with certain values and a democratic system for your people, the Soviet Union does a much better job of marketing their ideology. I oppose communism because it is an ideology that lacks a moral basis. But the bottom line for Iran is that we will not be the pawn of the U.S. or the Soviet Union. If I am killed fighting for my country, I do not care whether it is a communist bullet or a capitalist bullet—either way I am dead.” More on this in person. We then got into a discussion of the scenario for release of the hostages. Point #1. I’ll tell you about in person.3 3 In his account of this meeting, Jordan wrote that one solution posed by Ghotbzadeh was for the United States to “kill the Shah.” (Jordan, Crisis, pp. 162–168)

Negotiating Channels relations, but very, very difficult to re-establish them. He mentioned Cuba as an example. He said that within 6–9 months after the hostages are released, he would hope that a small group of U.S. diplomats could return to Iran. I mentioned here that it was going to be a very difficult decision for us to send people back to Iran given the present crisis. He said that he understood, but that our political presence was needed to counter Soviet activities. He said that he was anxious to use the excuse of a small U.S. diplomatic presence to reduce the Soviet embassy to a comparable size. He talked about our future relationship almost exclusively in the context of the U.S. counterbalancing Soviet presence in Iran. At some point, I gave him (on a plain white sheet of paper) our most recent summary of Soviet buildup on the NW Iranian border.5 He loved it. He said, “I will wave this paper at the next meeting of the Council and tell everyone to get off their asses and prepare for attempted Soviet domination of Iran.” I made most/all of the points in the paper prepared for me by Hal.6 I will report orally on them. To summarize, Mr. S.’s attitude in talking with me about future U.S.-Iranian relations seemed to be that now they have proven the strength of the Revolution to the United States, they are willing and anxious to teach the Soviet Union a lesson. He said that the Soviet Ambassador complained to him recently about his anti-Soviet statements and that he told him, “Don’t complain to me while you have stolen Afghanistan and are assembling troops on our own borders. You will not have to fight us on the borders, but in every house and in every street in Iran, and we will prevail.” After our meeting, I commented to one of our French friends that while very pleased with the meeting, I was not certain that I had moved the process on time for release of the hostages forward at all. He said, “You are wrong. If he considered it a good meeting it will help you more than you will ever know.” He offered two interesting observations. 5 Not further identified. 6 Saunders’s paper stressed the U.S. interest in the independence and integrity of Iran from Soviet control, separatism, or U.S. dominance; stated that the United States would “respect a genuinely non-aligned Iran” and wanted good relations with Iran; concurred in the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry; supported any Iranian legal action in U.S. courts; supported lifting of the Iranian asset freeze once the hostages were released; promised to work with Iran to resolve regional strategic problems; and requested that all 53 hostages leave at the same time. Saunders also requested that the scenario be further refined. (“Points to Cover,” February 25; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 1)

Negotiating Channels It was the most difficult but also the most honest and possibly the most successful session that we have had to date. I opened by saying that I had grown increasingly concerned during the week with some of Bani-Sadr’s claims that President Carter had to “apologize,” “admit the mistakes of the past” and enter a period of “self-criticism.” I said that we were prepared to do what we had promised to do last weekend in Switzerland,7 nothing more and nothing less. I told them that President Carter had personally authorized that we supplement his statement with certain things that he wanted to say, but I said that there should be no illusions on anyone’s part as to what we would say and would not say. I said that President Bani-Sadr should know that we would not “apologize,” that we would not “admit mistakes” nor do other things which we would consider a violation of principle. I told our French friends that we had taken seriously Bani- Sadr’s private statement that he had no desire to “humiliate us.” I told our French friends for us to say the kinds of things he had been calling for publicly would be humiliating and would not be said by President Carter. I told them that as much as we cared about the hostages, the honor of our country was even more important. And that the hostages could stay in Iran another two months or ten months before we would agree to a scenario “apologizing” or admitting “guilt.” Our French friends argued that Bani-Sadr, while endorsing the scenario, had created a tremendous problem for himself and consequently for us all by claiming that the U.S. would apologize. They said that they felt certain that he would have to have some knowledge of what would be in the U.S. statement before he moved to free the hostages. We all agreed that exchange of statements in advance was a bad idea as was the deposit of advance statements with Waldheim. A possible compromise would be an informal arrangement whereby our French friends informally reviewed the proposed statements by each side to insure that they conformed with the principles agreed upon at Berne. 7 See Document 180.

Negotiating Channels conflict versus emplacing U.S. forces at some point where the Soviets had not yet arrived. (TS) Clearly, detailed military analysis is in order in all of these nearterm options, however grim may be the prospects for a successful outcome.4 (TS) 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line beside the last two paragraphs and wrote in the left margin: “What next steps? ZB.” 186. Memorandum Prepared by the Iran Task Force, Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, February 19, 1980 SUBJECT CIA Views on The Release Of The Hostages If President Bani-Sadr orders the militants occupying the US Embassy to release the hostages we believe the militants will refuse to do so. The militants have repeatedly stated that they do not believe he has the authority or the right to make decisions regarding the hostage issue. In our judgment, only a direct order from Ayatollah Khomeini— probably in public—will persuade the militants to give up the hostages. [portion marking not declassified] Even if Khomeini orders the hostages’ release, there is some chance—probably less than 50 percent—that some of the militants will refuse to obey. [less than 1 line not declassified] there are some leftists among the Islamic fundamentalists holding the hostages. Bani-Sadr reportedly told a visiting Algerian delegation this month that he is concerned that one or more of the “Communist” captors will take precipitous action if the government orders the hostages released. [portion marking not declassified]

Negotiating Channels the hostages’ release would increase but would still be uncertain. [less than 1 line not declassified] there may be some fanatical Revolutionary Guards inside the Embassy who are prepared to execute the hostages in the event that any attempt is made to secure their release. [portion marking not declassified] In sum, we doubt that the Iranian government’s forces can secure the release of the hostages unharmed against the wishes of the militants. The compound is so large that it would be a relatively easy task to hold off a government rescue force long enough to kill all of the hostages. If some of the hostages have been moved from the compound as some reports have suggested, the government’s task would be even more difficult.2 [portion marking not declassified] 2 Attached but not printed are five tabs. Tabs A and B are “A DIA Working Paper, Capability of the Government of Iran to Secure the Release of the Hostages,” February 19, and a CIA memorandum, “CIA Views on the Release of the Hostages,” February 19. Tabs C–E are papers prepared by the Joint Task Force: “Hostage Location/Situation Projects,” February 16; “Analysis of ‘Student’/Militant Options,” February 9; and “Short Term Assessment,” February 4. 187. Memorandum of Conversation1

Negotiating Channels 188. Letter From H. Ross Perot to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Dallas, February 21, 1980 Dr. Brzezinski: Current negotiation efforts to free the hostages are directly dependent on Khomeini’s health. I have talked with heart specialists about Khomeini’s condition. They believe death is probable and could occur within six weeks. In this environment, the outlook for negotiations is bleak. After Khomeini’s death, the hostages will be in extreme jeopardy. Bani Sadr cannot control the students. Direct military intervention by Iranian armed forces against the students holding the hostages carries a greater risk than U.S. intervention by a trained rescue team. Having a rescue team is of little value unless at least part of the team is in Tehran, and the remainder of the team is nearby, ready to react immediately to an opportunity. No one can predict when this opportunity will occur. The lives of the hostages now depend on the failing heart of one old man. Our government should put the rescue team in position, including an advance unit in Tehran. Best wishes in all of your efforts. Sincerely, Ross Perot 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Negotiating Channels his staunch support for the students holding the hostages and announced that release of the hostages would be determined by the National Assembly in April after the scheduled February elections. (Telegram 49316 to all diplomatic and consular posts, February 23;

Negotiating Channels expensive and it can be used in many other applications—specifically anti-infrared screening or minefield marking. Unless you object, DOD will proceed with additional manufacture and delivery testing to provide a quick reaction capability in the event it is needed.3 3 At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “OK, but how would we use it?” 191. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 27, 1980 SUBJECT Contacts with the Lawyers in Iran Attached are two memcons reporting (1) a lengthy conversation with Villalon this morning and (2) the translation of a cable from Ambassador Lang.2 Some extracts from today’s conversation follow: —Because of Ghotbzadeh’s inability to get along with the Commission’s co-Chairman, the two lawyers have been given a middleman role.3 They do not like this assignment and are attempting to get out of it. It is clear from our contacts with the UN that the co-Chairman would like to see them out of the process. —The lawyers have criticized the Commission for its apparent rigidity in not yielding to Iranian requests to move around the city, 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 1. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Precht. 2 A record of the February 27 telephone conversation with Villalon is attached but not printed; the February 27 cable from Lang, not attached, is ibid. 3 Reference is to Chairman Aguilar. In the February 27 telephone conversation referenced in footnote 2 above, Villalon said that Waldheim had made every possible mistake which could be made, pointing to the fact that the Commission had involved itself directly in the matter of the transfer of the hostages from the compound, which was outside its role, and to Aguilar’s statements that the Commission’s goal was to “settle the crisis” as a means of pressuring Ghotbzadeh.

Negotiating Channels us to keep cool and avoid compromising public statements. There are several references to Khomeini’s state of tension and impatience with the continuing crisis. The lawyers intend to work on Khomeini to accelerate the date of release, i.e., before the convening of a new parliament. Lang reports the lawyers’ commitment to a series of reciprocal small steps, the same procedure outlined by Ghotbzadeh in his statement which appeared yesterday in the Washington Post.5 5 Michael Weisskopf, “Ghotbzadeh Says U.N. Mission Will See American Hostages,”

Negotiating Channels spare parts for military equipment, settling claims and attachments after assets are unfrozen, Iran’s efforts to repatriate the Shah’s assets, U.S. visas for Iranians (particularly students) and by the perception of U.S. policies in the region, e.g., Arab-Israel, defense relationships and the U.S.-USSR confrontation. Underlying these issues will be the question of “acceptance of the Iranian revolution”—an Iranian psychological need which we are unlikely to satisfy in the near term. Steps the U.S. and Others Can Take —Open a dialogue with Iran on outstanding bilateral issues, initially through the operation of a Joint Commission or indirect contacts. —Work closely with the Congress and the press to create a climate in the U.S. which recognizes the strategic importance of Iran and enables the U.S. to disentangle post-hostage issues such as assets and release of previously purchased spare parts with a minimum of friction. —Use the Joint Commission as a forum for a political dialogue on the Soviet threat and U.S. responses to it in the area, including our activities in the Gulf and with Pakistan. Exchange intelligence assessments on area problems such as Afghanistan. —Encourage our allies to take a forthcoming approach to Iran on economic and political ties with Iran, including provision of military equipment and oil field technology. —Make clear to the Soviets our interest in Iran’s integrity and in non-intervention by external powers. —Develop a dialogue with Iraq, either directly or through others, which emphasizes our mutual interest in a stable and secure Iran. —Strengthen our relations with Gulf states in ways that lessen their vulnerability to revolutionary waves from Iran (e.g., dealing with corruption, meeting legitimate needs of ethnic minorities). —Maintain discreet relationships with a variety of Iranians who might provide future leadership in Iran without encouraging their antirevolutionary activity. Avoid contact with émigré groups that have little or no political future in Iran. —Encourage the development of democratic forces in Iran that will permit groups favorable to us to survive. These last points will have a critical impact on improvement in bilateral relations. It is important that we maintain access to possible alternatives to the present revolutionary structure in Iran. However, to the extent that the Iranian authorities believe that we are supporting these dissidents or potential dissidents, it will be virtually impossible to build a constructive relationship with the revolutionary government

Negotiating Channels In response to the question whether the Shah had other possible havens, Jackson replied that none seemed available. During the past three weeks, Jackson has tried Austria and Switzerland, both of which replied not now, and South Africa which said no. Armao asked what would happen if, hypothetically, some country offered the Shah asylum and he left Panama on his own before the hostages were released. We noted that the decision would obviously be his, but that any travel by the Shah before the hostages are released could considerably complicate our attempts to achieve their freedom. After further discussion, it was agreed that we faced two immediate problems—discomfort at the hands of the Panamanians and the Shah’s concerns about extradition. On extradition, we noted that we fully believed the Panamanian statements that he would not be extradited and we had no reason to think otherwise. On Panamanian actions inimical to the Shah’s party, we offered to raise this issue in an appropriate way with the GOP, if the Shah so wished. Hamilton then made the following offer: He would be ready to travel to Panama secretly next week to meet Torrijos. He is prepared to discuss two issues. 1. He will ask Torrijos again for reassurances the Shah will not be extradited. Hamilton noted this is likely to disturb Torrijos, but he would do it if it would make the Shah more comfortable. 2. If the Shah wants, Bill Jackson should send Hamilton a letter giving specific examples of cases of extortion, bribery and other kinds of mistreatment of the Shah’s party. Hamilton will, without giving the letter to Torrijos, discuss the Shah’s specific concerns with the General. At the conclusion of the meeting, it was understood that Jackson or Armao will be in touch with Hamilton on whether a trip to Panama was desirable. If so, Hamilton will go and raise the extradition issue and, if the Shah wishes, also the question of alleged Panamanian mistreatment of the party.2 At the beginning of the conversation, Armao repeated his threat to go public and criticize Panama and Torrijos. By the conclusion of the meeting, he had backed off and seemed willing to let the hostage scenario play itself out for several more weeks before saying anything publicly. Hamilton’s offer to meet with Torrijos also helped mollify Armao. 2 Jordan recalled that when he reported the contents of this meeting to Carter, the President stated that the Shah had his and Torrijos’s word that he would not be extradited, adding, “I don’t know what else we can do.” Then Carter said, “Ham, you can tell the Shah that, as the President of the United States, I promise if the Panamanians try to fly him back to Iran, I will personally order the plane to be shot down. I was first startled, then I saw a grin creep over his face, and we both burst out laughing.” (Jordan, Crisis, p. 187)

Negotiating Channels if elected and even to support some of them himself. Thus it can be expected that the parliament will not be as manageable as might have been thought at first. The fact still remains that the future cabinet will at least have the advantage of not being a dead weight, frightened, bogged down by inertia like the Revolutionary Council. 5. B and V have observed as we did long ago that the economy is increasingly paralyzed and that the country is literally living off its oil and according to what V has observed is not even selling it well. There is nothing on the horizon to trigger a takeoff of the economy. The crisis is responsible to a large extent but bogeymen and incompetents are also responsible. So the authorities, even Bani-Sadr, trumpet that it is the fault of the West, the West which is strangling Iran, is not sending it enough foodstuffs or spare parts. B and V are trying to dramatize this situation to wake up Bani-Sadr, Moinfar, and anyone else who has some understanding. Let us not forget one important fact. Although Bani-Sadr is moderate in the political field, he will be less so in the economic field where he wants to apply theses which, to say the very least, have never been tried by fire. 6. The Imam, who is getting stronger, sometimes appears to regret having given Bani-Sadr too much power (df. the demonstration) and seems to be playing a role which runs counter to national stabilization, by favoring the opposition forces in order to strike a balance. In this context, B and V are wondering whether Ahmed Khomeini, the son, might not be playing a two-faced game and while pretending to help Bani-Sadr isn’t really playing the fundamentalists’ game. The Imam has really never given his total confidence to anyone. Recent history gives us several examples of this: elimination of Yazdi, then Bani-Sadr, benefitting Ghotbzadeh, etc., etc. The person who seems to have his greatest confidence—by his very nature!—is Ghotbzadeh. This is a happy circumstance to the extent that Ghotbzadeh has given himself body and soul to reaching a solution. V’s question is how far will he go if he feels that the sands are shifting too much. To this jealousy and sensitivity must be added the aspect of the “folqar” which is now replacing the role of the “fu¨hrer” that the Iman used to play. 7. Bani-Sadr now realizes that after having dreamed of overturning the imperial regime for more than ten years, the leadership obtained power without fighting, but especially without being prepared to take it. Aside from the unanimity on the question of overturning the imperial regime, there is total disagreement regarding the kind of system to be created, and this again adds to the total lack of structural organization. 8. Likewise, Bani-Sadr’s method of government and work does not favor a change in the direction of strong leadership. Bani-Sadr is a thinker, a loner, who, like the Imam, does not trust anyone entirely. It

Negotiating Channels 195. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1 Tehran, March 4, 1980

Negotiating Channels 197. Memorandum From the White House Counsel (Cutler) to the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)1 Washington, March 5, 1980 SUBJECT The Shah When I talked to Bill Jackson this morning, he advised me that the Shah’s medical condition has worsened considerably. The local doctors now believe that he must have an operation to remove his spleen immediately. Dr. Kean is flying down to verify their conclusions. If they decide on the operation they of course want to go to Gorgas.2 I have told him we will stand by our commitment to support his medical view. If the operation occurs it may alleviate a number of our problems because the Shah will have to be at a house in Panama City for some time, and we may be able to turn over a new leaf by getting him away from the present unsatisfactory arrangements on the island. I promised you would inform Ambler Moss immediately so that he can support Kean’s view that the operation should be performed at Gorgas. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Negotiating Channels Apparently Bani Sadr got approval from Khomeini for the Commission to visit the Compound.4 The reaction of the occupiers of the Compound was to issue this morning’s statement.5 Ahmed asked his counterpart how the U.S. should react publicly. The advice from Tehran was that the U.S. should not comment. The U.S. should avoid referring in any substantial way to the statement by the occupiers.6

Negotiating Channels Short Term Policy Issues The following list attempts to identify the specific policy issues which will require decisions soon after the hostages are released. For purposes of discussion at the SCC, these could be regarded as areas for possible contingency planning by the various agencies. Diplomatic Relations. State has already done quite a bit of work in preparation for the Swiss to take over as protecting power for us in Tehran, on the assumption that we will maintain diplomatic relations but no physical presence in Tehran. Alternatively, we could break diplomatic relations. Will we continue to grant student visas? Should we explore the possibility for direct contacts with the Iranian leadership on neutral territory? What does State mean by a “Joint Commission” which is mentioned in the paper? Spare Parts. Will we continue to embargo the supply of spare parts? If this is not part of a hostage release package, what is our asking price to lift the embargo? Can we realistically expect our allies to continue the embargo once the hostages are out? Oil. Will we be prepared to make spare parts and technical expertise available to Iran? Could we prevent it if we tried? Can we bargain our supply of parts and expertise in return for access to Iranian oil ports by U.S. tankers? Are we interested in attempting to resume purchase of Iranian oil? Allied Projects. Will we acquiesce in a return to business as usual on the part of our allies? Could we prevent it if we tried? Is it in our interest to encourage the allies to rebuild a Western commercial presence? Assets. How do we manage the unfreezing of Iranian assets? What problems do we foresee? How long will it take? What steps can we take in advance to facilitate management of this very complex problem? Intelligence. [2 lines not declassified] [1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified] Longer Term Policy Issues The following is intended as a thumbnail sketch of the kind of policy issues which we will have to address in terms of our basic foreign policy goals once the hostage crisis is off our backs. CENTO Redux. A combination of mutual need and common vulnerability will tend to drive Turkey, Iran and Pakistan together. We will want to consider how we can best encourage that natural tendency and how we might best exploit it for our own interests. This will have to be seen as an important component of our relations with Turkey in particular. Iraq will be a key factor, particularly if the tendency to intervene in the oil fields evolves into outright Iraqi expansionism.

Negotiating Channels JCS General David Jones Lt. Gen. John Pustay Justice John Shenefield Treasury Robert Carswell Energy John Sawhill SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Iran Developments. Secretary Vance informed the group that the U.S. public reaction to the reports that the hostages were to be turned over to the Revolutionary Council would be: “We have noted what has been said in Tehran and we are waiting to see what happens.” No one should go beyond that statement. All agreed. (C) 2. Iran Sanctions. The SCC reviewed the status of sanctions on Iran as follows: Military Spares. State and Defense reported that the embargo on sale of military spare parts was holding. [3 lines not declassified] In general, the anxiety on the part of the Iranians to find spares is evidence that the embargo is working. We are staying alert for efforts to circumvent the restrictions. (S) Assets Freeze. Treasury reported that the freeze is holding. The Iranians are considering a counter-attachment of U.S. assets in Swiss banks, and we have retained counsel to attempt to block them. The situation will have to be played day by day. In France, a hearing on our freeze of assets in French banks is scheduled for March 17, but we are seeking a month delay. If and when the hearing is held, it is likely to go against us. [12 lines not declassified] Otherwise, Treasury noted that there are a number of tactical situations around the world which are being watched, and we are holding fast. Iran is putting pressure on Finland to repay $38 million oil payment which was caught in the freeze. The World Bank is asking us to license payment of an Iranian loan which is coming due. In the UK, seven Iranian counter suits have been consolidated but will probably not be heard before summer or fall. There are 160 suits pending in the U.S., but consolidation proceedings insure that they will not be held for at least a month or longer. (TS)2 2 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Keep strictest possible sanctions intact.” Brzezinski passed on these instructions in a March 7 memorandum to Vance, Miller, Brown, Civiletti, Duncan, Cutler, and Jones. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 13)

Negotiating Channels 201. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting

Negotiating Channels after their physicals, but intended to remain in control of the compound in order to safeguard documents and files to prove Iran’s case against the United States. Later that day the students, calling Ghotbzadeh a “liar,” demanded that someone other than he represent the Revolutionary Council. (Telegram 62650 to all diplomatic and consular posts, March 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Break in Diplomatic Relations and the Rescue Mission 204. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission high-profile pressure which would be likely to upset efforts to put the Commission back on track. (C) Approve proceeding with oral arguments as scheduled.8 Postpone oral arguments for two weeks or more. 3. Break Diplomatic Relations with Iran. State is preparing a paper which examines the pros and cons of a formal break in diplomatic relations. This paper will also consider intermediate steps which we could take to restrict the presence and/or activities of Iranian diplomats in the U.S. The paper will be considered at the SCC meeting on Thursday morning.9 (C) 4. Impose Formal Economic Sanctions on Iran. Mr. Cutler had prepared and circulated a draft of the sanctions which the President could impose.10 Secretary Vance felt that immediate imposition of sanctions could interfere with the contacts which are under way, and he recommended that it be withheld until after we had been in touch with the intermediaries on Wednesday. The Attorney General and Treasury noted that the formal imposition of sanctions was essentially a symbolic gesture, since the regulations already in effect have shut off all economic relations with Iran. Dr. Brzezinski said that he would prefer taking a number of steps at once, rather than dribbling it out over time, so he would prefer holding the announcement of sanctions until we were prepared to take steps on diplomatic relations, resort to the SC, and other possible steps. The SCC recommended holding off on any action at this time. (C) Approve holding off announcement for now.11 Proceed with announcement of formal sanctions. 5. Message to Allies. State was in the process of revising the Presidential message which had been prepared the night before, based on the announcements which the U.S.12 and the UN had issued last night. The message will be available later today and will inform the allies that we are considering the imposition of sanctions and other steps 8 Carter approved this option with a checkmark. 9 The paper, “Possible Options for Changes in Diplomatic Relations with Iran,” was attached to a March 13 memorandum from Dodson to Mondale, Vance, Miller, Brown, Civiletti, Cutler, Jones, and Turner. For the discussion of the paper at the March 18 SCC meeting, see Document 210. 10 Not found. 11 Carter approved this option with a checkmark. 12 On March 10, the White House issued a statement announcing that the Commission of Inquiry had suspended its activities for several days and would return to New York for consultations with Waldheim. The statement also noted that the Commission was prepared to return to Tehran “when the situation requires.” (Public Papers: Carter,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission both ways and are not required to choose between us and the Soviets. If we can simply sit it out and get a resolution of the problem, fine; but he was worried that the Iranians were not willing to give up the hostages unless they face some difficult consequences. (S) Henry Owen noted that the effect of cutting off Iran’s 2 mbd. of oil would drive up prices, add to inflation, and create gas lines. Admiral Turner wondered exactly what we hoped to accomplish by our pressure. In the past several days, Iranian behavior had been vintage Khomeini, i.e. total unwillingness to compromise. The objectives which Khomeini takes seriously are: (1) to get the Shah back to Iran; and (2) to avoid seeing his dream of an Islamic Republic crumble out from under him. Secretary Brown observed that the most imminent danger to the survival of the Islamic Republic was a Soviet takeover, and he was unwilling to take that risk in order to scare Khomeini. Dr. Brzezinski noted that assertive U.S. action in the past had achieved results, and he wondered if the kind of lesser steps we were considering would have any real effect. (S) Mr. Cutler noted that military action would be counterproductive by driving the Iranians closer together. Dr. Brzezinski said he did not agree that that would necessarily be the result. Being forced toward the USSR would be something they would regard as unpleasant. Secretary Vance said he agreed with Mr. Cutler and noted that the risks of any military action were very high. Admiral Turner said that Iranian reaction would be different to a passive form of military action, e.g. a blockade, as compared to the kind of reaction which could be expected from a destructive action such as bombing. (S) The SCC agreed that a systematic assessment of the potential effects of a blockade was desirable on a very closely held basis. It was agreed that a paper would be prepared, with circulation only to principals, for consideration at the meeting one week from Thursday, i.e. March 20. CIA will examine the respective impact of a limited blockade and a total blockade on the Iranian economy. The NSC will examine the impact of a blockade on Western Europe and Japan. State will look at the effects on the Islamic world, on the allies, and the Soviets. Defense will examine the military risks.15 All understood the dangers of leaks, which could have a disruptive effect on our efforts over the next week, and this examination should be held as tightly as possible. (TS) 8. Public Posture. Secretary Vance will be backgrounding the press today. All agreed that we should take the position that serious problems have arisen but that we are not ready to write off the UN Commission

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission cially those with significant Shia Muslim populations, such as Iraq and Saudi Arabia. Tehran’s efforts to export its revolution have been complicated by the confusion that has marked all facets of Iranian politics since the fall of the Shah. Iranian leaders and groups often have acted independently of the government and have embarrassed the Foreign Ministry’s efforts to maintain correct relations with Iran’s neighbors. If Iran’s internal problems ease in the next year, Tehran probably will step up efforts to destabilize its neighbors. Bani-Sadr appears to be taking steps to increase support for unrest in Iraq and Afghanistan. Iranian support to Afghan insurgents could give the Soviets an excuse to intervene in Iran. Iran’s efforts to export its revolution are a threat to key US interests. US allies in the area would have reason to be nervous if the Iranians were to play a more active role. Iranian-supported unrest could lead to sabotage and strikes by oil workers, since Shias inhabit many of the oil-producing areas of the Persian Gulf states. One year after the fall of the Shah, Iran’s leaders appear more determined than ever to export their Islamic revolution to other countries in the Near East and South Asia. Although internal problems continue to limit Iran’s ability to export the revolution, Tehran radio broadcasts a steady stream of propaganda every day to Iran’s neighbors. The country’s leaders—including Ayatollah Khomeini and President Bani-Sadr—often express their commitment to the liberation of oppressed peoples throughout the Muslim world. Khomeini, for example, said on 20 February: I hope that (Iran) will become a model for all the meek and Muslim nations in the world and that this century will become the century for smashing great idols . . . O meek of the world, rise and rescue yourselves from the talons of nefarious oppressors; O zealous Muslims in various countries of the world, wake from your sleep of neglect and liberate Islam and the Islamic countries from the clutches of the colonialists and those subservient to them. Bani-Sadr was quoted on 4 February: Our revolution will not win unless it is exported. We are going to create a new order in which deprived people will not always be deprived. As long as our brothers in Palestine, Afghanistan, the Philippines, and all over the world have not been liberated, we Iranians will not put down our arms. We give our hand to deprived people all over the world. [portion marking not declassified] Iran’s revolutionary rhetoric and its actions in the last year have greatly alarmed its neighbors. The Arab states of the Persian Gulf region have been the most visibly disturbed. Iraq has initiated a program of aid to dissidents inside Iran in order to weaken the Khomeini regime

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission they believe fell because it lacked allies against the United States and the United Kingdom. The survival of the Islamic Republic is closely tied, in this view, to the overthrow of pro-Western regimes in the Middle East. [portion marking not declassified] Moreover, many Iranian leaders spent years in exile as leaders of the anti-Shah opposition during which they developed close ties with a broad range of Middle Eastern radical movements. Khomeini, for example, was one of the earliest supporters of Yasir Arafat’s Fatah movement, and Bani-Sadr has long had close ties with the radical Lebanese Shia movement formerly led by Imam Musa Sadr. The Iranians clearly feel obligated to support their fellow revolutionaries. [portion marking not declassified] Although the Iranians claim that their revolution should be a model for all Islamic peoples, actual support has been primarily given to other Shia Muslims in Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Afghanistan. This reflects Tehran’s sympathy for its Shia brethern and the continuing potency of Shia-Sunni differences. [portion marking not declassified]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission minded groups in the Middle East. Tehran’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs has established an Office of National Liberation Movements, headed by Sodebeh Sodeifi, to identify revolutionary groups worthy of Iranian support. In late February, for example, Sodeifi visited Algeria and extended Iran’s diplomatic recognition to the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic, the political wing of the Polisario Front. Tehran also has established contacts with dissidents in most Persian Gulf states, the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, and the Palestine Liberation Organization. [portion marking not declassified] Iranian policy in the future is likely to put more emphasis on exporting the revolution. Some traditionalist Foreign Ministry officials and diplomats will argue for maintaining correct relations with Iran’s neighbors, but their voices are not likely to have much resonance in Tehran. [portion marking not declassified] In any case, Iran’s militant Shia clergy will continue to press for exporting the revolution. Individual clergymen will support their favorite foreign causes. Given its weaknesses, the Tehran government has little ability to curb the clergy’s activities, which have already included providing guerrilla training and some arms for foreign radicals inside Iran. [portion marking not declassified] US Policy Implications If the internal chaos in Iran persists in the near term—as seems likely—Iranian support for groups and causes inimicable to US policies and interests will continue to be limited primarily to propaganda and perhaps some increased financial backing. One press report indicates that Iran plans to provide $14 million to liberation movements this year. [portion marking not declassified] Even limited Iranian support and propaganda will unnerve US allies in the area and complicate US efforts to improve ties with Tehran. If Iran continues to find an audience among Shias in oil-producing countries like Saudi Arabia and Iraq, the chances for sabotage and strikes by oil workers will be great. [portion marking not declassified] If Iranian leaders succeed in consolidating their hold on the country in the next year, the threat to neighboring regimes—especially pro-US regimes—is likely to increase. Iran could then devote more attention and resources to sponsoring subversion. [portion marking not declassified] Iran’s efforts to destabilize its Iraqi and Afghan neighbors also pose dangers for US interests. Increased tensions between Tehran and Baghdad threaten to disrupt oil production in the area, since many of both countries’ facilities are located close to the border. If Iran succeeds in promoting increased Shia unrest in Iraq—the strongest Arab country in the Gulf—the threat to other countries in the area, especially Saudi Arabia, would be greatly increased. [portion marking not declassified]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission directed at Iraq and highlighted by an anti-Iraqi commentary entitled “The Baath in the Dock.” The main themes of Iranian propaganda are: • Iraq secretly supports the United States and Israel against Iran. • Iraq is fomenting sedition in Iran. • Iraqi Shias are oppressed and should rise against the Baathist leadership. The programs directed toward Iraq occasionally include messages from little known Iraqi dissident organizations supporting Tehran and attacking the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified] Iran also has provided some training and arms for Iraqi Shia dissidents. According to one account Iran had given military training to about 1,000 Iraqi militants by February 1980. There have been several small border clashes between the two countries, and some have probably been caused by dissidents crossing the border from Iran. [less than 1 line not declassified] a clash in mid-December was the result of Iraqi commandos raiding a Shia guerrilla center in Iran. [less than 1 line not declassified] [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified] Baghdad has assets of its own to counter Iranian support for the Iraqi Shia dissidents. Iraqi President Saddam Husayn has not hesitated to order Iraqi security forces to pursue Shia rebels, and his Information Minister said last June that “if there are those in Iraq who seek martyrdom, the government is prepared to accommodate them.” Baghdad also seeks to exploit Persian-Arab differences and uses economic and welfare programs to improve the Shias’ standard of living and loyalty. [portion marking not declassified] Tehran’s support for the Iraqi Shias also has been hindered by the Shias’ traditional inability to unite. [3 lines not declassified] Tehran will probably continue to provide propaganda backing to the Iraqi Shias and may increase direct assistance. Bani-Sadr probably will seek to prevent relations with Baghdad from deteriorating too far, however, because he recognizes that the Iranian military is far inferior to the Iraqis’. Iranian revolutionary leaders hope that limited support for the Iraqi Shias will keep Baghdad off balance, prevent Iraq from interfering in Iran, and ultimately create the revolutionary mobilization of the Iraqi masses necessary for the creation of an Islamic Republic to replace the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified] Saudi Arabia Tehran’s relations with the Saudi monarchy have been predictably uneasy since the fall of the Shah. To many Iranians, the Saudi royal family shares many of the Pahlavis’ worst characteristics—a pro-US regime that has embarked on a massive modernization program with-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Hajj) reportedly also visited Shia towns in the Eastern Province to preach the Khomeini line to the devout. The Saudis subsequently expelled several Iranian clerics. [portion marking not declassified] The Saudi Shias are too few in number and too isolated from the mainstream of Saudi society to overthrow the monarchy. Their strategic location and participation in the oil industry, however, give them the ability to pose a serious security problem for the regime. Tehran will almost certainly continue to support Shia dissidence in Saudi Arabia, even if diplomatic relations between the two countries remain correct. [portion marking not declassified] Bahrain, Kuwait, and the Gulf States Iran’s relations with the small Persian Gulf monarchies also have been troubled by Tehran’s support for Shia unrest. Iranian propaganda often has criticized the Gulf states for failing to support Iran against the United States. Government officials have stressed that Iran would like to maintain good relations with the Gulf states, but have also argued—as Bani-Sadr said in early February—that “we are not responsible for other peoples oppressed by rapacious and unpopular governments (in the Gulf) who are attracted by our deeds to follow our example.” [portion marking not declassified] Tehran’s attention has focused largely on Bahrain because about half of its population is Shia and because until 1971 the island was claimed as part of Iran. One Iranian cleric, Ayatollah Sadiq Rouhani, has been especially outspoken in his support for Bahraini Shias and on occasion has demanded the return of Bahrain to Persian sovereignty. Rouhani’s statements had caused considerable embarrassment for former Prime Minister Bazargan’s government and never appeared to have had full support in Tehran. Since the fall of the Bazargan government, Rouhani has continued to call for the overthrow of the regime in Manama, but it remains unclear how much support he enjoys among his fellow clerics. [portion marking not declassified] Nonetheless, some Bahraini Shia dissidents and clerical leaders have made several trips to Tehran and Qom to meet with Iranian officials including Ayatollah Khomeini. Some have been arrested or expelled upon their return to Bahrain. Radio Tehran, moreover, has broadcast statements from the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain praising the Iranian revolution and appealing for support to overthrow “internal and foreign despots.” Antigovernment leaflets also have been sent to Bahrain from Iran. [portion marking not declassified] [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified] The level of Shia unrest in Bahrain has been relatively low since last fall, and support for Ayatollah Khomeini has apparently fallen off because of the hostage crisis. Tehran probably will continue to try to

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Substantial evidence indicates that since the revolution toppled the Shah in early 1979 Iran has been providing some limited support to Afghanistan: • [3 lines not declassified] • [3½ lines not declassified] • [4½ lines not declassified] • [2½ lines not declassified] • [2½ lines not declassified] [Omitted here is a picture of Afghan insurgents near Herat.] There are now about 100,000 Afghan refugees in eastern Iran, and some are reportedly using the refugee camps near Zahedan and Mashhad to train militants and mount cross-border operations into Afghanistan. The border is more than 400 kilometers long and poorly supervised. Tribal groups like the Baluchis live on both sides of the border and have traditionally passed back and forth with ease. Smuggling is a major business in the area. [portion marking not declassified] • [2½ lines not declassified] • [2½ lines not declassified] • [4½ lines not declassified] Iranian aid appears to have had little impact on the Afghan insurgency. Although dissident tactics in Herat have at times been patterned after those used in Iran to bring down the Shah, there is no good evidence to support Afghan Government charges of direct Iranian involvement. The Shia Hazaras (Shias compose only 12 percent of Afghans) look to Khomeini for leadership, but their success in limiting government control to some towns is chiefly due to their own efforts and to the low priority Kabul has given to the Hazara insurgency. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is copyright information on the photographs.]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission so far as to say he would resign if the Commission chose to stay in Tehran. Waldheim said that Bedjaoui characterized his fellow Commission members as follows: Aguilar was very outspoken, emotional and difficult to work with. He also did not understand the unusual political dynamics in Iran. Pettiti was deeply afraid from the beginning of the mission and his one overriding goal was to get out of Iran. Jayewardene was “very honest and nice but living in the clouds.” Bedjaoui contended he had no political understanding and did not appreciate that in an unusual situation one must act unusually. He believed that Daoudy was honest, cooperative but ill for some of the time and therefore did not play an important role. Waldheim concluded his comments on the personalities of the Commission members by noting that the real problem was the Bedjaoui-Aguilar split. On the substance of the mission, Waldheim said that on Thursday2 everyone was quite optimistic. The students were ready to transfer authority for the hostages to the government. The Imam had received Bani-Sadr but refused to see representatives of the students. Over the next three days, however, something happened, and Khomeini changed his position saying the Commission would first have to issue a statement on Iran’s grievances castigating the Shah and the American role in Iran. Waldheim said that although we did not know specifically what happened in the three days, he and the Commission members pieced together the following: Waldheim believes the fundamental mistake made by Bani-Sadr and Qotbzadeh is that they did not arrange to transfer authority immediately upon the students’ announcement on Thursday that they would give up the hostages. Instead there was a delay and on Friday, a holiday, the students organized demonstrations in front of the Embassy. On Saturday, Khomeini issued a statement which did not contain any mention of the transfer of the hostages. Monday morning, in an attempt to get reconfirmation of Khomeini’s position, Qotbzadeh went to see the Iman and asked him to order the immediate transfer of authority. After the meeting with Khomeini, Qotbzadeh came to see the Commission members and was, for the first time, accompanied by Revolutionary Council Spokesman Habibi. The Commission members thought this was a disquieting change since Habibi had become a hard-liner on the hostage issue. Qotbzadeh told the Commission members that Khomeini would issue a statement on Tuesday which would demand that the Commission, before seeing all 2 March 6.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission perhaps return just before the 21st and arrange for transfer of the hostages over the Iranian holidays. Waldheim’s own view was that we should wait and see how the elections turn out and then look at setting a date for the return of the Commission. Waldheim closed the conversation by noting, a point later made by the Commission members, that in their last conversation with Qotbzadeh, the Foreign Minister told the Commission that it would be welcome back but not with the same composition. Both Bedjaoui and Aguilar said that this comment may have been a result of fatigue and discouragement on Qotbzadeh’s part and a reflection of his own mercurial personality. They did not see it as a definitive Iranian request to change the makeup of the Commission. Both felt, however, that it was an issue that must be reviewed before the Commission makes plans to return to Iran. 207. Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the Department of State1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 7. B and V acknowledge that it is difficult to say where the scenario stands until the Iranians themselves decide to transfer the hostages. They believe it is imperative for Bani-Sadr to resolve this issue, and we should give him a little time to work this out, having brought the issue to a head. This has become primarily a domestic Iranian matter at this stage, and B and V do not recommend any action by us. They fear some outside actions would drive the Iranians together instead of allowing them further to isolate the militants. They believe a final scenario is needed to take account at the start of the fact that the transfer of the hostages should under present circumstances take place before the Commission’s visit to the hostages. They urge a continued lowkey posture in the US as long as possible. 8. The main element of the scenario discussed Wednesday, of course, was the future of the UN Commission. B and V believe the Commission must be maintained and must finish its tasks. Although they continue to believe that the Commission interpreted its mandate too literally and did not exercise the flexibility to take advantage of developments—at least a debatable point—they felt the Commission’s presence was a positive factor. But B and V feel strongly that Commission members should not state publicly that transfer of the hostages is a precondition for the Commission’s return. Both B and V agree, however, that transfer is, in fact, a precondition. They believe the Commission must fulfill its mandate by visiting the hostages after their transfer because the visit is important to government efforts to consolidate its grip on the situation and to reduce the power of the militants— both moves are essential in paving the way for release of the hostages. They also urge that the Commission should at least be organizing and assembling elements of its report. They recall that the original scenario5 envisioned the Commission telling the Council that it was ready to report but that no report would have credibility while the hostages were being held in intolerable conditions. B and V feel that some such statement—perhaps coupled with some comments on the grievances they have heard—will be important in strengthening the hands of the Revolutionary Council against those who may try to block eventual release of the hostages. 9. When the transfer of the hostages occurs, the current plan is that the 50 will initially be lodged in the Foreign Ministry. At that time they will no longer be known as “hostages”, but will become “persons under the protection of the Iranian Government”. It is possible that

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 2. Please pass to the White House Eyes Only for the President and Dr. Brzezinski. 3. In order to focus discussion on how the situation in Tehran can evolve relating to the hostages and the work of the UN Commission, we developed the middle and final stages of the scenario as a basis for discussions in Washington, Tehran, and New York on how to proceed. You will have an opportunity to study the revised scenario in Washington Friday and Saturday.2 V is planning to return to Tehran Sunday. One possible action for Friday is discussed below. 4. Begin text of revised scenario. Scenario—Second Revision I. Principles and Procedures The United States and Iran renew their commitment to resolve the crisis between them through completion of the previously agreed scenario.3 The following is a suggested development of events in the days ahead: II. Transfer of the Hostages (Objective: March 15–25) A. March 15 or 16: Election results are announced. B. March 16: V returns to Tehran with a personal message from Jordan to Bani Sadr4 which would make the following points: —President Carter appreciates President Bani Sadr’s message stating that the transfer of the hostages to the control of the Revolutionary Council would take place no later than March 25.5 —President Carter appreciated this direct communication and has asked Jordan to discuss with B and V agreed steps that could be taken to make possible an early end of the crisis between the two countries and also ask them to report to President Bani Sadr steps that the US has taken. —The US is prepared to continue restraint in its public posture for a few more days, despite the increase in public pressure for it to adopt stronger measures. —The US has urged the UN Commission to complete its work and to be prepared to return to Iran to do so in coordination with the Iranian authorities. Until the time is right, we have urged the Commission also to maintain restraint in its public posture. —When the hostages are transferred, the US will regard that as a clear indication of President Bani Sadr’s willingness to continue,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission IV. Final Steps (Objective: Ten days after transfer) The previous scenario agreed to by both parties envisioned a final stage of reciprocal steps leading to release of the Americans held in Tehran. However, the sequence of steps envisioned then has changed because in the new circumstances the Commission will return to Iran after the Revolutionary Council has taken custody of the American personnel. Because of recent developments, the final steps of the scenario agreed earlier seem no longer to be completely applicable. If that assumption is not correct, the US is prepared to abide by the previously agreed scenario. If the final steps of the earlier scenario can no longer be followed, it is necessary for both parties to agree on the steps in a new final stage. In these new circumstances, the United States believes that the components of the final stage—including the report of the United Nations Commission, the statements of Presidents Carter and Bani Sadr, the establishment of an Iran-US joint commission to resolve bilateral issues, and the release of all 53 Americans—should be taken simultaneously. It is also the position of the United States that the release of the hostages should take place no later than 10 days after the transfer of the American personnel. End text. 5. The one possible action the Secretary might wish to discuss with SYG Waldheim Friday while members of the Commission may still be in New York is the possible message from the Commission described in para IIC of the scenario above. They could at least talk it over with a view to authorizing the co-chairmen to send it Sunday or Monday to arrive in Tehran shortly after the election results are available and when the US message arrives in Tehran Sunday.6 6. A draft of the message mentioned in para IIB of the scenario is being carried back to Washington Friday morning. Vine 6 Brzezinski informed Carter that he thought it “doubtful that we can side-step” Khomeini’s public declarations against release of the hostages. He found the scenario to have “an unrealistic quality in not factoring in student resistance, the Ayatollah’s, the Parliament, etc.” and added “we will be setting ourselves up for another fall which will leave the hostages still in Tehran and could damage you seriously politically.” He concluded that Bani-Sadr is “stringing us along.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, March 14; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission sion’s decision to leave Iran, President Carter called upon the American people and the Congress to be patient.3 He also conveyed to the UN Commission through Secretary-General Waldheim and Secretary Vance his desire that the Commission not abandon their work and be prepared to return to Tehran under the proper circumstances. We believe that the process negotiated by Misters Villalon and Bourguet represents an honorable way to resolve our problems. We are prepared to renew our commitment to that process, but must have evidence of your government’s willingness and ability to [abide by that process] [carry out their commitments and abide strictly by that process.] The transfer of the hostages to the custody of the government would be4 important evidence of Iranian goodwill. After we resolve the immediate problems, I can assure you that our government will adopt a reasonable attitude in resolving our numerous bilateral problems. Misters Bourguet and Villalon have recommended the creation of a joint US-Iranian Commission as the instrument for dealing with these bilateral issues. We would be receptive to this approach and could see the Commission as the means for developing our future relationship. Finally, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to communicate directly with you. We are aware of and appreciate your personal efforts to resolve this crisis in a manner that is fair and honorable to both countries. It is my judgment that time is working against us. [Time is of the essence.] I look forward to meeting you someday when the problems are sat[isfied]. Sincerely, Hamilton Jordan Chief-of-Staff to the President Attachment Alternate Ending to Draft Letter5 Beyond the present problems, I can assure you that our government will adopt a reasonable attitude in resolving the numerous bilateral issues that we face.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Iran: Seizure of Assets. Justice reviewed briefly an options paper2 concerning steps we would have to take to seize Iranian assets. One initial step we could take with no additional legislation and without the creation of a large legal mechanism would be a census of claims. The President could direct the Department of Treasury to conduct a census of private claims presently asserted against Iran, to identify the nature and amounts of claims. The SCC thought this would be a good step to take since it could be a useful and necessary prior step for seizing the assets or dismantling the freeze we have imposed. The signal could be played either way. However, this action by itself would probably not be effective in pressuring Iran, and the timing should be left open until we have decided on an overall approach. (C) Approve in principle a census of private claims, with timing of implementation left open for the moment.3 Disapprove Justice believes that it would not be desirable to take custody of Iranian-owned assets or to introduce new legislation authorizing seizure of Iranian assets. This would create a massive legal mechanism in the United States and would have very limited results. Moreover, the requirement of new legislation would involve Congressional hearings on Iran policy. State and other SCC members agreed that seizure of assets would have little practical value beyond the present freeze, and it did not appear worth the effort at this time. (C) Agree that assets should not be seized at this time.4 Other 2. Iranian Exports. Treasury circulated a paper5 proposing that companies be required to contact the Office of Foreign Assets Control before making any exports to Iran, either to get a license or to get a written interpretation that a license is not required. This is simply a clarification of the regulations already in effect which would tighten up our control on all exports, direct or indirect, to Iran. The SCC approved this measure

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 4. Iran: Report to the Security Council. Mr. Christopher briefed the SCC on the options of raising the Iranian question once again at the UN Security Council. Waldheim will talk to Bani-Sadr later this week, and we expect a speech by Khomeini on March 20. In the meantime, there does not appear to be anything to be gained by going to the UN. The most we could expect would be to get another resolution along the lines of the previous resolutions, and another Soviet veto. It is also possible that the resolutions would get watered down or that we would lose some votes on a second attempt. The SCC unanimously recommended against a formal UNSC resolution at this time. (C) Concur.9 Go back to the UNSC. 5. Iran: Other Sanctions. Dr. Brzezinski expressed concern that we are being diddled along indefinitely by the Iranians. The Iranians obviously want to keep alive the illusion that the UN Commission will produce results, but in the meantime, we are beginning to look increasingly impotent. The polls indicate that the U.S. public is increasingly considering the Administration’s policy a failure.10 We are universally praised by the international community for our restraint and patience; however, he wondered what really lies behind that praise. Dr. Brzezinski suspected that we are increasingly perceived as ineffective and indecisive. The convening of the new Parliament, which will probably not occur until May, will probably make the situation worse, not better. He wondered if the situation was not turning into farce. He proposed that we keep the UN Commission alive, but that we deliver a private, credible ultimatum to the Iranians and to the allies that if the situation has not been resolved peaceably and with dignity by April 15 we will take unilateral actions which will be highly disruptive to Iranian society. We would not specify precisely what we would do. This would break the present impasse in which the Iranians have every incentive to do nothing. Mr. Aaron agreed, but added that we need to take some action which will make our threat credible, since it is doubtful that the Iranians would believe us today. He suggested that we begin interrogating merchant shipping enroute to and from Iranian ports in conjunction with a private warning. (S) Mr. Christopher said that this was a good point but he did not agree. If we issue a warning, we must be able to carry it out.11 He did 9 Carter checked this option and initialed in the margin. 10 Carter underlined the phrase “the Administration’s policy a failure” and wrote in the margin: “The polls are accurate.” 11 Carter underlined this sentence and wrote in the margin: “I agree.”

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 211. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, March 18, 1980 SUBJECT NSC Meeting If I understood your approval correctly, the NSC meeting today— in addition to deciding several specific policy issues—is meant to accomplish a larger purpose: to infuse a renewed sense of direction and discipline into our foreign policy. (C) You must have sensed, as I have, that in recent weeks there has been a loss of momentum and increasing uncertainty in our foreign policy. In large measure this is due to the mixed signals which you criticized in your notes to Cy and me.2 I hope you will use the meeting again to establish in our foreign policy a more assertive tone and to insist on closer coordination. (S) Insofar as the agenda itself is concerned, I would suggest that you use the meeting to accomplish the following: 1. Iran. Explore more systematically whether our negotiating strategy has a real chance of success and whether the time has not come for perhaps a more risky course, involving direct action; [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] NSC ISSUES The following key issues and alternative actions need to be considered to give shape to our current foreign policy effort. (U) IRAN Two fundamental policy questions need to be addressed: 1. Short Term. Should we continue to pursue the negotiating track with Bani-Sadr as our sole strategy, consciously minimizing any words or actions which might disrupt that effort; or should we turn up the pressure of words and actions to build a fire under both the Iranians and the Allies to increase the tempo of their efforts? (S) 2. Longer Term. Should we step up our efforts to encourage alternative leadership and pro-Western presence to counter a growing Soviet effort to build a leftist infrastructure? (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 2. Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” in upper right corner. 2 Not found.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission one of the primary levers we will have to influence events over the longer term. This is an area where we can cooperate effectively with the French, Germans, British and others who fear the rising tide of Soviet influence in the country. (S) [Omitted here is material on Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Israel/Egypt Negotiations.] 212. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission [Omitted here is material on the Middle East] Mr. Jordan inquired about Iran and the prospects for movement there. The Secretary of State responded that nothing is going to happen until we get further along in the election process. He thought the upcoming speech by Khomeini or Bani-Sadr, depending on who gives it, may prove something.3 Dr. Brzezinski added that if Khomeini is totally hostile in his speech, we ought to consider sending the kind of signal we did in November—that we will negotiate and we will do so in good faith, but that there is a deadline, beyond which the U.S. will take alternative actions if negotiations are not successful. Harold Brown added that we will, however, have to decide what we will do and that we will do it. In this connection, the President noted a report by Cottam in his discussions with Gotzbadeh that the latter thinks the Islamic representatives being elected to the Iranian Parliament will want to end the hostage crisis. The Secretary of State said we may see more in the speech, but there are some steps that we can take and are prepared to take that will not rip the relationship so badly that a peaceful solution is not possible. Dr. Brzezinski added that these steps are extremely modest and they are more for U.S. domestic consumption than they are to put real pressure on the Iranians. [Omitted here is material on the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, and the U.S. Defense Posture.] The President then concluded the meeting by instructing the group to discuss the question of follow-up and preparation of the meeting at Camp David with Dr. Brzezinski. 3 Speeches on March 21, the Persian New Year, by Khomeini (delivered by his son) and Bani-Sadr focused on the threat to Iran from the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. Neither mentioned the American hostages. (Jonathan C. Randal, “Iran Warns of Threat

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission which would give pause to any adventurous merchant captains and would halt port operations at least temporarily. We should make clear that our blockade is aimed only at seaborne supply as a unilateral gesture. We should not attempt to stop air traffic or land traffic. The seaborne traffic is 75–80%, which is enough to make the point. 5. We should use the intervening time before the deadline to get in place the elements of the best rescue operation we can mount. This could be needed as a fallback if the Iranians begin threatening the lives of the hostages as bargaining leverage. Anticipated reactions: —European Allies. Deep concern, nervousness, strong opposition, and leaks suggesting that the U.S. risks stumbling into a Third World War. Although this will place additional strains on the Alliance at a difficult time, the shock and rumors should help to make the Iranians take it seriously, and it could inspire a fresh round of dedicated efforts by the Europeans to find a way out. —Japan. Extreme nervousness. No action. —Soviets. Increased propaganda about dangers of U.S. imperialist intervention. Efforts to draw Iran closer to its orbit. Increase in naval and air presence in the Indian Ocean. However, any actual military involvement or counteraction is not likely. —Islamic States. They understand the dilemma, and we can help them understand our objectives and the limited nature of what we propose by careful preparation in advance. They will counsel against a blockade, but they will also renew their efforts to persuade the Iranians to be reasonable. The threat—or reality—of U.S. action will breathe life into the Iraqi efforts to get a charter opposing all Great Power intervention. There will be a growing tendency to equate U.S. actions with the Soviet actions in Afghanistan. The April deadline would virtually coincide with the scheduled Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference, which might lead to a new Islamic call for the U.S. to postpone action in order for them to consider possible solutions—not a bad excuse if we need one. —Oil. The threat of a blockade and uncertainty about oil supplies will heat up the market as nations scramble to assure their reserves. Prices will go up and the spot market will thrive. Risk Assessment. In my judgment, if we are prepared to carry through on our threat, and if we successfully convey that impression, we almost certainly will not have to impose a blockade. By energizing the Europeans and the Islamic states and the UN, a flood of new pressures will build up on the Iranians to do something. The hostage issue is not popular in Iran any more, and it will be difficult to whip up public emotion to a new frenzy on this issue. Even the Iranian man

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Treasury C. Fred Bergsten* Commerce Homer Moyer* *Present only for discussion of items 1 and 2 **Present only for discussion of items 2 and 3 ***Present only for first ten minutes SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS [Omitted here is material on the Soviet Union and the Olympics.] 3. Possible Blockade of Iran:2 The SCC was then reduced to the small political-military group. Mr. Aaron asked whether it was the judgment of the group that to be effective, Iranian exports of oil would have to be blocked, or would it be enough to block imports into Iran? Secondly, if oil exports should be terminated either by blockade or Iranian retaliation, what would be the effect? Admiral Turner replied to the first question that, if all imports, including food, were blocked, it would have a significant impact on Iran’s economy within two weeks. Blocking oil exports, however, would take nearly a year to have a major impact since Iran has sufficient monetary reserves to do without the revenue. It would be reasonable to expect Iran to cut off oil exports as retaliation for any U.S. blockade. About 80% of Iran’s exports come in by sea, and the land and rail routes through Turkey and the USSR could not make up the difference. It would not be necessary to block ground and air traffic to have the desired impact. There were no real alternatives to seaborne trade. Mr. Aaron noted that there could be a political problem if Turkey and Pakistan actively helped Iran evade a boycott at the same time we are trying to get large sums of assistance for them. Mr. Sick suggested that we should make it clear from the outset that this was a unilateral U.S. action limited to maritime commerce, that it was not intended to interfere with other commerce, and that we believed that the naval interruption was sufficient to make the political point and to significantly affect Iran’s economy. Henry Owen commented that Iran would probably cut off oil, which would raise the level of hostility in the U.S. and elsewhere; that in turn would draw 2 This discussion was based on the papers requested at the March 11 SCC meeting (see Document 204). The CIA paper, “Economic Consequences of a Naval Blockade of Iran on Oil Importing Countries,” March 19, and its attachment, “Iran: Effects of a Naval Blockade, are in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission angry but would not kill the hostages. Khomeini would use it as an opportunity to rouse the masses behind him. It could also strengthen the position of Bani-Sadr and the moderates. However, it is not clear that the moderates would succeed in the resulting power play. We might be pressuring the weakest political element. (S) Admiral Turner wondered if it would be possible for the U.S. to absorb the oil drawdown and make up the Japanese loss. Mr. Fried said that we would have to draw down stocks, and the price increases which would have to be imposed to reduce our own consumption by that amount would have to be very high, with substantial effects on inflation and growth. (S) At that point, the meeting had to adjourn, with the understanding that this subject would probably be discussed further by principals over the weekend.3 (C) 3 In a March 20 memorandum detailing potential items for Vance to discuss at the March 21 foreign policy breakfast meeting with the President, Newsom provided Tarnoff with the main points of this discussion and concluded: “My impression is that there will be little support for the concept of a blockade at the breakfast meeting but that it will be kept alive as a contingency.” (Ibid.) In a supplementary March 20 memorandum, Hinton wrote that Fried’s analysis was “extremely bearish.” He thought there was a “strong political case” for increasing pressure on Iran in order to send “an immediate message of resolve.” (Ibid.) 215. Memorandum from the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) and the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Raphel) to President Carter and Secretary of State Vance1 New Orleans, March 21, 1980 We are waiting in New Orleans for a new plane to take us to Panama.2 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 12. Secret. 2 In his memoir, Jordan recalled that, after receiving intelligence that the Shah planned to leave Panama, Brzezinski said to him: “Hamilton, Panama and the Shah are your specialty. I’m in charge of current leaders and big countries—you’re in charge of former leaders and small countries.” Jordan then made plans to travel to Panama. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 199)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Dr. DeBakey said that he had operated in 30 different countries in very unusual circumstances, but that was the worst situation he had ever encountered. Some or all of this was conveyed to the Shah by DeBakey, and he quickly hardened against having the operation in Panama. This probably stimulated the latest initiative to go to Egypt for the operation. Meeting with Dr. DeBakey: In talking with Dr. DeBakey, we laid out for him all of the concerns which we see. We told him that we shared his interest in seeing that the Shah received good medical treatment, and we had the additional responsibility of the lives of 53 Americans being held in Iran. We tried to probe as to what new conditions— improvements—would be required before he would be satisfied to conduct the operation in Panama. He talked very frankly and insisted that his comments be treated in total confidence. I assured him they would be treated in confidence. He said that the Shah is a very sick man and that his condition is fragile. He said that his principal concern about Panama was not a concern based on medical facilities, but on the larger questions of authority and attitude. He said that the operation itself was not difficult or particularly risky, but that complications often arose in the postoperative period that could be serious and fatal. He said that someone had to be in charge, and that he could not tolerate a situation in the operating room or during the post-operative period when a decision he had taken was undermined or reversed by well-meaning Panamanian doctors. He said that he could operate in a tent with less risk than in a situation where his authority was not clear and a general atmosphere of hostility existed which might prejudice the care given his patient. We asked if assurances were given by the Panamanians as to his ultimate authority, would he be willing to do the operation in Panama. He said that he would do the operation in Panama if he had to, but, based on his experience there and the hostility directed toward him by the medical staff, he would not believe or accept assurances if given by the Panamanians. He said that he thought the brief delay in the operation would create a situation in Panama which would permit him to conduct the operation there, but that his professional medical advice to the Shah would have to be that he would be better off to go to Egypt or the United States for the operation. We pressed him as to the degree of risk. He said that the risk of death to the Shah in ideal medical circumstances was in the range of 5 percent. He said that if the operation was conducted in the Panamanian hospital under the present circumstances, the risk would increase to the range of 10 to 15 percent. We asked if there were steps we could take to diminish that risk, and he said that all we could do was to obtain assurances from the Panamanians that he could trust.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission as a result of the Shah’s return to the States. On balance, in terms of our national interest, it is preferable to have the operation performed in the United States rather than Egypt. Summary: The Shah has a terminal illness and is a dying man. Dr. Norman Rich, who accompanied us and who has worked with Dr. DeBakey and is an expert in this area, estimates that he has no more than one or two years to live. If you decide to allow the Shah to return to the United States for the operation on humanitarian grounds, I think it is important that he understand clearly the ramifications of his return to the States and accept some personal responsibility for a decision to return. Although we are not saying that this would work, we believe that if the Shah was confronted with the stark realities of the situation and the ramifications of each of the options, he might decide to ask Dr. DeBakey to perform the surgery in Panama. We would suggest an approach to the Shah that is frank and acknowledge our willingness to receive him in the United States. We would use talking points along the following lines: —The President understands that surgery may be necessary and is concerned that the surgery be conducted under conditions that are satisfactory both to yourself and to your doctors. —If your doctors analyze the need for surgery to be both critical and pressing, we are willing to have you return to the United States for surgery. We are sure that you would want to know and understand our frank analysis of possible consequences of your return. —We understand that another option is for surgery in Egypt. We believe that if the surgery were performed in Egypt it would have a very detrimental impact on Sadat’s internal position, which is already precarious, and will increase his isolation in the Islamic world. The President would strongly prefer that, if you are convinced the surgery cannot be performed in Panama, it should be done in the United States rather than Egypt. The President is confident that you share this personal concern for President Sadat and wanted you to have the benefit of our own analysis. —You should realize that the President of the United States believes, at a minimum, that it would prolong the detention of the American hostages in Iran and increase the chances of some immediate harm coming to them. —We understand that Dr. DeBakey will perform the surgery wherever you decide. —We realize the conditions in Panama are not as good as they might be elsewhere. We know that this is a difficult decision for you to make. You and your family are justifiably concerned about the chances of the success of the operation. You are faced with a very hard

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 2. Cutler and Raphel met alone with Shah and Empress for 1½ hours evening March 21 on Contadora. Cutler described in detail the three options available to the Shah—operation in Panama, United States or Egypt. Cutler emphasized the very real and serious difficulties if operation were performed in either the States or Egypt and noted that many of these difficulties could be ameliorated if operation took place, under medically acceptable conditions, in Panama. 3. In response, the Shah was adamant in his refusal to have operation in Panama. He exhibited no flexibility, referred in highly negative terms to experience of last week-end,2 and gave every indication his decision in this regard was firm. When we suggested that it may be possible to check again with DeBakey on this issue, the Shah responded that he had already spoken with the doctor, his strong recommendation was to have the operation elsewhere, and there was no need to check again. 4. The Shah was obviously undecided between the Egypt and US options. He noted that in strictly medical terms, it made sense to have the operation performed in Houston. In quote mental terms close quote, however, he would prefer to go to Egypt where he knew Sadat would welcome him. While discussing the Egypt option, the Shah tended to downplay any immediate threat to Sadat due to the Shah’s presence. He noted that as long as Sadat were in power, there would be no danger of demonstrations or a hostile press, and Sadat would not have invited him if it were threatening to the Egyptian President. 5. The Shah added that whether he went to Cairo or the States, the stay would only be temporary until he had fully recovered from the operation. He made a point of contending that he believed he had some permanent options of places that would accept him for residence. When pressed, he mentioned Canada as a possibility, or quote some island somewhere close quote. 6. The Shah noted that before our visit, he had tentatively planned to depart Sunday for Cairo with the operation scheduled for Wednesday.3 He had agreed with Torrijos that when he left, whether for the States or Cairo, the departure would be public, amicable and friendly. 7. The meeting closed with the Shah noting that he wanted to think about his decision overnight, and we agreed it would be best to spend the night considering the various options. The Shah asked our view of what he should do—go to the States or Cairo. He asked if we could check with the President to see if we would want to make a specific recommendation to him as to which of the two places we would prefer. 2 See Document 215.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 217. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission cans will be left behind. Thus, we need some threat to deter reprisals against whatever Americans might be left behind. The Chairman commented that if we can get to the wall with surprise and if the Americans are in the compound, he had high confidence that we could get them all. However, some of them may be dead. Thus, while there was a possibility that some Americans could be left behind, it was more likely that Americans would be killed than left behind. The Secretary of State asked how much time was required for the rescue operation. The Chairman replied that inside the compound we were aiming to complete the operation in 45 minutes, however, we were allowing up to an hour and a half. Secretary Brown asked where is the nearest Iranian military installation and how well we could hold them off for this period of time. The Chairman replied that a few blocks away there is an installation with Revolutionary Guards. It is our estimate that they could mobilize a few hundred personnel in about an hour. To handle this, we would be placing our main reliance on the C–130 gunships. These aircraft provide tremendous firepower and this gives our team confidence that they can defend themselves. The C–130 gunships are very accurate, able to fire within 40 feet of our own personnel, they have up to 105mm cannons aboard and have incendiary ordnance called “mishmash” which will cause diversion and enormous confusion. The Chairman explained that we would, however, try to minimize the damage to the Iranians and would not fire into crowds unless it were absolutely necessary. The Vice President asked what would happen if the Iranian Air Force is tipped off and they attack our C–130s. The Chairman replied that there would be a gunship covering the Mehrabad airport, which is the main problem and where there are two F–4s kept on alert. The gunship would circle the field and keep Iranian aircraft on the ground. They would be able to break up the taxiway or shoot the aircraft before they took off. Dr. Brzezinski commented that the rescue in Tehran is in fact the easiest phase of the operation. There were two more risky aspects to the operation. The first is getting the Delta team into town and hiding the helicopters. The second is the operation at Nain: sealing off the base for 26 hours without any word getting out that Americans are conducting a military operation. He was particularly concerned that in the assault on Nain, someone might get away, go into town and pass the word that they had been attacked by Americans. The Chairman commented that his confidence level is someplace between that of Dr. Brzezinski and his team. The team is highly confi-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission feasibility of the alternative rendezvous site6 and 3) some early flow of support material to Wadi Kena. The latter would reduce the time required for initial activity. The Chairman added that we ought to realize that in five or six days we did not have to make a go decision but we would want to take a next step which is moving the airplanes actually involved in the operation. This is assuming of course that we want to go about April 4, which is the point at which the night becomes so short that we have to contemplate a three-day operation. The President asked to be told again what the two men would do. It was explained that two military personnel, [less than 1 line not declassified] would go in by regular airline to reconnoiter the Foreign Ministry. They would find out about the security arrangements to see if they can get in easily, where they might drive their vehicles, check out where the helicopter might land and so forth. They would be in Tehran for three days and then come out. The President asked why the people who are already in there cannot do this. The DCI said that the men inside do not have the tactical expertise to perform this mission. The President asked if there was any objection to the two men going in and to the Otter operation. The Vice President asked what were the risks of the Otter operation. [1½ lines not declassified] Three men would go in to test the ground, drill core samples and so forth to make sure that the area would be suitable for the landing of C–130s. If we have problems, the three men will have documents indicating that they are on their way to Afghanistan. Even if they are found, it will be difficult to associate them with the situation in the compound. The greatest danger would come from the Otter not being able to restart once it had landed. The Secretary of State said he had no objection to sending in the two military personnel but he felt very strongly that we should not proceed with the rescue operation at this point. The President said that he did not want to undertake a rescue operation unless there was no choice. He said he would rather wait a month and a half to get the hostages out than undertake an operation in which the hostages might be killed. The Chairman pointed out that one problem was the fact that the nights were getting shorter which meant past early April it would in 6 In a March 21 paper, “Outline of Operational Concept,” the CIA identified the Twin Otter mission as “a clandestine air penetration of Iran to locate and determine the suitability of an MC–130 landing zone for use in place of Na’in Airfield for helicopter refueling operations.” It identified what would become Desert One. [text not declassified] (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Vice President said that he was not against sending in two officers but he had questions about the Otter. He wondered whether it was really so crucial at this point. The DCI said that it was a lowrisk operation but there was the danger that the plane will not take off. If that were the case, we could then go in later and pick them up and move them out, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Thus, he was not so concerned that his people would be immediately apprehended unless of course a truck carrying the wrong people came along. Dr. Brzezinski asked if they would be armed. Admiral Turner said yes. The President asked how far it was from Tehran to this location. Admiral Turner replied 200 kilometers. The President said that’s a long way [less than 1 line not declassified] to have to drive to pick them up. The Chairman said that whoever comes down from Tehran should come beforehand in order to position themselves in case we have some problems. [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] The President explained that this proposal had been under consideration for some time and asked whether it would not be desirable to go forward with it. There was general agreement to do so. Admiral Turner said he would start immediately and added that the mission could be turned off right up to the last minute. It was agreed that he would check with the White House prior to takeoff. The President said he did not want anyone to leave the meeting with the impression that there should be momentum proceeding towards a rescue. He said he did not intend to mount a rescue operation unless he was convinced there was a risk of loss of life of the hostages and that that risk was imminent. As for our diplomatic strategy, the President wanted to escalate pressure on the Iranians and get our Allies to join us. The President said he had received a letter from Prime Minister Thatcher saying that the British will stay with us.7 Therefore, he wanted to proceed to consider expelling the diplomats, breaking relations, undertaking legal sanctions and any other options. He said he thought that breaking relations would leave a gap which might be difficult to close later but it is something we should consider. The Secretary of State said there are some steps which are not very effective, but which would give an impression of some movement. First of all, there is the idea of compiling a compendium of the claims against Iran preparatory to legal action against the frozen assets. Secondly, we could expel the diplomats. He thought this would only have an effect in the U.S. It would make us feel better. It had little or no 7 Dated March 21. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Secretary of State said the suggestion of possible use of military actions will help encourage our Allies to take the step of threatening a break in relations and actually following through, but he thought military actions are not a good idea because of the effect on the hostages and upon the solidarity of the Allies as well as the Islamic world reaction. He also thought that a mining or interruption of trade would drive the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets. The President asked the Secretary whether he wanted the hostages out next December or to mine the harbors. The Secretary said he would rather find another way, one that did not threaten hurting the hostages or US interests. The Secretary of Defense said we ought to be sure what we are going to do once the deadline passes. We have several options: a blockade, mining and interdiction of their power supplies. The Secretary said that if we cannot convince ourselves we are going to do any of these things, we ought to be careful about threatening to our Allies that we would do them. Otherwise, we will look foolish and our credibility will be undermined. The Secretary of Defense said that in looking at our options, he concluded that mining is better than a blockade. There is a risk that the Soviets would sweep the mines and then we would have to do the mining again and the result is that we might find ourselves in a confrontation with the Soviets. In any event, we would drive the Iranians toward the Soviet Union. The question we have to ask in considering mining is: Why are we doing it? Presumably to get the hostages out. But he was not at all sure this would result in getting the hostages out. From this standpoint, he thought a rescue is better than mining or a blockade. He allowed that it would kill hostages and Iranians but it was aimed at the kidnappers and not at the Iranian Government with which we would hope in the long run to have some kind of relationship. Mining, on the other hand, was aimed at the Iranian Government, which already wants the hostages out. The President reminded the group that we had stated previously that the option of interrupting trade was open to us. Dr. Brzezinski said that we had conveyed that privately to the Iranians. Mr. Powell added, however, that this was the implication of what he had said publicly. Secretary Vance added that it had been conveyed to the Iranians through the Swiss. He explained, however, that he was not saying that we should not keep the option open. He was just saying that the more he looked at it, the worse it looked. The President then asked but how are we going to get the EC Nine to follow through on the recommendation of its ambassadors? The Secretary said he had no difficulty in saying that if they do not stick with us on the Iranian crisis, we will do what is necessary and they

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission there was a fourth power center that had to be considered: the new Iranian Parliament. Once they get into office, the price will keep going up, as it has already. The DCI added that if we want the Allies to go along with our actions, we must let them see that we have a plan for the future of Iran overall, not just for the hostages. They already think that we are giving too much weight to the hostages and not enough to Iran’s strategic position. However, the longer the hostage issue goes along, the more there is a threat of a leftist takeover in the country. We must demonstrate to the Allies and to the Iranians that we are prepared to take action and that we want to end the hostage crisis because it is one of the principal vehicles whereby the left will come to power in Iran. The DCI said that he agreed with Secretary Brown that our choices were either mining, interrogation of vessels, or a rescue. He concluded by saying that the humanitarian interest we have in the hostages is declining because of the increasing risks to our overall interests in the region. The Secretary of State disagreed with the DCI’s analysis of the prospects of a negotiated solution. He said the odds are not good, but we need more patience on the negotiating track. He said we do not know what the consequences of using force will be, so we have to pursue negotiations. The Chairman said that if Admiral Turner was correct, then the rescue was the best way to go and far preferable to a blockade. However, he emphasized that he would not create any momentum towards a rescue in his preparations. The Chairman expressed concern about the impact on the Allies if our threats to act prove to be empty. However, he thought they might be willing to help on Iran because they do not want to take stronger action against the Soviets on Afghanistan. He then turned to the military options short of mining which were available to us. One was the interrogation of ships. That would look like a prelude to a blockade. Second, we could put an SR–71 flight over Tehran. Third, we could have carrier aircraft patrol the Persian Gulf. The trouble is that all of these steps soon become empty gestures. As for mining versus a blockade (which he preferred to call a quarantine since a blockade was an act of war), he felt that mining was better. But he added that we could not mine Khorramshahr, which is a port which is shared with the Iraqis and that port could expand to take up much of the slack. The Iranians could also shift to the Bandar-e-shahtur. Therefore, he was not at all certain that mining would work. [1 line not declassified] [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified] The President said the only way we got our Allies on board the Olympics is to give them time. They are now feeling pressure from

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Returning to the subject of Iran, the President said that a major immediate goal should be to get the Allies to commit themselves to breaking relations by a certain time. There may be other dates than the ones that he had suggested, but he did not see how we could get the Allies to commit themselves to such a course except by threatening other options that would have a severe adverse impact on them. We did not have to agree at this point on those options in order to go ahead on this track. Personally, the President said he was not so adverse to mining as some of the members of the [National] Security Council but that was a future decision. The Vice President said that we were not under pressure politically to take drastic actions. In time our position will slip but it is not severe. There was no support in the country for any other course of action so we have political room to maneuver. We ought to use this time to push the Allies. The best way to do that would be to suggest that the alternative courses would be much more painful to them. The Vice President’s personal view was that all the other options were excessive at this point. He felt the appropriate target date was after the Parliament had met. Secretary Vance raised the issue of our own sanctions. The Vice President suggested that we should formalize them. The Secretary agreed. The President said that we should outline for the Allies a series of steps that would include the possibility of more serious measures. Then we might take the first step in order to persuade them of our seriousness. The Secretary of State said he thought we ought to tell the Allies that we are taking the step of breaking relations and imposing economic sanctions, and we are putting them on notice that we will be pressing them to do the same. The President asked: Why not press them now? The Secretary replied that we would probably get a mixed bag in response. The President said that even if we know they would not do it, he had the feeling that it would be good to press them. They agreed in the UN to break relations and to impose sanctions. The Secretary of State replied that some of them backed off when the UN Resolution was vetoed,12 saying they did not have a legal basis for imposing sanctions. The Secretary wondered whether we wanted to fight them on that issue. The Secretary of Defense observed that our Allies were saying that they cannot do sanctions without Soviet permission. The Secretary of State asked nonetheless, do we want to get into that kind of fight? 12 See Document 147.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Secretary of State reported that the National Council of Churches was organizing a world-wide appeal for Easter release of the hostages. Moreover, they are also trying to organize services for the hostages. Admiral Turner suggested that we push hard on the concept of more visits to the hostages. The Secretary of State endorsed the idea. Admiral Turner further suggested that we promote the idea of each of the hostages calling their families to verify that they were all right. The President thought that also was a good idea. [Omitted here is discussion on Afghanistan, the Middle East, relations with the Soviet Union, SALT II, and Diego Garcia.] 218. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, March 24, 1980 The President has approved the following initiatives discussed at

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission diagnosis. Dr. Michael DeBakey led the operating team. The team was divided over the Shah’s longevity, with estimates running from 5–10 years to mere months. (Telegram 7548 from Cairo, April 3; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Imposing Formal Economic Sanctions. The papers are prepared for the President to sign. It can be implemented at any time by a Presidential signature and subsequent publication of appropriate regulations in the Federal Register. Treasury raised the question of whether we should not proceed with the proposal approved at the March 18 meeting2 to advise U.S. companies to seek a license or Treasury interpretation prior to any direct or indirect export of goods to Iran. This would permit Treasury to exhort companies to prohibit action by their subsidiaries, which is an extraterritorial limitation not included in the UN sanctions. The SCC agreed that, in the context of imposing formal sanctions, we would announce that we will ask U.S. companies to direct their overseas subsidiaries to respect the restrictions outlined in the sanctions and to discuss with Treasury any proposed exports by their subsidiaries before such exports are made.3 (C) Timing of Announcement. It was agreed that the announcement of the entire package of sanctions would be made at a coordinated press briefing. The details will be worked out between Jody Powell, Hodding Carter and Alfred Friendly. The date of the announcement would be determined by the deadline which we convey to Bani-Sadr. Secretary Vance noted that we will probably be unable to get the message into Bani-Sadr’s hands before Thursday. We should allow him sufficient time to act before proceeding. After some discussion, it was agreed that our deadline to Iran should be Monday, March 31, with the announcement to be made on Tuesday if they do not comply.4 (S) Message to Bani-Sadr. The draft text of the message to Bani-Sadr was discussed and revised. The revised text was forwarded separately to the President.5 (S) Sanctions by Allies. Henry Owen asked whether we should not ask the allies to impose sanctions, as we are doing. Secretary Vance replied that we had been through this at considerable length with the allies and we know they will reply that they have no legal basis for imposing such sanctions and could not get them through their parliaments. A UN resolution would be necessary to provide the necessary legal basis. Since we know they will not agree, we would be better advised not to ask. Mr. Cutler observed that a formal order by the ICJ might help in this regard. Secretary Vance said it might help a little, but that was still some weeks away.6 (S) 2 See Document 210. 3 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the margin. 4 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the margin. He announced the sanctions on April 7; see Document 246. 5 See Document 220.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 222. Editorial Note On March 25, 1980, French lawyer Christian Bourguet stopped in Washington on his way from Panama to Iran. As White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan recalled, Bourguet had lunch with Jordan, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold Saunders, Director of the Office of Iranian Affairs in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Henry Precht, and White House Counsel Lloyd Cutler. Vice President Walter Mondale stopped by briefly. Bourguet then met with President Jimmy Carter in the Map Room at the White House. This was the first time the two men had met. Bourguet told Carter that the departure of the Shah from Panama was “a turning point.” The Iranians had originally thought the United States helped the Shah escape arrest in Panama, but now, he argued, this could be sold as a “victory” for Iran “in that it demonstrates that the Shah did commit crimes and is having to flee from justice to avoid paying for them.” (Jordan, Crisis, pages 230–234) During their discussion Bourguet admitted the hostage situation was frustrating. Carter responded: “Frustrating? Look at the spot I’m in! I am the President of a great country. Fifty-three people look to me for support week after week and month after month while we watch this comic opera in Tehran.” The President continued: “I don’t see that there is any progress at all! We’re in exactly the same position as we were four months ago. The hostages are suffering every day. We are a strong nation and we do not have to prove it, but our patience is beginning to look like a demonstration of cowardice of which we cannot be proud and which I will not allow to become a way of life. Something has to change.” (Ibid.) At Jordan’s prompting, Carter quickly wrote a note for Bourguet to take to the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini or President Abol Hassan Bani-Sadr. The note stated that the United States wanted the captives released unharmed, would eventually want normal relations with Iran under the existing government thereby recognizing the results of the revolution, and wanted Iran to air its grievances through the International Court of Justice or through the media. (Ibid.) The President,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission result in freeing the hostages by no later than two weeks after the Majlis convenes, and in any case no later than mid May, you will join with us at that time in complete and formal severance of all diplomatic relations with Iran. Without this kind of support from our close friends, the U.S. will have little choice but to undertake further and more severe unilateral actions. It is important to keep the attention of the Iranians on the issue of releasing the hostages. While the departure of the Shah from Panama was dictated by medical considerations, his presence in Egypt has the effect of again removing the extradition of the Shah as a possible element in the arrangements for release of the hostages. We had sought to enable the Shah to have necessary surgery in Panama, but that proved impossible given his assessment of the medical circumstances there. We will want to be in close touch with your government during the days ahead so as to share assessments of changing circumstances and to coordinate our actions in the most effective way possible. No one can dispute the fact that the patience of the American people during this crisis has been extraordinary. That patience will not endure in the face of further Iranian inaction. I trust you will agree that it is now time to bring home forcibly to Iranians the consequences of their illegal action. Thank you again for your help during this difficult time.4 Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 4 In his memoir, Vance noted that except for a positive response from Trudeau, the formal replies to the letter expressed strong endorsement of the U.S. diplomatic approach but counseled restraint. (Vance, Hard Choices, p. 407) Giscard’s response was transmitted

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission —To be effective, a White Paper would have to be presented as an objective account of current and past policies. In portraying earlier problems, we could stimulate charges of having attacked previous administrations. To the extent the Paper fell short of complete objectivity, we could be open to charges, here and abroad, of “covering up” the acts of this or previous administrations. —Past experience with White Papers, such as those on China (1949) and Vietnam (1965), is not encouraging. Regardless of how well they were prepared (the China White Paper, for example, was very well done), they became more of a liability than an asset. The Vietnam White Paper was clearly a minus in public attitudes towards our Vietnam policies. —A White Paper covering the entire range of our policies with Iran could arouse serious concern in other states in the region, including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Pakistan, that their confidential exchanges with the U.S. could be brought into the open at some point. —We would have difficulty controlling the timing of its presentation; once it was completed, we could encounter FOI and Congressional requests for its release. —Lastly, if issued before the hostages were released, a spirited public defense of U.S. policy in the form of a White Paper would almost certainly complicate our efforts to gain their freedom. Depending on how it were perceived, it could make still more difficult a face-saving solution for the Iranians, or strengthen those elements in Iran demanding other inquiries into U.S. actions in that country. 225. Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser) to the Department of State1 Tehran, March 27, 1980 (1) This morning, following a prolonged siege which enabled me once again to observe how strongly the President is assailed from all sides with various concerns, I personally transmitted the State Department message to Bani-Sadr2 as you had once again urged me to do. 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 226. Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser) to the Department of State1 Tehran, March 27, 1980 (Text of letter intended for Khomeini and attributed to President Carter)2 Excellency: I have read your message to the Iranian people dated March 21.3 I consider it to be a key document for the future of your country. In that message you also defined your international policy choice. This concerns us. I agree that the peace of the world requires new relations between States, especially respect for the sovereignty of nations and the right of peoples to self-determination. I wish to say to you that these two principles often expressed by you and by President Bani-Sadr are my principles, and we have proved to the world our decision to implement them, in Nicaragua, in Pakistan, and in the face of a probable threat to the sovereignty of Yugoslavia. I wish to say to you that my Government inherited a very delicate international situation—the product of another policy, of other circumstances which have led us all to commit errors in the past. The great advantage of American democracy is that it has always been able to recognize or condemn its mistakes. We agreed to the Congressional Commission of Inquiry to clarify the truth of serious acts of American intervention such as in the case of Chile, and that Commission of Inquiry made very important decisions condemning that intervention and taking very important measures against those responsible for those acts. President Bani-Sadr has been informed by us that we are prepared to establish this Commission of Inquiry in the United States within the framework of a program which would allow the settlement of this crisis between our two nations. 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 227. Message From the U.S. Government to Iranian President Bani-Sadr1 Washington, March 29, 1980 1. We would appreciate it if Ambassador Lang could see Bani-Sadr to make the following points: Begin text. —We have noted Bani-Sadr’s reaction to our message of March 25 [24]2 which provided him with our assessment of the urgency and seriousness of the situation and the need to take effective steps to transfer the hostages to government control by Monday, March 31. The time remaining is very short. —We welcome Bani-Sadr’s renewed assurance through Kaiser that the hostages will be transfered to government control.3 It is important that this happen without delay. In our analysis, political conditions in Iran and the United States will make more difficult—not easier—transfer at a later date. —In a separate message, we summarized the changed reaction of U.S. political leaders and the public to the crisis with Iran.4 This negative attitude can be expected to become more intense in the weeks ahead if there are no positive developments —With reference to Bani-Sadr’s remark to Kaiser, we believe that the United States has, in fact, demonstrated good will towards Iran and Bani-Sadr. The establishment of the UN Commission is the most significant of such signs. In addition, during the past two months we have refrained from harsh statements against Iran and have tried to take into account Bani-Sadr’s position. We tried unsuccessfully to have the Shah remain in Panama. On March 27, Secretary Vance agreed publicly to the preparation and publication of a historical white paper on the relations between Iran and the United States.5 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission ger had organized this move (re the US declaration that it had tried to prevent the departure of the Shah.)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission new location with a group of Mullahs to celebrate Easter services with their former hostages. The government had agreed. This implied the students had accepted the idea of transfer. Lang also reported they hoped ICRC could visit the hostages very soon. Villalon said that the students presently are willing to show only 49 of them. Metrinko who had been “very courageous and a real hero” would not be shown by the students. (The Swiss DCM here could not explain the apparent contradiction between transfer of all the hostages and refusal of the students to let the ICRC visit Metrinko. We should get a text of Lang’s cable later in the day.) 230. Paper Prepared by the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Tehran, March 31, 1980 Meeting with Bani-Sadr 1. In view of the fact that my meeting took place with almost a two hour delay, I will convey the general climate in my next cable.2 I want you to know that Bani-Sadr appeared to me to be at the end of his rope, he could hardly get his words out, was confused and imprecise. This forced me to ask him to repeat his words several times in a manner which was almost unpleasant. 2. Because of the capital importance of his message I took his words down as he was saying them. 3. Bani-Sadr, who had just left a meeting of the Revolutionary Council, told me the following: The Council decided that we can ask for a change in the situation of the hostages in order to give the Americans more confidence than is really needed provided that they (the US) waits for Parliament to take the decision to release the hostages, which will take a while. Bani- Sadr tells me the Imam agrees, the students agree, the students have just left my office. 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission the Iran Government. I pursued this same idea three times in different terms and until the end of our meeting. 8. I asked Bani-Sadr when a choice would be made between these proposals, meaning in effect become specific and be implemented and Bani-Sadr said that will happen tomorrow. 9. I asked Bani-Sadr what was the immediate followup on his part and he replied that while awaiting the reaction of the other side he is going to the Imam to get him to choose a solution. If the Imam agrees with the two solutions and tells me to make a choice, well then I therefore will have to analyze myself Bani-Sadr, the psychology of our people in tactical terms and I would choose two stages. The first stage would be the second solution to be followed after a certain interval by the first solution. I told him one more time that this analysis was very good as far as it went but that a capital element was lacking: to know how the other side would take this. 10. Following V’s advice who insisted strongly that he wanted a press statement I asked Bani-Sadr if he was going to make a statement to the press. I admit that V had showed me the advantages of it but what I had just heard caused me to think that a press statement would be counterproductive. I therefore did not object when Bani-Sadr told me that he would not speak to the press now but only as soon as a solution had been chosen. Either the Imam or Bani-Sadr himself would issue a public statement. 11. During the last ten minutes of our conversation which were extremely difficult because Bani-Sadr could barely get a word out—a condition he acknowledged himself—Sandjabi et Molavi came in and sat down at the table. I took advantage of this to repeat firmly and clearly what I believed to be the kind of solution the other side was expecting and I stressed the determination to see the hostages placed henceforth under the direct and sole control of the legitimate government of Iran. 12. Logistically speaking I don’t know how President Carter will reply. I can reach Bani-Sadr at his office until midnight, after that time I have his private number but considering the condition he is in I wonder if a direct communication or a communication through B or V would not be preferable. Lang

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission other statements, but no one sent a message to Khomeini such as that which has been published in Tehran.5 Sec Vance noted that our reports indicate that, after 5½ hours of discussion about the modalities of making the transfer of the hostages to the Government, the Revolutionary Council reaffirmed its decision and that this had been agreed to by the students. Reportedly, Bani- Sadr was given two options: (1) for the Government to take over the Embassy and remove the students; or (2) to take joint custody of the Embassy with the students. We understand that Bani-Sadr has had a further meeting with the students and will make a statement tomorrow. ZB pointed out that the meeting with the students took place earlier today according to Reuters. We also had private reports that Bani-Sadr had rejected the idea of joint custody. Jordan said he was concerned that, according to the Reuters report, the students had no derogatory comments to make after the meeting, which may indicate that they cut a deal with Bani-Sadr. CV said we were trying to confirm these reports through the Swiss. We have an open line with them. ZB said we have a massive credibility problem. For example, Jim Schlesinger called him today and was convinced from the New York Times story that there had been a message from the U.S. along the lines publicized in Tehran. If someone as sympathetic to the Administration as he believes the Iranians, it means that the belief is widespread. With regard to next steps, if we go ahead with our sanctions at this point, we provide Bani-Sadr a perfect excuse to blame us for not taking the necessary steps to transfer the hostages. Cutler asked if we had any indication that they intend to move the hostages out of the Embassy. CV said no. Addressing the President, he said it was his view that to go ahead with the three items today would put us in an impossible position. We can wait until tomorrow. He would recommend against acting today. Sec Brown said he agreed but wondered what we could do to clarify the confusion over the messages. Could we clarify what was in the message which was actually sent to Bani-Sadr? The Pres said he had met last night with the editors of the Washington Post, the Star, the LA Times, the New York Times and the Chicago Tribune6 and had told them flatly what had happened. They agreed to honor 5 See Document 226. The counterfeit letter was also published in full in the United States. (“‘Errors’ in the past: Iran’s Version of Carter Letter,” Chicago Tribune, March 31,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission . . . if these steps are not taken, we will take additional measures which we have not taken thus far . . . the NSC meeting had been held . . . and the President will make an appropriate announcement tomorrow. CV said it would be a mistake to refer to it. They were not able to produce in the past. This could create another credibility problem for us. JP said we need some basis for it. CV suggested saying that the Revolutionary Council had met for 5½ hours, we have information that Bani Sadr will make a statement at noon their time and that the President will make a statement. HB thought we should hold off for today, but if the decision is bad it will hurt us. HJ said we will take a beating tonight if we do not go ahead. We can’t make Bani-Sadr’s statement for him. They say we are giving them no reason to make a statement. JP noted that we had asked them for more assurance. ZB suggested saying that the President met with the NSC to review the situation and that an appropriate statement will be made tomorrow. If we say what we are going to do, we give Bani-Sadr an excuse to back out. LC said if we make a statement we should start with the gist of what we told Bani-Sadr, that there has been a meeting of the Revolutionary Council, we have no report, that we will wait until we hear the speech tomorrow. We cannot make a speech without referring to the confusion over the messages. The Pres said that would be demeaning. We could indicate that reports from Iran say . . . ZB said anything could happen today. The Pres could go on the tube tomorrow. The Pres said we need to be able to tide over until tomorrow. HJ suggested saying that we have reports from Iran that the Revolutionary Council has met and made decisions concerning the transfer of the hostages. We are also informed that Bani-Sadr will make a speech tomorrow, so the President will make an appropriate statement to the U.S. people tomorrow. ZB wondered why we should say that. It will be disappointing if the results are not good. Why do we want to put out the story? HJ said we would take a beating overnight. DA suggested saying the NSC met to review reports . . . HJ said if we do not announce our actions, we need to give the reason. The reason is that we have reports that the hostage question will be addressed by the Revolutionary Council tomorrow. HB wondered about the so-called message to Khomeini?

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission LC said there were infinite possibilities of possible arrangements for custody of the hostages. GC said that merely having some students in the Embassy was not so bad. It was their control which was important. The Pres said Vance should talk to Waldheim.10 ST said we should be prepared if the Revolutionary Council gets into the Embassy they may not find 50 hostages. British Ambassador Graham was just back and talked to us in London. He had been in touch with Entezam in prison who had said that the militants control a section of the prison and there may be Americans in that section. The Pres said it was the impression when the UN Commission was there that some hostages had been moved back. HJ said we should maintain flexibility. If the Iranians renege, we should break diplomatic relations. ZB said it is important that we reject joint control. The Pres agreed. If the government was in control, we cannot specify exactly what arrangement will be adopted. LC asked if the Pres wanted a 7 a.m. meeting. The Pres said that Jody Powell and two or three others should meet with him at 5 a.m. HJ said that if the news was bad, we could sleep late. JP asked in the event of bad news, what would we implement regarding the Iranian diplomats. WC said we plan to call in the Chargé and give him a diplomatic note ordering [that] the 15 diplomats here and 5 others from each of the Consulates were being declared PNG and must leave. State will work with Justice. We would plan loose surveillance of the diplomats between now and April 4. There were 35 diplomats in all. Under the diplomatic note we would be prepared to have 4 in Washington and 1 in each of the Consulates remain for an additional 5 days. We would identify those who could remain. Justice has asked that they be restricted to the Embassy and their homes and a 2-mile radius of the corridor between them. This would be civilized but firm. The diplomats could not claim to be students or have other status which would permit them to remain. The only way they could stay would be to request asylum. 10 After this sentence, Carter wrote: “If the transfer is made, the Commission could return to Tehran.”

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission WC said he could not explain it. LC said that Congressional leaders should be told that when we get to the next steps, we will need Congressional consultations about imposition of IEEPA. The Pres wondered if he should mention the question of stopping the $4 million to the Olympics. LC said that the chances of stopping it by legislation were slim. He had talked to Stevens and Byrd. However, it would depend on Byrd. It would probably be better to prepare a letter to the Olympic Committee and others signed by 88 senators and House members. The Pres said we want to stop things, not people, from going to the Olympics. Rosalynn had asked if we could stop TV broadcasts of the Olympics. We can stop NBC. LC said that use of the Export Administration Act was alright to stop NBC if it is not challenged in court. However, we cannot stop news or broadcast of events as news items. Most of the sports federations will go against us. We will work hard over the next few weeks to get a favorable outcome on the Olympics. DA noted that if we are quiet, others will go against our position. The Pres noted that NBC is giving us hell on this issue. WC said the President should tell Congressional leaders what to say to the press after the meeting. The Pres said the thrust should be that no one in the government sent a message to Khomeini or any apology. HJ added that they should note that things were at a delicate stage and that the Pres is wise to act tomorrow rather than today. 232. Paper Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency Washington, March 31, 1980 [Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission the Iranians have responded to the message sent to them on March 24,4 consequently our measures are suspended. We could ignore the conditions they set. The Pres said it would be better to say that the President of Iran has said that the hostages will be transferred, therefore, we are delaying our actions until a certain time . . . Mr. Powell said we could say the Iranians say they are ready to transfer the hostages. If they should release them by a certain time . . . Jordan said we should be careful. It is clear that Bani-Sadr and others are under the gun and have little room for maneuver. We should not put them in a corner. The Pres said we should acknowledge their decision. ZB said we should indicate that it was the result of your (the President’s) initiative. Jordan said he thought we should not mention our message. Saunders came in after being on the phone. He restated Amb. Lang’s understanding of the Khomeini statement and Bani-Sadr’s speech. The Pres said we should restate that Iran has announced that the hostages will be released after the Majlis meets. Our statement could say that Iranian officials have stated that the hostages will be released when the Majlis convenes. Mr. Christopher read a possible draft statement acknowledging the announcement of Bani-Sadr as a positive step, and acknowledging the Iranian Government statement that the hostage issue would be resolved when the Majlis convenes. There was also a statement at the end expressing unity with the families of the hostages.5 ZB said he was uneasy about making too positive a reading of the Iranian position. The President should take credit for the initiative. We should not read too much into their statement. Mention of the decision to be taken by the Majlis prompts a response from them saying that only the Majlis can decide the release of the hostages. We legitimize that position by mentioning it. The Pres said we are dealing with a crazy group. Bani-Sadr and others are holding on by their fingernails. If we leave out any mention of the Majlis, they could come back to us and demand acknowledgement of their position. He felt it was necessary to mention it in our statement. Jordan said the decision about the Majlis was already in the public domain. 4 See Document 220. 5 The draft was not found. See Document 234.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Pres said we should give this the maximum positive twist. It gives Bani-Sadr what he asked for via the Swiss. He asked everyone in the room to make no statements. All statements should come through Jody Powell and Hodding Carter. There will be rapidly changing circumstances. We can expect Khomeini, Beheshti and others to say crazy things in the next few days. CV said he would contact Senator Byrd and other key congressional leaders. ZB asked how we respond to the question if we have accepted Iran’s conditions. JP said we would not address it. The Pres said we should turn it around, i.e., that they accepted our conditions. ZB suggested that on background we note that it was the President’s message which set this off. The Pres said we should ask Congressional leaders to exercise restraint over the next 24 hours. They can say it is a positive development. ZB asked whether Kennedy and Reagan should be contacted to ask them for restraint. The Pres said Kennedy was avoiding the issue. Reagan, however, is giving us hell. Last night he (the Pres) had called the three TV anchors (Cronkite, Reynolds, etc.) and had told them on background that we never apologized to Iran and that we never condoned the taking of hostages by the militants.8 He thought the news coverage last night reflected that. He wondered if he should call them again this morning. We could turn around the idea of conditions, to say that it was not we who had accepted conditions. He asked Saunders to thank Swiss Amb. Lang for his efforts. 8 Carter spoke to Walter Cronkite, John Chancellor, and Frank Reynolds in separate

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 235. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, April 2, 1980 SUBJECT Next Steps on Iran There are two categories of additional steps which we need to consider: (1) interim steps which can keep the pressure up over the next 48 hours while we wait for transfer of the hostages; and (2) sanctions which can be used in addition to those we already have in our pocket. Interim Pressure 1. Ask Allies to make a new démarche to Bani-Sadr stressing the importance of prompt action. 2. Private message through Swiss or other channels telling them we will be unable to hold off beyond Saturday morning.2 3. Message to selected Third World capitals (especially Pakistan, Syria, Turkey, Algeria) informing them that we will have to proceed soon with the sanctions unless there is tangible movement in Tehran. 4. Preliminary consultations at the UN about possible new resolution condemning Iran, revival of sanctions in the Security Council, or some other move which they will hear about—even if we do not go ahead. 5. Sharply increase the VOA broadcast time in Farsi—even if only for a day or two. Fill the time with rebroadcasts of Christopher’s statement on Afghanistan, indications of growing restiveness in the U.S., read editorials which call for more action, do updates on the U.S. military presence in the Arabian Sea, interviews with U.S. military figures about the U.S. presence. 6. Close an area of the Arabian Sea for a naval live firing exercise. 7. On the clandestine broadcasts, drop some rumors about U.S. intentions. [3½ lines not declassified] 8. Citing the TASS attack on the U.S., plant a story that the Soviets have sent a secret message to Khomeini telling him to resist the U.S. pressure and offering him their full support if he does. If the story is 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 14. Secret. 2 April 5.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission their presence. We would have to take some unilateral steps which would add conviction to their démarches. A Negotiating Strategy We cannot maintain our present posture of watchful waiting for more than a few days without losing credibility entirely. We must also not lose sight of the fact that the transfer of the hostages—even if successful—is not the end of the game. The final negotiation for release is still ahead of us and will be even tougher. We need to have cards in our hand for the next round which will give us some negotiating leverage—things we can give up or things which we can renounce doing—which will keep the negotiations from being focused entirely on U.S. concessions on matters of basic principle. Even if we decide not to go ahead with tangible punitive acts, we need to create an environment of uncertainty and potential threat which will keep the Iranians focused on the immediacy of the problem and, if possible, for them to set deadlines for themselves. This is the necessary counterpart to the carrot we have been brandishing. We must have the private channels of communication, but we should also be doing things which raise doubt in their minds about our real intentions. Pure carrot is going to be ineffective without some stick in the background. There are a number of things we can do which create uncertainty and even fear in the minds of Iranians but which we can blandly explain away as not our doing or as unrelated to Iran. We have been playing the game totally in the open. We should reach down a little into our bag of tricks. I recommend a brainstorming session with the Agency, DOD, State and some selected members of the NSC Staff which would come up with a menu of largely deniable actions which could be orchestrated over a period of time to build pressure and tension. We were doing this for a while, but the effort ceased as the UN Commission took over. It is time to start some new systematic thinking about the end game.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission fact that the situation is very fluid and no comments are desirable at this time. (S) 2. Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats. The Attorney General reviewed for the SCC the problems associated with expelling Iranian diplomats. The decision to grant them five days to depart, to impose close and visible surveillance, and to avoid disruptive incidents were inconsistent. A considerable number of non-diplomats are present in some of the facilities (perhaps more than 60 in the Washington Embassy, for example) and arms have been stockpiled. By allowing five days, we increase the chances that these individuals will organize incidents which could have an impact on civil order here and possibly on the hostages in Tehran. The need for close surveillance over a five-day period increases the diplomats [refusal?] to leave or a refusal of the airlines to accept them. (S) The Attorney General recommended that we assume responsibility for removing the diplomats from the facilities and transporting them to the departure point. There would be an initial demonstration of U.S. presence, including individual notification of the requirement to depart, then less visible surveillance in the interim, followed by official escort to the departure point. He recommended reducing the period of delay to the minimum and no more than 24–48 hours. If there is substantial resistance, we would attempt to defuse it by negotiating methods rather than the use of force. (S) Judge Webster seconded this recommendation. He noted that the FBI had located all but two of the residences of the diplomats involved. There is no evidence to date of any plan by the diplomats to run or attempt to escape. There are thousands of Iranian students in all of the cities where facilities are located, and demonstrations are a significant possibility. Recent reports indicate one case of an individual entering the Embassy with an AK–47 submachinegun. Another report indicates armed guards on the roof. There are Hanafi Muslims on the grounds of the Embassy with hand guns. There is one diplomat in Chicago who has been linked to the militants, and we would keep particularly close surveillance on him. However, we want to avoid a “Keystone Kops” situation where police cars converge on the Embassy and Consulates from all directions as the diplomats come to work in the morning. Three teams of two men each would be assigned to each individual, and this would be increased as the moment of departure arrives. Agents in each of the locations have been notified to make preparations, but detailed instructions have not yet been sent to avoid leaks. (S) Mr. Aaron strongly supported the idea of reducing the departure time for the bulk of the diplomats to 24 hours from notification. This would cause personal hardship in some cases, but their personal effects could be handled by those who remained behind. The Department of

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Mr. Aaron said the airlines are supposed to report departures to INS, but the Attorney General said they often fail to do so. The SCC agreed that the Attorney General should crack down on the airlines to insure that they fulfill their reporting obligations. With that data, we can determine what further steps might be effective. Revoke all Iranian visas and Revalidate only for those who have no residence or business connection with Iran. Mr. Newsom noted that we still may be receiving visas issued by the militants using the visa plates at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Instructions had already been prepared to implement this order if the decision is taken, with special instructions to give preference to minority groups. Mr. Sick noted that this would impact heavily on many Iranians who are friends of the United States and who have legitimate business and personal interests here and in Iran. Mr. Aaron said that was a cost that would have to be accepted so long as the hostages are being held. The SCC agreed that this should be placed on the list of steps we would consider taking in the event we invoke sanctions.7 Explore legislation to prosecute individuals supporting the militants. The Attorney General said that there are very few actions Iranians in this country might take which would justify prosecution. If we want to get rid of the students, there are better ways to do it than restricting their freedom of speech. The SCC agreed that this should be rejected. (C) Prohibit Shipment of Food and Medicine. Treasury noted that the present level of shipments of food is very small. Henry Owen said he would look into the question and report back to the SCC.8 It was the general feeling of the SCC that food should be included in the sanctions, since we had imposed the grain embargo on the USSR. Medicine should continue to be excluded. (C) Prohibit all Transfers of Funds from Iran to Iranians in this Country. It was noted that a cutoff of funds for the Iranian students here would force them either to leave the country or to go on welfare. Mr. Aaron noted that this would be an option if and when we should decide to break diplomatic relations. We had decided not to take that step for the time being. 7 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin: “for NSC.” 8 In an April 4 memorandum, Tim Deal of the National Security Council Staff wrote to Aaron and Owen that a U.S. food embargo would work only in the long run if other grain exporting countries imposed a similar food embargo. Deal concluded that “the only effective way to use food to put pressure on Iran now would be a multilateral embargo combined with interdiction at sea to prevent grain ships from entering Iranian ports. The political costs of this option would obviously be extremely high.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 237. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, April 3, 1980 Afternoon Report from Iran I. Cottam-Ghotbzadeh Conversation: (1530) Cottam found Ghotbzadeh very depressed and reluctant to go into details on the telephone about the Revolutionary Council meeting. He said he was aware it was a horrible setback but he had not yet given up hope. He would go tomorrow morning to see the Imam to get a reversal of the ruling of the Council so that the transfer could go on as planned. Ghotbzadeh said that at the critical moment several members of the Council backed away from their prior commitment. When Cottam pressed him as to who or why, all Ghotbzadeh could say was politics. Cottam had the impression that if Ghotbzadeh could not succeed in persuading the Imam to change his position, he would resign. II. Bourguet-Precht Conversation: (1600) Bourguet had had a long conversation with Villalon who told him the Council met to consider the various assurances the U.S. had provided as well as a memo Villalon had written. All of the documentation was considered satisfactory and sufficient by the Council and everyone was in agreement for the transfer to take place on Saturday.2 The Council designated Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh to go to the Imam for his final blessing. For reasons that are unclear Beheshti raised objections and Bani-Sadr hesitated to show firmness. Bourguet said that he, Villalon and Ghotbzadeh felt that it was necessary for the U.S. to send a strong message to Bani-Sadr with a copy to Ghotbzadeh advising them, in a non-threatening way, that the U.S. would take firm measures if the transfer was not accomplished by a specific day. Bourguet suggested that we explain our efforts to understand the difficult political situation in Iran and to assist Bani- Sadr in dealing with that situation. He further suggested that we might want to list the specific measures we had in mind. Only by bringing home to Bani-Sadr our determination to move with concrete measures would we convince Bani-Sadr that we are not a “paper tiger” and that we meant what we said. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 7. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Precht. 2 April 5.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission “We are sure7 you understand the urgency of resolving this crisis before it deepens further.” Ambassador Lang is requested to convey with utmost urgency the response of Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr to this message. 7 Carter changed the word “believe” to the words “are sure.” 239. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, April 4, 1980 SUBJECT Iran Update—April 4, 1980 Today’s Objective —To determine the chances for an Iranian decision to transfer the hostages this weekend. —To begin to prepare a second package of measures we might take against Iran if the transfer does not occur.2 Status of Initiatives —The attached cable from Lang3 responds as best he is able to the questions we put to him on Wednesday. It also conveys the flavor of the situation prior to the Revolutionary Council’s about-face late yesterday. 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 240. Draft Message From the U.S. Government to the Iranian Government1 Washington, April 4, 1980 I telephoned the gist of your early-morning report2 personally to Secretary Vance and he asked me to send Ambassador Brunner and you his deep personal thanks for your most timely responses and your analysis. Then, I took the full text to Assistant Secretary Saunders. Following conversations in the State Department, I want to pass on to you my reading of the situation in Washington. The Americans remain prepared to cooperate fully in a series of reciprocal steps including the transfer of the hostages to the full custody and protection of the government and their early release. The Americans do not wish to humiliate Iran and want very much for the crisis to end in a way so that gradually they can begin to build with Iran a new relationship of mutual respect and equality. They realize that the alternative could be very harsh for Iran and could give the USSR greater opportunities in Iran, but U.S. larger interests could require the pursuit of such a course if Iran remains intransigent. The Americans recognize that members of the Revolutionary Council in Tehran are making persistent efforts to achieve the transfer of the hostages to government custody, but the Americans are reaching a point where they doubt whether the authorities in Tehran have the ability to do what they say they will do. Because of the pressures mounting in the United States as a result of repeated inability in Tehran to act as promised, the U.S. Government will have little choice but to take decisive steps in the very near future and to press other governments to follow these steps. At the same time, the steps which they deferred taking on April 1 could put them on the road to even graver measures. If the crisis continues to drag on, the U.S. will be obliged to take sterner measures which will have the inevitable effect of causing hardship to many 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 7. Secret. Sent via the Swiss ostensibly as a message from the Swiss Ambassador in Washington, Raymond Probst, to Lang. In an April 4 covering memorandum to Carter, Aaron wrote: “Attached is the draft message to the Iranians which Cy has prepared. It incorporates all my comments.” On another copy of this draft, an unknown hand wrote: “cleared by pres 1900.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained 4/80]) Villalon told Precht the United States should send a firm message laying out the U.S. position and the gravity of the situation to eliminate any doubt of U.S. willingness to go forward. If the message were oral, he suggested sending it through Lang. (Memorandum of conversation, April 4; ibid.)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 2. The Census of Claims against Iran will be accompanied by legislation to permit the families of the hostages to begin legal action against Iran and its assets in the U.S. 3. An economic embargo which could be total, if you decide to add food and medicine. 4. A cut-off in all visas for Iranians except humanitarian cases and exiles/refugees. In addition, we are preparing for a new approach to our allies to urge further actions on their part—including the withdrawal of their Ambassadors shortly after our actions go into effect. We also are exploring some military “gestures” (surveillance, jamming, overflights) which would underscore the seriousness of the moment. The problem is that some of them may heighten Iranian military readiness and thus conflict with other options on which you have been briefed. JCS and CIA will do a quiet analysis before Monday.3 Finally, it is extremely important that the agencies get 24 hours’ advance notice so that everything will proceed smoothly and we remain in full control. The following sets forth the specifics on the diplomats’ explusion and the decision needed on including food and medicine in the sanctions. Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats —From the time of notice of explusion, the diplomats would be allowed until the departure of the last plane out of the country the following evening to leave the United States. —All Iranian diplomats and all official Iranian representatives of purchasing missions here would be included in the order. Only one diplomat now would be allowed to remain in Washington for an additional five days to handle turnover to a Protecting Power. Military officials will be expelled, but military students and their liaison officers would be permitted to remain. —Those diplomats wishing to apply for residence or asylum would be permitted to do so from Europe or other locations after expulsion. 3 April 7. According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Carlucci, discussion of military options took place after the April 4 SCC meeting devolved into a smaller group. Carlucci noted that while everyone agreed that a heightened Iranian state of readiness could complicate other options, they felt that such alertness would work to U.S. advantage “since when the Iranians adjust to heightened U.S. activity whatever we do would be less noticed.” Carlucci added: “I am somewhat skeptical of this.” (April 4; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 242. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1 Tehran, April 5, 1980 2. The last cards are being played. B back from Paris just visited me (11:30) before going to see GH. B shared with me the current strategy. 2.1 A “family” meeting is to take place at the Imam’s with BS, a delegation from the Revolutionary Council, and students. The results should be known soon. B has a very interesting theory: the Imam, in his hatred for the Americans, wants to humiliate them ad nauseam. This is not the case with BS. Like a Persian rug merchant, the Imam believes he can pressure the US ad infinitum the more so since he interprets American moderation as weakness. Unlike BS he does not realize the damage caused by the sanctions. Paradoxically the Imam does not seem to oppose the transfer of power, but he wants BS and the leadership to do it by themselves and prove their maturity and their authority by showing that they are directing the country effectively. The Imam would be delighted if BS shows himself to be a real President. (Here there is a paradox because he takes umbrage if (BS) becomes too popular or influential.) What is BS doing? Good will, certainly, but no courage. BS is seized by “the great fear” that if he acts the Imam by a word or a speech of which he is a master will not guarantee or not guarantee entirely the action (transfer) or the release, and in so doing ignite public opinion and cause him to lose the Presidency which he values above all. He therefore fears a stab in the back. 2.2 So what is to be done if the results of the consultation with the Imam is negative or inconclusive. B and V and GH have the following cards in reserve. 2.3 Mgr. Capucci has just arrived with B. He is, perhaps, the best person in all the world, given the context, and has perhaps the greatest capacity to persuade because he is “not involved”. Capucci is religious, Palestinian favorably viewed by the students,2 well viewed by the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 243. Memorandum of Conversation1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 3. What measures of a limited military nature (if any) should we take in conjunction with the announcement, and what preparations should we take now for more stringent military activities which may become necessary later? (S) Proceed Now With Sanctions Barring some last-minute change in Tehran, it now appears that Bani-Sadr and his associates have been unable to achieve the kind of support within the Revolutionary Council and with Khomeini which would permit a prompt transfer of the hostages from the custody of the militants. We have postponed imposition of sanctions for a full week to give them an opportunity to make the necessary decision. All of your advisors are agreed that we have delayed as long as we reasonably can and that we must proceed with sanctions in order to sustain our credibility and in order to convince Tehran that their inability to act is costly. This view is shared by Bruce Laingen and by the French lawyers as well. (S) The package of sanctions is ready to be announced. The timing of an announcement should take into account the need for the Department of State to notify the Iranian Embassy of the expulsion of their diplomats and for the Department of Justice to have its personnel in place to implement the order. You will wish to ask Cy and Ben Civiletti for their comments on timing. (S) Texts of Communications The following texts are attached and will be distributed to the participants at the NSC meeting: Tab A—The draft text of the formal announcement which you will make. (U) Tab B—The draft text of a message to the allies, in the form of an Aide Mémoire. (U) Tab C—The text of an Executive Order directing revalidation of all outstanding Iranian visas. There is no difference of views on this issue, and it need not be raised at the meeting. The Executive Order amends the Order which you signed on November 26, 1979, (but which was never implemented) extending its scope to include all categories of visas.2 (S) A. Draft Announcement.3 There are three points of controversy in the text:

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission B. Draft Message to Allies. Because of the technical nature of the message, it is more appropriate to send it as an Aide Mémoire rather than a Presidential message. The only item of controversy is the possible additional phrase in paragraph 14 indicating that we intend to go beyond the UN sanctions by embargoing food and medicine. (S) Additional Measures of a Military Nature Before turning to this subject, you may wish to reduce participation to the statutory membership of the NSC. (C) There are a number of limited military measures which could be taken simultaneously with the imposition of economic and diplomatic sanctions which would enhance the sense of uncertainty and risk in Tehran (and with the allies) without committing us to any specific additional actions. An illustrative list of such actions is at Tab D, with a paper prepared by JCS and CIA analyzing the possible effects of such measures on Iranian military alert and possible reaction.8 With the exception of overflights, none of these measures would intrude on Iranian air or sea space. None is intended to do more than build credibility that we may be prepared to follow through with more stringent military measures, and thereby add urgency to the decisionmaking process by Iran and our allies. (S) As we undertake a new program of pressure against Iran, we necessarily edge closer to the point where mining of Iranian harbors may be essential to demonstrate to Iran that continued holding of the hostages will severely damage Iran’s economy. You may wish to review the status of contingency planning at this point and consider the possible circumstances and timing for such a step. (S) Finally, you may wish to reconsider with the NSC the desirability of proceeding with a rescue operation. In view of the failure of diplomatic efforts to budge Khomeini, and the bleak prospect of any improvement in the internal power struggles inside Iran, this may be the only realistic means of freeing the hostages in the next six months. (S) 8 An undated list, “Possible Limited Military Measures,” at Tab D mentions increased surveillance, spot jamming, aircraft penetration of the Persian Gulf, naval demonstrations, sonic booms, and overflights.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission obligation to some of our people there in Iran and we should let them know that they should come out. The President had read the list of options discussed previously by the SCC and was aware of the areas of agreement.3 His own preference was to bring the thing to a head, to ask others to join with us, and if they will not to move to take forceful action later on. The Secretary of State noted that a draft announcement4 had been circulated to all participants in the meeting, and he suggested that it be made later today, possibly about 3:00 p.m., which would provide sufficient time to notify those who need to be notified, including those key congressional leaders who should be informed in advance. He noted that there had been some possible additional steps discussed by the SCC which should be reviewed in addition to those covered in the draft announcement. The President said we are no longer involved in a negotiation with the terrorists. The obstacle now is the Government, with Khomeini as the ultimate authority of the Iranian Government. Admiral Turner said he did not think it was that clear. Although that was a good line to take publicly—and it could be defended—it was not entirely clear that the militants would in fact have let the hostages go if ordered to do so by the Revolutionary Council. The President said he included Khomeini in the Government. In that sense, it was not a radical departure, but the militants had for the first time stated that they would turn the hostages over. We should get it out of our minds that we are dealing directly with the terrorists. We need to expell the Iranian diplomats from this country as quickly as physically possible. Secretary Vance said he recommended the announcement today, with the diplomats to depart by tomorrow night. Dr. Brzezinski asked if we could enforce it. Attorney General Civiletti said yes. The only difficulty would be if there was armed resistance. Dr. Brzezinski said it was his view that we should confront any armed resistance with overwhelming force. It should be crushed quickly. The Attorney General said he would argue against that approach. If there is armed resistance from the Embassy or Consulates, we should take the kind of measures which the FBI would normally take in such a situation and cut off the food, water and electricity and force them 3 See Document 236. 4 See Document 244.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Attorney General said that a situation deemed beyond the control of local forces could justify a declaration of national emergency and the sending of U.S. troops. The President asked if the Attorney General anticipated problems in the event of an announcement this afternoon. The Attorney General said that he thought 3:00 p.m. was about right to move. We should begin during normal business hours. Afterwards we would seal the Embassy. We would let people out, but let no one in, and we would hope the numbers inside would be reduced by attrition. The Secretary of State wondered what would be the interaction between this action and the Iranian students who planned to march against the Shah. Where is this group likely to be between 2 and 4 o’clock? The Attorney General said that they had a permit to march for the

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission the law. After two or three days we could get them out and lock them up and hold them until our own people were released. Rushing in would just get people killed, and it could make us look even more stupid. Mr. Cutler said that killing someone would put the hostages in greater danger. Dr. Brzezinski said that tear gas did not kill people. He could imagine being forced to close off Massachusetts Avenue for several days during an armed siege. They could have stockpiled food and drink. It could take many days to get them out. We would look ridiculous if we could not enforce the law right in our own capital. We should use tear gas in the evening, preferably on the first day rather than the second. Mr. Powell said we should make a judgment expeditiously when the situation arises. The President said we would not foreclose the option that the situation might develop peacefully. If we take violent steps at the start we allow them no opportunity to leave on their own. However, if there is a barricade situation, we would not reject the use of forceful actions. If they hurt our hostages, they will be hurt severely. If we hurt them at this point, we open a new likelihood that our hostages will be injured. We should do it peacefully but firmly. Secretary Vance said that the diplomats are required to depart from Dulles. The President asked if we would escort them to the plane. The Attorney General said yes. We are also prepared to put an escort on board if necessary. We also have contingency military aircraft available. The Vice President said taking action in the evening makes sense. During the day there are people in and out. There is a chance they could grab innocents and hold them. If we moved at night, the innocents would be out of the building. Mr. Cutler said that would also avoid any possible interaction with the proposed demonstrations. Dr. Brzezinski said it was inevitable that the demonstrators would congregate in front of the Embassy. The President said we should prevent any assembly or demonstrations around the Embassy and Consulates. He wondered if the announcement should be postponed until 8 o’clock this evening. Mr. Powell said there would be lots of speculation throughout the day. The Vice President said that would also avoid the heavy evening traffic and the danger of a shooting incident.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Admiral Turner said that no embargo of food would likely have a substantial impact. Cutting off all Iranian commerce would, but otherwise they will be able to find suppliers. The President said the primary thing is not a mutual interest by five or seven nations, but rather to let Khomeini know he faces a problem not just with us but with others as well. Because of our actions, he is not convinced. In retrospect, he did not believe we had been firm enough. We had been too equivocal. He then turned to the question of a census of claims. Mr. Cutler said we should make it clear that we intend to satisfy claims especially of the hostages and their families out of the frozen assets and that legislation is being introduced to that end. The Attorney General said that suits and claims are pending now and could be satisfied by attachment except that the sovereign rights immunity prevents attachment. This could be removed by statute or it could be combined with extra rights and a claims proceeding which would recognize the right of claims for reparations. The Vice President said that the freezing of $8 billion in Iranian assets was the one thing we have done which really hurt them. We will need to be in a position to bargain with that money for the final release of the hostages. Once it has been attached, we lose control. Mr. Cutler said if we take ownership of the assets and establish a claims process, we are always in a position to settle on the remainder of the assets. But in the meantime we can pursue more vigorous steps. The President asked how much money was involved.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Attorney General said there was only a political problem. Should we, for example, put in reparations of $1,000 per day for each hostage held? Mr. Cutler said he could see no problem. There was plenty of money to cover any foreseeable claims. If there were insufficient funds, that would be different. The President said that since we must prepare legislation, we should go ahead. He thought that if we were perceived as acting forcefully for a change, that could keep Congress under control. Mr. Jordan said he would hate to see us have to change legislation two months from now to negotiate a solution. The President said the problems are going to be there anyway. We may face a struggle with Congress. He would prefer to let the courts handle this expeditiously. He was not a lawyer, but in the few weeks after the hostages are released—or killed—we should have a quick response. Mr. Aaron noted that the President had earlier indicated a desire to raise with the NSC the proposal of stopping all financial transfers between Iran and the U.S. The main effect of this would be to cut off funds to the Iranian students in the country. Many would go on welfare. Others would probably leave. The SCC had decided that if we wished to get rid of the students, we should simply throw them out rather than use the financial weapon. It would be cleaner. This action was very close to a break in diplomatic relations. The President agreed that this was probably not the way to go. He did want to discuss the possibility of a break in relations, however. Mr. Claytor briefed the President on the number of Iranian military students in the country. Secretary Vance asked what excuse we had to keep 500 military students in this country under these circumstances. Dr. Brzezinski said that if they were not sympathetic to the Khomeini regime, they should be allowed to stay. The President said we could offer them asylum if they want to stay. Mr. Claytor said that the U.S. military would prefer to send them home if the diplomats go. A number of midshipmen are in U.S. colleges just like civilian students. They are paid through Iranian banks. The President wondered what proportion of these Iranian students are supported by the Government. Mr. Claytor said only 500 are actually paid by the Government of Iran. The President said that the other thousands are supported by their families. He thought we should permit them (military students) to stay

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Mr. Claytor wondered about the effect on the U.S. priests and others who had been going back and forth to Tehran. Secretary Vance said that in terms of international practice, it would make no difference. However, psychologically it would make them less willing to continue their efforts. Mr. Powell said the psychological effect of a break in relations would be to send a signal that this is the first step. The average citizen would see this as the possible prior step to some kind of military action. The Vice President said that if they break first, we will look weak and reactive. He would like to get ourselves out of the position of being seen as trying to get the Allies always to go along. Mr. Powell said it was important for us to signal that while we want the support of our Allies, we intend to do what we have to do. Maybe this is the most encouraging thing we could say to the Allies. Dr. Brzezinski said it would also tell the Iranians that we have exhausted all steps available to us. He recommended that we say that explicitly and privately to the Iranians. We should also indicate that we will wait 2–3 more weeks, then take more severe action. They may threaten the lives of the hostages. It is necessary for the views of Khomeini, the Revolutionary Council, the President and the students to coalesce. Mr. Christopher said he thought we should go ahead with the break in relations. Otherwise we are left with the problem of trying to explain the metaphysics of why this is different from a break in relations. The President asked for views, then noted that the group was unanimous in their views, “Just like the Revolutionary Council.” He did not support cutting off financial support for the students, but we should cut off all visas. With regard to the “refugees from injustice,” phrase in the announcement, he thought that our interpretation of exceptions should be very narrow. We should not let them into the country. If they are truly escaping from persecution, that is acceptable. Mr. Aaron suggested changing the wording to say that Consular officers will not let them in unless there are compelling reasons. The President added unless there are compelling and proven reasons. The impression is that we have not done a damned thing. Just as the expulsion of 65 diplomats who then “vanished.” The Attorney General said that nearly 1,400 Iranian students have left and we are pretty certain of that although we do not have a signed piece of paper to prove it in each case. The President said that we are making tough statements, then when the evidence dribbles in . . . Dr. Brzezinski suggested “compelling and convincing reasons . . .”

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission tomorrow for something important. This suggests a need to try and see where all the hostages are located. The President said that, on timing, it would be at 3:00 and he would make an announcement. Mr. Cutler said the news from Tehran suggested that the militants cannot account for all 50 hostages. Perhaps we should mention that. The President said he would be queasy about acknowledging that there might be 50. The militants could use that as an excuse to get rid of some of them. Secretary Vance agreed, noting we should be aware of the reaction of the hostages’ families. (At that point, 10:36 a.m., the meeting was reduced to the statutory membership of the NSC.) At 10:37, the NSC reduced itself to its statutory membership. The members at that point were: The President, the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Dr. Brzezinski and David Aaron. The President said that he was really quite disappointed in recent developments. Bani-Sadr is apparently too weak and lacks the courage to act. The Secretary of State agreed with him. The President said that his own assessment was that we are embarked, finally and after great caution, on a procedure which he— he was interrupted at that point by Hamilton Jordan who asked about Congressional notification. Should the Congressional leaders be brought down to the White House? The Secretary of State pointed out that the Congress was not in session and the leaders would not be around. The President concluded that if we get a draft of the statement before noon, we can notify the key Congressional Leaders. The President then continued his earlier thought. We have been adequately reticent. In retrospect, we may have delayed taking action for too long, although, at the time, it seemed the better course of action. Now, we need to consider additional steps. We need to force the Allies to help. If they will not, they must know that we will be taking more forceful action. The President said he thought that what we are going to announce today will not result in the freeing of the hostages. But he still believed that knowledge on the part of the Iranian officials, including such figures as Beheshti, that Iran is suffering and is increasingly isolated is a necessary step in getting the hostages released. He did not believe that we would get the help of Bani-Sadr if the action he must take to free the hostages is unpopular. Bani-Sadr is hanging by his fingernails already. Turning to the military options, the President said that his inclination for the last few months has been the mining option. He did not

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission He said a C–141 could drop the fuel 12 miles south of the area where the Otter explored. With fuel there ahead of time; the helicopters can depart from the carriers with the Delta team on board and, if the mission must be aborted, they can return to the carriers. The Chairman said that our principal uncertainty is still whether the hostages are in the Embassy compound. He thought we may need to take some additional risks in order to get a better picture of that situation. Turning to the schedule, he said the 17th is a possible date for conducting the rescue, but the 24th would be preferable. He would like to ask the NSC to look at the possibility of a decision to cache the fuel before that date. The operation would be conducted as follows: We would take in a C–141, drop four people and a little fuel and a jeep with some radios. They would go into the foothills, surveil the area to find a place to cache the fuel and to land an airplane, if that proved to be the desirable way to supply the fuel. If they run into trouble, they would come out either with an Otter, with a helicopter, or it is possible to literally snatch them from the ground with a moving C–130. However, the area was totally barren and appeared as though no human being had set foot on it for centuries. The next night, three C–130s would come, and more people would be brought into the foothills. They would then continue the execution of the mission on into Tehran, or they would be pulled out and we would stay in a holding pattern. With this scenario, we would still have the 24-hour waiting period around Tehran, but he did not believe that the risk of exposure is great at that point. The President asked what would be visible during the day of waiting. The Chairman answered that there would be no airplanes; there would be six helicopters, outside, up in these barren hills covered by camouflage. There would be 100 people waiting in the warehouse, which is located 12 miles from Tehran. The Director of Central Intelligence said that the principal advantage of this is that there would be no more C–130s flying across Saudi Arabia the first night. General Jones said the seizure and holding of Nain has been eliminated and the overflight of Saudi Arabia has been reduced to only the second day when there would be no tip-off problem. Admiral Turner stressed that under this approach, the troops would come out from the carriers on the helicopters and not on a C–130. The Chairman said that they were about two days away from completing planning on the fuel-caching operation. Once that is completed, he would then like to ask that we consider the possibility of

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission man said he would put that at 80%. He said the place is so relaxed, so without authority, so without leadership, so without organization, that he felt the likelihood of interception was small. Dr. Brzezinski said the political advantage lies with the rescue over a mining option. Mining would drive the Iranians towards the Soviets. Rescue would not, unless it failed in which case retribution and retaliation become necessary. Secretary Vance said that mining also increased the likelihood of the hostages being killed. He was concerned, moreover, about the effect in the Middle East generally. He thought there was a likelihood of a strong reaction on the part of the Middle East countries to a mining operation. Finally, he agreed it would push the Iranians toward the Soviet Union. He felt these were substantially negative considerations to be weighed when deciding on the mining option. The President said the blockade had the same disadvantages. The Secretary of State agreed and thought that a blockade was even more complicated. Dr. Brzezinski said that a rescue was politically more desirable than mining, but considerably riskier. The President said that what sticks in his mind is the bloodshed, the deaths. He said we cannot do it without deaths. The Chairman commented that the principal casualties would be Iranians and not Americans, with the exception of those who may be down in the vaults and being closely guarded in the basements of some of the buildings in the Embassy compound. He thought the operation at the Foreign Ministry would not be too difficult. Dr. Brzezinski said there was no way of avoiding the fatalities, including Americans. Indeed, we have had reports that some of the militants would try to kill the Americans even if Khomeini had ordered them released. Admiral Turner thought the probability of Americans being killed was less than that we might not be able to find them all. He has been examining reports concerning the location of the hostages, but it was his conclusion that, with the recent arrival of the visitors, all the Americans had been moved back into the compound; however, he did not have hard evidence to that effect. But even if they are all there, the Delta force has to go through five buildings and count 50 heads, and they have to do this running around in the dark; therefore, under those circumstances, it is likely they would leave some behind. Admiral Turner went on to say that surprise is the sine qua non of a successful operation. He thought there were elements of possible prior detection in the actions that would be announced this afternoon. He said these actions will increase the alert of the Iranians. The longer we wait: the more tense things become, and the more likely the possibil-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Director of Central Intelligence said that we would be asking Khomeini to back off his current and most recent statement which was quite categoric and firm. The President said that he could always finesse the problem by constituting the Parliament. Admiral Turner pointed out that they have not gotten their elections completed for that purpose yet. The President asked the Secretary of State what options he saw. Secretary Vance replied that he preferred a rescue over mining although he said there would be substantial loss of life. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we move forward on a more flexible program. We could tell Khomeini that by May 15 we would undertake military action. We could tell the Allies that unless they pressure Iran we would be taking more severe action. We could, at the same time, authorize the caching of the fuel and then, by the third or fourth week in April, we could make up our mind which route we wish to go. The President said he thought setting a deadline in our messages to the Iranians is ill-advised. It would put their nation on alert. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that this would not affect the mining option, but the President added it would affect the rescue. In reply, Dr. Brzezinski said we could nonetheless go earlier on the rescue, before the deadline, in fact: we could begin by setting June 1 as the deadline. Dr. Brzezinski then asked what about the daylight problem. The Chairman said that there were two problems. First, the nights were growing shorter, thus reducing the time we have for operations and forcing us to consider a three-day operation. Second, by mid-May, the temperature will have increased to the point that it will be difficult to get the helicopters over the mountains fully loaded with the Delta team. Thus, we may have to consider the use of even more helicopters and more prepositioned fuel. The President asked why the fuel cannot go into the rendezvous zone on the same night that the helicopters go in. The Chairman replied that it is a possibility and, indeed, is one of our options. However, we then have a large number of C–130s and refueling aircraft going over Saudi Arabia in daylight of the first day of the operation. The President asked at what point the helicopters needed to be refueled. The Chairman replied that the helicopters only have the range to get half-way to Tehran. The President asked whether they needed to refuel on the first night. The Chairman replied, “yes”; they would enter Iran on the first night, get refueled and then go on to Tehran. The Chairman went on to explain that they are also exploring the possibility of having the C–130 tankers come out of Diego Garcia, but this required a lot of C–141 tankers as well.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission and all the ground operations are part of the Delta team. They would simply continue on into Tehran as part of the activity there. Dr. Brzezinski thought that trying this operation might be worthwhile so that we could see whether the risks proved to be as great as one thought. The President added that conducting a prepositioning of fuel operation would increase the risk of detection, but if successful, it would increase our confidence in being able to conduct the overall operation. The Chairman explained that a large number of planes over Saudi Arabia in the daytime might provide a tip-off to the Iranians that an operation was under way. Dr. Brzezinski added that the Israelis might well know of it, and they could be penetrated by the Soviets. The Chairman said that, because our target date is the 24th, they would like to come back to the National Security Council in five or six days on a decision as to whether to cache the fuel. Admiral Turner asked how many C–130s were involved. The Chairman explained that there would be three. He said that we would come out of Diego Garcia the first night, and the second night we would fly over Saudi Arabia. The President asked whether it would be better to come out of Diego Garcia than Egypt. The Chairman replied, yes. Dr. Brzezinski asked, that if we were aiming for the 24th, when would the Delta team have to leave the the United States. The Chairman replied, the 18th or 19th. The President asked, how far do we usually put the carriers up into the Gulf? The Chairman said that we come as close as 60 nautical miles from the Straits of Hormuz, but we are normally operating farther away. Mr. Aaron asked whether the British would be notified of our operations out of Diego Garcia. The Chairman replied that we could figure out a way to operate so that the British would not know what we were up to. The President asked if there were any further observations. Admiral Turner said that he thought it was time to intensify our political action operations in Iran. [4 lines not declassified] Admiral Turner felt that, in the long run, [less than 1 line not declassified] neither Khomeini nor Bani-Sadr is going to be viable and will be replaced at some point. [1½ lines not declassified] Admiral Turner also noted that we had been polite during this period of negotiations in the material broadcast [less than 1 line not declassified]. He would now like to be more strident. The President replied that we will not prevent any group from making whatever moves they may make—that we couldn’t do so in any event. The Secretary of State asked whether the groups would then expect money if we gave them such a signal. [1½ lines not declassified] This portion of the meeting concluded at 11:30 a.m.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission economic sanctions would be discussed at an upcoming meeting. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Giscard: Yes, and then either we have a very negative answer from Iran which I think is probable. And then we have to decide what to do. I am just mentioning that I suspect that we will probably have to act on the diplomatic aspect (sic). Carter: Yes. Giscard: If on the other hand there is an indication of delay by Iran, then we can resort to take specific actions. Carter: Allright, I understand. This is good information for me, Valery. I think you understand the difficult position we’re in. Giscard: Yes, I understand very well. Of course we must not only work to release the hostages, but also consider the impact of our actions on Iran. Carter: Absolutely. Giscard: We must consider both. Carter: Yes, I understand that. Giscard: This is for your personal information and the statement will not say that we are proposing this. Carter: I understand. Giscard: But it will certainly be a firm and strong statement. Carter: Valery, let me ask you to do one other thing for me which I think you already understand. We have had so many promises from them—either outright lies or failure to do what they say they will do. The only thing I would like to ask you all to do is not to let them equivocate and delay and delay and delay, as they have with us for the past five months. That’s their character and even if Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh make a flat, absolute promise, they then refer it to the Revolutionary Council. They insist upon a unanimous vote and in the last few days they have had all the Council members except two who approved the transfer of the hostages. Under those circumstances they referred it to Khomeini, who then says it must be a unanimous decision. I know you called me just for information purposes, but I think if you all could try to prevent that sort of deliberate postponement or delay in action, it would really be helpful. Giscard: Yes. We will be very clear and precise about it. It will look like the European countries acting on their own. If the answer is negative, then we will take a decision at once. Carter: That’s good. We want to avoid taking military action. And, I think we have a few days that we can wait, as you know, before we take any stronger action than we have taken. I think the outcome might very well be determined by how forceful you all act together. Well, I am very grateful to you for this information. Giscard: One more point, Jimmy. We will also contact the Iraqis tomorrow. They can have also indirect pressure on Iran.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Graduated Pressure It is now clear that the diplomatic option is closed. The hostages are going to be held at least until the Majlis convenes in June, and the prospects that a new Parliament dominated by the clerics will vote to release them on terms even marginally acceptable to us are very remote. In short, unless something is done to change the nature of the game, we must resign ourselves to the continued imprisonment of the hostages through the summer or even later. (S) Accordingly, a sharp increase in the pressures on Iran is one way of changing the environment. For example, we could undertake a deliberate program of increasingly severe steps every week or two weeks until the hostages are delivered. We might wish to inform the Iranians in advance of the schedule, or we could simply proceed step by step and let them draw their own conclusions. The following steps represent an illustrative program: 1. Sharply increased surveillance of shipping enroute to and from Iranian ports, combined with some overflights. 2. Declaration of a state of belligerency with Iran, coupled with a screening program of Iranian nationals in this country. 3. Technical interruption of power at a key point, e.g. the refinery complex in Abadan or cities such as Tehran or Qom. 4. Mining of harbors, leaving the Kharg Island facility untouched. 5. Closure of Kharg Island and/or occupation of the Tunbs and Abu Musa at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. 6. Selective air strikes on economic targets. (TS) The objective of undertaking such a program would be to free the hostages before the program had to be carried to its logical conclusion of outright hostilities. However, once embarked, we would have to be prepared to persevere or else be perceived as paper tigers. (C) There are several difficulties with this strategy in terms of getting the hostages released. First, the deliberate progression of actions, even if fairly rapid in succession, will encourage the Iranians to seek some counterpressure to force us to stop. The recent threat by the militants to kill the hostages in the event of U.S. military action represents the kind of pressure tactics we can expect to encounter. (C) The second problem is the uncertainty of the political reaction inside Iran. The Ayatollah would attempt to use this program to arouse public opinion and to unite the nation against the common enemy. He might succeed, at least initially, but over time, as it became clear that the Ayatollah was unable to prevent the disruption of the internal economy and as the citizens begin to bear increasingly heavy penalties because of his obstinacy, the mood might begin to shift from defiance of the U.S. to discontent with the irresponsibility of their own leaders. (C) A third, very serious problem is the danger that our actions will inspire the tribal elements and other opposition forces to rise up against

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Cy with the same recommendation. They all believe that the risks of continued incarceration or of military escalation are far greater than a surprise rescue operation. They are convinced that true surprise is possible and that penetration of the Embassy is a realistic prospect. (TS) I find this argument persuasive. There may never be a better moment to undertake such an operation than the next few weeks. The security at the Embassy must have settled into a routine by now, and the Iranians are almost contemptuous in their certainty that rescue is not a feasible option. Even the U.S. press has totally accepted our explanations that such an operation is impossible. The Iranian military is in nearly total disarray and preoccupied with the Iraqi threat. The chance of maintaining true surprise is good, and with true surprise, our chances of a successful operation grow. (TS) We have no risk-free options. Even the risks of inaction are considerable. No other option offers as many potential benefits or gives us as many opportunities to keep the timing and control in our own hands. We could even build in a little protection for any hostages who might not be freed by “arresting” some of the militants and bringing them back under kidnapping and even murder charges. (TS) In my view, a carefully planned and boldly executed rescue operation represents the only realistic prospect that the hostages—any of them—will be freed in the foreseeable future. Our policy of restraint has won us well-deserved understanding throughout the world, but it has run out. This is the painful conclusion we must now face. (TS) I understand that your preference is not to undertake a rescue except as a reaction to the killing of our hostages. But that is really tantamount to dismissing the rescue option altogether. Please consider the following: the lead time on any rescue operation is a minimum of eight days. If a hostage is killed, there will be an immediate outcry for retaliation; there will be mass hysteria; there will also be a heightened state of alert in Tehran and perhaps even additional killings. I very much doubt that we could afford to wait for days to undertake a rescue operation, and could be thus forced to retaliate, which would then further reduce the element of surprise which is so crucial to a successful rescue. (TS) Post-Rescue It is essential that we be ready to react to any post-rescue consequences. These would include threats to the lives of any hostages left behind, or to any prisoners taken in the operation, or to any Americans available in Tehran. In addition, we have to consider the need to react to any large-scale failure that could occur, and which could maximize the foregoing complications. Accordingly, in addition to the rescue operation, we should be prepared to initiate almost immediately large-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 249. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee (Implementation) Meeting1 Washington, April 10, 1980 The meeting opened with a brief discussion of the situation between Iraq and Iran. There continue to be intermittent skirmishes but there is no sign that either side is engaged in a large-scale buildup or has made any commitment to extend the hostilities substantially. (S) The State Department reported that our allies’ reaction to your imposition of sanctions has been cautious so far. The Europeans have come to realize, however, that what we are doing not only affects our relations with Iran or potentially their relations with Iran, but also will be an important factor in relations between the United States and Europe. The EC–9 Foreign Ministers have devoted their current discussion to the Iranian question and we understand that they will be withdrawing their Ambassador from Tehran for consultations. (S) Treasury pointed out that it will be attending a large number of basically economic meetings with countries from all over the world in the next several weeks. They volunteered to take up the question of Iran and the Olympics as subsidiary themes in these meetings. Henry Owen added that he would be glad to do the same. State and Lloyd Cutler will provide talking points. (S) The bulk of the discussion focused on a memo by Ben Civiletti posing issues arising out of your commitment to introduce legislation for claims against the Iranian Government.2 There was general agreement on a variety of issues including timing of actions to be taken, alternate means of settling claims, and the desirability of maintaining maximum executive branch flexibility. There was however significant disagreement among the agencies on whether you should seek authority to vest Iranian resources as part of the claims legislation. (Treasury underlined the impact this could have on the dollar abroad; Civiletti and Cutler saw a claims process without vesting authority as being empty.) In addition there are a number of factors that have to be considered in providing relief for the hostages. (S) There seemed to be general agreement that legislation should be introduced to remove impediments to legal action against Iran resulting from jurisdictional limitation and the provisions of the Sovereign Immunities Act. There was much less agreement, however, on the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 250. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission have to keep it clandestine, even from people here in the White House. In the meantime, we can also use Christopher’s list and we could tell the Iranians that we are prepared to consider Khomeini’s demands in order to provide a cover for the rescue. We should also tell the allies we need more support and indicate that we may have no choice but to blockade. We need to move quickly—by the 24th if ready. (Cy prefers also the rescue option if we have to go the military route.) (12:48 p.m.) So we ought to go ahead with the rescue without delay. David Jones: (Outlines possible military deception designed to simulate the mining option.) Zbigniew Brzezinski: (Argues for a diplomatic initiative and a mining deadline to maximize deception.) The President: We need to plan for post-rescue actions in the event the rescue does not work.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 252. Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 11, 1980 SUBJECT Iran and the Soviets (U) I am concerned about the evidence we continue to get of steady, quiet build-up in the Transcaucasus for a Soviet military move into Iran. While I do not question current intelligence assessments that there is no indication that the Soviets are actually preparing to move, I am fearful that we are in danger of wishfully turning this rational assumption into a conviction that they will not move. I worry about the kind of mind-sets that afflict intelligence estimators and comfort policymakers and which led to conclusions, e.g., that the Soviets were not putting nuclear weaponry into Cuba in 1962 or that the dynasty was secure in I am worried also about the impact of increased pressure by us on Iran or punitive measures if the hostages are harmed. Given the utterly irrational state of mind that dominates elements in Tehran, and the intense hatred of Khomeini for America, a seemingly rational action such as a naval blockade could conceivably provoke an Iranian invitation to the Soviets to come in to protect them. Khomeini could give such intervention his blessing with a doctrine of “the lesser Satan.” The Iranian left, certainly capitalizing on current tensions to improve its position, could abet such a move. (C) [1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified] Do the Soviets want to invade? In the final analysis, I find it impossible to believe that the Soviets could resist temptation to take over most or all of Iran if the opportunity presented itself to them in a form where they could get themselves invited in as a protecting power. For more than 150 years, the Russians have aspired to advance in this area. Afghanistan has whetted their appetite; but Afghanistan will continue to cost with little prospect of return. Iran could be a paying proposition with its vast oil and gas reserves—the first really profitable territorial acquisition for the Soviets. It could help pay for Cuba and Ethiopia and help 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Logged INT Files, Box

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 253. Memorandum of Conversation1

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission including the parliamentary and political leaders, Brandt, Wehner and others, so we were nine or ten people altogether talking about Iran, and all the other subjects I have mentioned; and I am glad to tell you that we were very united in the opinion which we at the end articulated and I would just like to mention them now to you one after the other. I have also the opportunity tonight, within the next quarter of an hour, to go over to Parliament to talk to the Foreign Relations Committee in a private session to tell them what is in the making. First, Iran. As you know from early January, we are still not really convinced that extending economic sanctions will help to liberate the hostages, but we will certainly follow through. We are determined to take that decision next week in our Cabinet. President: Yes, I am not sure either. There is no way to be sure. Schmidt: I think it opens up two dangerous possibilities: one danger is that they fall back on the Soviet Union which they will not like, but they may feel they may be forced to and secondly, if sanctions don’t work, then in a couple of weeks, we have to come to the point where we have to ask for other measures. President: Yes. Schmidt: Anyway, we will participate. Valery will participate. I guess we’ll get a consensus with the EC Foreign Secretaries on Monday or Tuesday next week.6 They are sitting together Monday or Tuesday; we will try to form a so-called European umbrella for the Nine governments to act on a national basis. Possibly, we might also act by a joint decision. The Rome Treaty has some clause, the famous article 113 which may be useful as an end.7 Anyway, I guess you will see in the course of next week some European Cabinets, at least, anyway my Cabinet to publicly decide that we take economic sanctions. They would be declared next Wednesday, but probably becoming effective a fortnight after the election of the Parliament, if within that fortnight the hostages are not freed. This would mean about the date which you mentioned five minutes ago. President: Well, you know, we have indications that it is very doubtful that the Parliament is going to be elected at all. And the date that I mentioned was really either mid-May or two weeks after the

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Secretary Vance: It is a serious mistake to go ahead with the rescue because (1) the Red Cross visit has accounted for all hostages and all

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The President: We are going into our own compound to take our own people out. There is no additional purpose. General Jones: We should let the gun ships hit some Tehran targets the same night if things go bad. Jody Powell: It might be a good idea to do the TV station in in the same night. The President: One thing bothers me. Our nation’s stature should be preserved. The Iranians have not killed anybody, and hence we should not kill innocent Iranians. Secretary Brown: Then we should mine in that case. Zbigniew Brzezinski: The President is right. We should only do these additional things if there is a failure and killing of hostages afterwards. Maybe we could take out the TV/communications tower. (Discussion of various diplomatic initiatives designed to provide a diversion to prevent speculation on a rescue mission.) Jody Powell: We won’t be able to get all of the American press out. Maybe Ham could get his contact in Tehran to throw our people out. Alternatively we could warn the top TV people that our own media people have been targeted for attack and therefore they should leave. (The President and Brown skeptical that the above would work.) Admiral Turner: Major disinformation should have an overall theme. We particularly need to deceive Soviet/Cuban intelligence. We also need a cover story for a possible leak. Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should hint that we are considering mining. (Further discussion about cover for the operation, insofar as Oman is concerned—a cover story emphasizing air drops to Afghanistan approved.) General Jones: The operation will proceed unless the President disapproves next Thursday.4 If weather bad, we will postpone on a day by day basis. 4 April 24.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 1. Embargo all imports from Iran to the United States. This can easily be done under the existing provisions of IEEPA and amounts to approximately $1 million per month. Treasury will prepare the necessary implementing regulations. (C) 2. Prohibit the export of food and medicine to Iran. IEEPA provides authority to prohibit all exports except private donations of food, clothing and medicine. The SCC agreed that private donations would continue to be excepted since this includes packages to the hostages and clear humanitarian gifts. A finding will also be prepared under the Export Administration Act prohibiting exports on the grounds that Iran is assisting international terrorism by its acts. (C) 3. Prohibit the Use of U.S. Passports for Travel to Iran. There is statutory authority for the President to invoke measures short of war in order to induce the release of hostages. Use of this statute to prohibit using passports is subject to challenge under the provisions of the subsequent Passport Act which does not provide such authority for hostage cases. If applied to U.S. journalists, we can anticipate an immediate challenge; but court action will require some time. We can probably defeat such a challenge on grounds that the safety of U.S. citizens is endangered by remaining in Iran; however, we will not cite that as our reason in the initial announcement. (S) 4. Prohibit all Financial Transactions with Iran, Including any Transactions in Connection with Travel to Iran. If drawn tightly and applied immediately, this would prevent a U.S. citizen from buying a ticket to leave Iran. A group composed of representatives of State, Justice, Treasury, Commerce and the Counsel to the President will meet to draw up regulations which are as tight as possible to pressure all U.S. citizens to depart Iran as soon as possible. The group will also examine the potentially serious policy and constitutional problems relating to the application of this order (under IEEPA) to the press. (S) 5. Telecommunications. Matt Nimetz will meet today with representatives of COMSAT to explore the technical implications of interrupting satellite communications with Iran. It was agreed that continued contact with Iran was sufficiently beneficial for intelligence purposes and for maintaining contact with Laingen and intermediaries in Tehran that we should not order an immediate interruption by COMSAT. However, unless there are overriding technical reasons, we should call for an extraordinary meeting of INTELSAT members within 30 days to consider barring Iran from use of the INTELSAT system. The SCC recognized that we may be unable to muster a two-thirds vote in INTELSAT, but considered it desirable to signal our intent to pursue our efforts to isolate Iran internationally. (S) 6. Close Offices of Iran Air, the National Iranian Oil Company, and the Iranian Natural Gas Company in the United States. They would be given

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission —There is a substantial Soviet military threat to Iran, in both the near and the longer term, most likely to be triggered by (a) US military action, or (b) the need of a promising pro-Soviet regime for support. —The judgment in my memo on Soviet expectation of the need to use force and willingness to do so may or may not prove correct; but it is overstated in the light of current evidence. (Three-to-one against me here; I’ll stand pat on my judgment, however.) —We do need to do more faster in building our security posture in and for Southwest Asia. But it will take more than apocalyptic opinions to generate the requisite additional money and political Some key points in the discussion: Bill expressed some skepticism about the extent and novelty of Soviet military upgrades in the Transcaucasus.3 In a day or so, we’ll be getting a complete inventory of what they’ve done since December, and the supporting evidence. The senior DCI staffer on the problem told me today he regards the activity as extensive and novel, but not signifying imminent (days, weeks) operations. He says it looks like they are meeting a new force readiness objective some months in the future. Marshall argued that the Soviets probably regard their military improvements as a prudent response to turmoil in the region, and they need not be linked in Soviet thinking to any specific contingency or schedule. The US forces buildup in the Indian Ocean would be enough to rationalize it. (S) Marshall argued, with Bill’s support, that the Soviets have a preferred strategy for gaining dominance in Iran, in which they have justifiable confidence: A Tudeh-dominated regime, arising out of a post-Khomeini “popular front” and able to consolidate its power without direct Soviet intervention. If this regime were seriously threatened with overthrow from within, the Soviets would intervene to preserve it. But the Soviets see their main military task as deterring US military intervention. I argued that a Tudeh regime would almost inevitably be met with widespread armed resistance requiring Soviet intervention, as in Afghanistan. We were all quite unsure as to how fast the rise of a Tudeh regime could come about. (S) Marshall was of the view, on balance, that the Soviets would probably not intervene militarily to prevent the emergence of an effective Islamic regime, even if it sought to liquidate the Left. He also judged that Soviet public disaffection over the costs of the Afghan war, assuming it is not a fairly quick victory and well over by the time of a decision on Iran, would have at least some inhibiting effect on a Soviet repeat 3 Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, April 16. (Carter Library, National Secu-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission a clearer stand, and lately Soviet commentary has evinced a slight tilt toward Iran. (S) Although they could use the threat of Iraqi military intervention

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 259. Message From the Department of State to the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Washington, April 17, 1980 We would appreciate Ambassador Lang’s delivering the following message at the earliest possible moment to President Bani-Sadr from the USG: 1. While we are pleased that the hostages were visited,2 we hope that their conditions can be improved and that visits can take place on a regular basis. 2. Our continued objective is the prompt and safe release of all the American hostages. Because the hostages continue to be held in violation of international law and all principles of civilized behavior, we have today announced additional non-military steps.3 Under the circumstances, we have no choice but to take steps necessary to redress our grievances and to seek the cooperation of others in such measures. 3. We have seen statements indicating that there is a possibility of release before the parliament meets. This outcome is by far preferable to others that have been proposed. We would welcome your suggestions for achieving such a result, through any of the existing channels or otherwise as you may wish. 4. But we are also very concerned about press accounts out of Iran saying that the hostages may be kept through the summer. If the Majlis election takes place May 2, can you give us an estimate as to when it will be in a position to deal with the hostage situation, and how you will avoid a situation in which the Majlis would seek to impose conditions which the United States cannot and will not accept or to delay indefinitely an ultimate decision. 5. Beyond the present crisis it is our hope to build a new relationship with Iran based on equality and mutual respect. 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 1. Former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar now plans to return to Iran in the latter part of May 1980. He had hoped to return to Iran by the end of April, but was forced to change his plans because of several new developments. Notably, in reviewing the plans drawn up by his staff, he noted some deficiencies which must be corrected prior to launching his movement. He is also disappointed at the delays that have occurred in getting his staff in Baghdad organized. 2. Bakhtiar went to Baghdad at Iraqi President Saddam Husayn’s request the weekend of 12–13 April and had numerous discussions with Barzan Ibrahim Al-Tikriti, Saddam’s half-brother, as well as a two-hour meeting alone with Saddam on 13 April. Saddam told Bakhtiar that he was willing to support him despite Bakhtiar’s refusal to cooperate with General Gholam Ali Oveisi who is also receiving Iraqi aid. According to Bakhtiar, one of the primary reasons Saddam Husayn wanted to talk to Bakhtiar was to try to obtain some form of cooperation between Oveisi and Bakhtiar. Bakhtiar refused to even consider cooperation with Oveisi for two basic reasons: One reason is Oveisi’s past association with the Shah and the second is that Bakhtiar does not accept Oveisi’s relying solely on a military solution to overthrow Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Bakhtiar told Saddam Husayn that Oveisi’s plan will not work because it will unite the urban population behind Khomeini. Bakhtiar warned Saddam Husayn about committing any Iraqi soldiers in support of Oveisi as such a commitment would provide the Soviets the option of moving into Iran. Saddam told Bakhtiar that he did not think there was much chance of the Soviets actually invading Iran, particularly because of the already heavy Soviet involvement in Afghanistan. 3. What impressed Bakhtiar most about his discussion with Saddam Husayn was Husayn’s almost irrational fear of Khomeini. He was particularly concerned about what Khomeini might or might not be able to do among the Iraqi Shia. 4. In discussing big power involvement in Iran, Saddam Husayn said that one benefit of the revolution in Iran was that the Americans had been forced to withdraw in toto. The Iraqi President thought this was a positive development and he hopes the U.S. will not be able to get back into Iran in strength. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: Saddam Husayn would look with disfavor on the evolvement of any situation which provides the U.S. the opportunity of regaining a foothold in Iran.) Bakhtiar disagreed with Saddam Husayn about the benefits of keeping a U.S. presence out of Iran. Bakhtiar argued that a big power presence is needed to counter the Soviet threat in the region, pointing out that while Iraq has no common border with the USSR, Iran has 2,000 kilometers of common border with the Soviets as well as bordering on Afghanistan. Given this situation, Bakhtiar, said, Iran

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission several Western oil companies asking for increased liftings of crude. The Iraqi leader said Iraq has increased its sales of oil and is demanding a premium for these increases. 8. Bakhtiar claims he has a sufficient number of arms for his supporters. One problem though is that he has a fairly large quantity of arms in the Basra area, including AK–47’s, rifles, RPG’s, and grenades, that he would like to ship to Tehran. Current crackdowns in Kurdistan and Khuzestan are making the shipment of arms difficult for his group. They are now trying to smuggle the arms to southern Baluchistan and then move them from there to Tehran. 9. Another reason Bakhtiar is delaying his return to Iran is that he just recently obtained the support of former National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) head Hassan Nazih. Bakhtiar wants to devote more time to planning and discussions with Nazih whom he hopes to meet with soon. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: [2 lines not declassified] Hassan Nazih and his group have offered to support Bakhtiar. Abdal Rahman Boroumand, at one time a close associate of former Iranian Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, and currently an intermediary between Bakhtiar and non-national front figures, is holding discussions with members of Nazih’s group on how best to organize.) 10. ACQ: [less than 1 line not declassified] 11. [2 lines not declassified] 12. Washington Dissem: To State Exclusive for the Director, INR. To DIA Exclusive for the Director, DIA. 261. Editorial Note On April 16, 1980, President Jimmy Carter met with senior advisers and mission commanders to discuss the details of the rescue operation.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission As a part of this disinformation campaign, a message was sent to Iranian Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh on April 23 through Swiss Ambassador Erik Lang in Tehran suggesting that Iran and the United States “take stock of our respective positions in the crisis” and noting that the Carter administration was “willing to discuss practical steps to resolve the crisis as soon as possible.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 4/80) As Jordan recalled in his memoir, he volunteered to see Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh again. The meeting was arranged through lawyers Christian Bourguet and Hector Villalon. Jordan and translator Stephanie van Reigersberg left Washington on April 18 and met with Ghotbzadeh in Paris on April 19. (Jordan, Crisis, pages 264– 267, and Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, page 135) Ghotbzadeh stressed that breaking relations had been bad, and, in answer to Jordan’s question, said that the hostages “are not important anymore,” but that it would still be “months and months” before they returned home. He also told Jordan: “I just hope your President doesn’t do anything rash, like attack Iran or mine our harbors.” Jordan reassured him that this would not happen. On April 19, Carter read Jordan’s report, which Jordan had written on the return flight, then called Brown to say “my last remaining doubt about the mission has been removed. Tell Colonel Beckwith to proceed.” (Jordan, Crisis, pages 265–267) Carter recalled that Jordan had concluded from his meeting with Ghotbzadeh that “there is absolutely no chance the hostages will be released for two and a half to three months, and an even greater chance that it will drag on five or six months. This only supports the tentative decision that you have already made.” Carter also noted that he had been impressed with a report from hostage Chargé Bruce Laingen, urging strong action against Iran. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 511– 512) The telegram from Laingen, received via the British Embassy in Tehran, is in Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Ghotbzadeh said that anything we could do on our side to improve the atmosphere would be welcome. He mentioned Senator Church’s idea of a White Paper on Iran2 in that connection. Finally, Ghotbzadeh said that the hostage issue was not having any impact at all on the campaign for parliamentary elections.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission There are approximately twenty—repeat twenty—militant students in that apartment house. To left of subject’s apartment house there is another apartment house—three stories high—which normally houses approximately six Iranian female guards, those female guards who are on night duty. E. Areas Patrolled. Areas patrolled by militant students are: 1. Embassy building where there are approximately one guard for each hostage or approximately 45. 2. Ambassador’s residence—approximately six guards including four female guards for kitchen area mentioned above. 3. The militant students also control the interior of the compound with emphasis on gates, exits, and around the Embassy building. These latter guards number approximately 100. There are also five to ten militant student guards near the gate to the compound in the vicinity of the Bijan Gate. In all, militant students total approximately 175 at any given time. F. Status of Alert. All those mentioned above have weapons but subject unable to designate just what kind of weapons. The guards, according to subject, appear very alert and “keyed up.” [Omitted here is the remainder of the telegram.]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Carter: David, my question was how close is the nearest settlement or town to Desert One. Jones: We are . . . I don’t know that information . . . I asked them for a full (plot out) (phonetic) on it. It appears in the rough map I have here it’s quite a distance to the first town. Carter: Yes. Quite a distance, OK. That was the question I tried to ask but couldn’t get through. Jones: OK. I’ve got the book map here and we’re just trying . . . we want to know which way it’s . . . the truck was going and information of that nature . . . and if the 41 people . . . where they may have been going, leaving home and going to a place like Teheran or something may be expected at home, whatever the . . . we’re trying to figure out where the closest gendarmerie station. We’ve got the report as of a few minutes ago that about 40 minutes after the supposed truck fire gendarmerie were still not up on the network as of now. Carter: Yes. And you don’t have any report on the helicopter’s location? Jones: Well one report that they have passed the point of no return and the fuel to the carrier . . . the six have and that means they were only within 30 minutes out from the landing point, I should be getting a report at anytime on the helicopter in . . . and the refueling. Carter: OK. Jones: There’s a small town about 15 miles through the roads here to the west . . . it is much further over to the northeast depending on which way the truck was going. It is still . . . it is quite a ways to (NAIENE) (phonetic) and (YAZDEH) (phonetic) where the . . . it will be over 100 miles where we would expect the gendarmerie major post to be. We’re listening to all of those and there’s no report. But there is this town . . . we’re trying to figure out whether those would be any communications out of this little town of (ALI ABAD) (phonetic). Carter: David, just as a matter of intent . . . do you recall why we decided to land just adjacent to a highway? Jones: It’s not a highway, sir, it’s that little road . . . the only place we’ve been able to find, so for that we could land the 130s . . . and we looked and looked and looked and it’s the only place we found. We looked at another one and hoped to land there, and . . . we just did not find any place to land. We have speculated that if we had some delay or something to send the Otter back in if we could find another place. But we had not found another place to land, and the alternatives were (NAIENE) (phonetic) to go ahead and seize the field, or to go to this place. Carter: OK. If you have any further reports just send them to Dr. Brzezinski.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Talking with Vaught we have only been able to determine with certainty 7 of the crews from the helicopters. It’s likely that one helicopter is down, probably they think with mechanical trouble someplace down in the southern part of Iran. We’re doing everything we can to figure out the identification of it . . . figure out a rescue way, but it looks as though we do not have the eighth helicopter crew identified. They talked with the helicopter crews at the Desert One and they said there are six there. The seventh is returning to the carrier from having landed down below . . . they think the other one went down from mechanical trouble, which probably means they are on the ground and can be retrieved though. Carter: Now can we detect them on the ground . . . can we find them on the ground? Jones: We should be able to if they landed OK . . . we should be able to with radios and the rest . . . to be able to find them. We’re going to try every effort to see . . . to locate them, to include the helicopters that are coming back to the coast . . . to pick up radios, NSA to try to pick up any radio contact from them. They should be able to pick them up, should be able to get them if everything goes OK. But we are expending all of our efforts towards two things. Getting the people out of Desert One, and two, to identify this eighth crew and get it rescued. I have talked to Admiral Long, who’s talking to the carrier task force commander to do everything they can to avoid any casualties on Iranians, and only as a last resort to engage. In that regard, because of the endangering of our hostages. Still the report . . . and of course it’s still sketchy until we get everybody figured out . . . that there were no Iranians that were killed or injured at Desert One, but we’ll have to confirm that a little later. Carter: Is everyone off the ground now at Desert One? Jones: No, they are having to . . . it’s been I guess 15 or 20 minutes since I talked to Vaught . . . they may be off the ground, but they were having to move everybody from that 130 to another 130, and helicopter and 130 people had to get off. I would expect them to be off fairly shortly. I asked him for a report as soon as they all get off and headed south. I will pass that word on. Carter: OK. Thank you David. Jones: Yes sir. [electronic click] [new call] Long: Long speaking. Johnson: Ah sir, General Johnson here. The Chairman asked me to check, sir, if we had a confirmation on the one helicopter making it back to the Nimitz sir. Long: We have not received a report yet that they . . . the first helo is back aboard Nimitz.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Voice C: Go ahead, gentlemen. Carter: Hello? Jones: Yes sir, Mr President. Carter: Heard anything else? Jones: Yes sir. I just got a report from General Vaught. He’s on the other phone now, but let me just give you a run down. He believes that all Americans who are alive are off the ground. That is his report. Carter: All Americans who are what? Jones: He said who are alive. There are some who evidently were fatalities there. Here is his report. He said it’s unsure until they sort it out . . . what they have done is because of the problem of the helicopter and the departure of time . . . and the daylight flyout, they have decided to take everybody out in the 130s and to leave the helicopters there because of the risk of losing people. Carter: OK. All right. Jones: Their estimate is that one helicopter crew . . . the one that was involved in the accident . . . the crew . . . the missing . . . probably died in the accident. Carter: Yes . . . I . . . Jones: Probably five, they think one got out, that the . . . in the EC– 130 . . . when the helicopter hit it up in that part, the pilot is believed missing and presumed dead. And some passengers . . . the passengers most got out, but there may have been some trapped in there. And they haven’t been able to make an exact accounting. They just went around and made sure that everyone they could get a hold of got aboard and get them out. They don’t believe that anybody remained . . . except fatality . . . but the accounting is very very poor. As to right now they have to sort it out as to what . . . what the situation would be. The . . . if they all left now . . . it’s about 2 and one half hours to coast with the . . . with the MC–130s and another hour and a half up to . . . down to Masirah. We are getting air MEDEVAC aircraft into Masirah . . . the one out of Daharan so that there will be the medical treatment there when they arrive. We . . . one helicopter is back on the carrier . . . the one that I reported earlier, and the eighth crew is still unaccounted for. We are doing everything we can to determine the rescue of it. Over. Carter: I understand. Jones: And we will try to get an accounting as soon as we can . . . on the accident and how many got out. It will be a little different with the 130s coming out . . . come out somewhat faster . . . better . . . and fewer . . . so the risks of them being attacked probably less . . . less than having both helicopters and 130s coming out.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission There may be others who are missing from that group. We have aero MEDEVAC airplanes . . . we had at Dhaharan one positioned for the next day . . . and a C–9 special with whole blood coming out of Germany to go into Wadi Kena to meet. We have report from [less than 1 line not declassified] . . . we’re not sure . . . may be from the helicopter crew that is missing, however their first report is that they cannot get a location on it yet. So we’re working on an expedited basis on that [less than 1 line not declassified] and the whole business of trying to rescue that crew that’re down. Carter: How would we go about that David? Jones: Well, probably with that RH–53 we now have back and refueled on the Nimitz. They also have other helicopters. That would be the quickest thing. We are also . . . we had loaded aboard C–5 in New Mexico . . . launching some special RH–53s that we did not launch ahead of time because it would tip the hand of the whole operation. But if it becomes very complex they are better. But it appears that the Nimitz could pick up in the rescue . . . from the Nimitz . . . with its helicopters if we could find out where the crew is located. So that’s where . . . now it appears that everybody’s airborne out of Desert One and getting close to the coast. We’re really concentrating on trying to find that crew. And also be sure to get those 5 aircraft across the coast without being intercepted. Carter: Now David one thing we don’t want to do is compound the problem by having a major pitched air battle over Iran. Jones: Yes sir. I had told that to . . . Carter: We need to think this through if we know where that crew is on the ground, how to go about getting them out. Jones: Yes sir. Well when we find it I’ll talk with you or with Harold and we’ll make sure we’ve got a well organized plan to get in and to get it out. I told Harold one thing we wanted to do the better choice we have [1½ lines not declassified] to get this helicopter crew picked up. We have no report [less than 1 line not declassified] any alerting of anybody anyplace. Carter: That’s unbelievable, isn’t it? Jones: Yes sir. Carter: Someone just walked through the office watching TV. They’re apparently having massive riots on the street over there in Tehran because of other altercations, and they said the streets in Tehran looked almost like they did when the Shah fell. Jones: I hadn’t heard that. I know there was a lot of fighting in and around the Iraqi border, and many people killed over there that we’d gotten earlier. Things have quieted down now as far as all of the gendarmerie out in the country.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission and BANI-SADR . . . and what we’d like to do as soon as you all . . . you might want to think of this independent of us . . . we’ve got to go through the Swiss and things have to be translated into French and so forth . . . and so we’ve got at least a couple of hours delay in getting him a message. And I need to let him know as soon as possible that we had planned a rescue operation . . . we had canceled it when we had a collision between . . . an accident involving our own aircraft. So far as we know there are no Iranian casualties and that we . . . that all Americans have been withdrawn. We don’t want to have them think we’re invading Iran and have them all of a sudden go on a bloodbath against Americans over there. Jones: Uh huh. Yes I think though they will . . . it will take them quite awhile if they don’t see the 130s coming out or anything like that . . . to get out to those helicopters and then look at them and identify them as American . . . and not . . . they were all painted . . . and to get inside them . . . there are things we had to abandon . . . we’re not sure what they’ve . . . abandoned in there . . . but I think there will be a considerable time period before they’re really aware of it. I think we’ll have a few hours . . . Carter: Yes. Jones: . . . and so we are working that and we will be alert to that. Carter: Let me know . . . let me know immediately when you hear anything about . . . [less than 1 line not declassified]. David it’s better for you to call . . . we’re all here in my little black office . . . it’s Signal 176 . . . and then just tell me to pick up the secure phone, if you want to call me. Jones: OK. Signal 176 and then ask you to pick up secure. Carter: Yeah. One other thing David. Do you have anyway yet to know what American bodies were left in there? Jones: No we do not. We . . . they had report of one body, but it was confused if whether the body was taken out. The intent would have been to bring the bodies out. Carter: I know. I understand they were completely burned. Jones: They said they were missing . . . I think there may be one body coming and the other 5 missing, but that is clearly not determined as yet. Carter: OK. I’ll be sitting here by the phone. Jones: Yes sir. Thank you. [electronic click] [new call] Jones: . . . the other one we got back through [CURTSY] which we’re still not sure of indicated that 7 were coming back from Desert

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission people that were casualties at Desert One. That’s just . . . they won’t know until they get on the ground at Masirah and count up everybody. We now believe . . . and it’s highly likely . . . we keep getting confusing reports . . . but it’s highly likely that that eighth helicopter crew is on the 130. They just haven’t been able to confirm it . . . it’s been on again, off again . . . through one channel we get a confirmation, through the other channel an uncertainty . . . but when they land in an hour and 45 minutes, shortly thereafter we should know. So I would say better than 50–50 that the eighth crew . . . so we won’t have a rescue mission to perform, but that’s still uncertain. Carter: Well, if that materializes that will be the first good news that we’ve had tonight. Jones: Yes sir. Carter: Any disturbance in Iran yet? Jones: I just talked with Admiral Inman and he said everything is very quiet. Nothing . . . Carter: I cannot understand that. Jones: Nothing at all. Carter: David, can you explain to me now . . . we’re getting down to the point where I’m going to have to start notifying . . . you know . . . members of Congress . . . and even telling the American people. It’s getting to . . . it’s not crucial, it’s getting more and more urgent. [1½ lines not declassified] Jones: [4½ lines not declassified] Carter: I’ll hold. Jones: The belief here is that they will . . . get working together today and it’s getting . . . it’s light over there now . . . Carter: It is? Jones: [4½ lines not declassified] Carter: [1 line not declassified] Jones: [4 lines not declassified] Carter: [1 line not declassified] Jones: [8½ lines not declassified] Carter: [7 lines not declassified] Jones: [3½ lines not declassified] Carter: [1 line not declassified] Jones: [1 line not declassified] Carter: [1 line not declassified] Jones: [1 line not declassified] Carter: [1 line not declassified] Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Brown: All right. Jones: . . . that we go ahead and start moving them back tomorrow if that’s OK. Brown: Yeah . . . let me check here, but that’s my inclination. Very strong inclination. OK. See . . . the Vice President is here and would like to talk to you a little. Then, after that, maybe you could get John [COUSTAY] (phonetic) to call me back over here . . . I’ll be in the Cabinet Room or reachable there . . . with his ideas about the sheath of things he sent over in the way of messages that we would send out. The only one I would propose to send out now, suitably modified, is the CINC’s alert message. I don’t think it makes sense now to tell the Pakistanis, the Omanis, and the Indians to stay away from our ships. Jones: I agree. Brown: OK. Here’s the Vice President. Mondale: David, I just wanted some information. If you’re busy in an operational sense just call me back. Jones: No, I’m not busy right now. If I get a hot call or something . . . [words indistinct] Mondale: Yeah, sure. As I understand it our planes have now cleared Iranian territory. Jones: That is correct. We still have an uncertainty as to one of the helicopter crews. Mondale: Uh huh. But everyone that was at Desert One got in the 130s . . . has left and has cleared Iranian territory. Jones: Yes sir. We had an unfortunate accident at Desert One, where a helicopter ran into a 130 and they both caught fire, and it appears that all but one crew member on the helicopter is a fatality and a small number . . . maybe the pilot and one or two . . . we’re not sure . . . in the back on the 130 from that accident and until they get back and sort it out we won’t be sure. But a small number . . . caused by an accident there as they were getting ready to leave. Mondale: What do you estimate? Six dead? Jones: Well . . . that’s so uncertain right now. I would say that’s . . . that’s about what we know about, but there may be some others missing or dead from that accident. Mondale: Yeah . . . ah . . . what about the helicopter crew that we’ve had trouble finding? Jones: Well, we think it’s aboard the 130, but we’re not sure. It was confusion as to . . . out of Desert One we got a report that there were only 6 crews there. Then a report . . . no, there were seven crews, and that one got picked up. We have one crew, the eighth one, that had landed and then went back to the Nimitz.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission working on them and been flying them out there and . . . but it’s just one of those things . . . the reliability impacted on the mission . . . Mondale: We just got two bad breaks, that’s all. Jones: It looks as though that . . . there’s no tip off from that desert landing as yet, and we’re surprised, but these vehicles . . . and the vehicle that drove through evidently didn’t report anything. Mondale: It’s hard to believe, isn’t it. Jones: Well if I were a person over there and I wasn’t sure if you put your head above water you’d get your head chopped off . . . that if I were some poor guy out in the country I’m not sure I just wouldn’t drive home . . . you don’t know who’s there and what it’s all about, and that sort of thing. Mondale: Yeah. Jones: So, I . . . we thought maybe there was a good chance he wouldn’t report. Now, the bus load of 41 people . . . we don’t know if this bus was still OK and that they are heading to town or that they are . . . the bus was disabled and they’re waiting for the next vehicle to come by or what. There were more vehicles than we thought. We knew there were vehicles coming down that road. We had expected that on a Thursday night . . . a holiday . . . weekend there would be fewer road . . . vehicles in the middle of the night. We did have the expectation there would be some and the roadblock was set up for stopping of the vehicles. But he hasn’t tipped off yet, so we’d have been up in the hideout now, and everything was total green at that way . . . bedded down, and things were going. But the reliability . . . once we aborted, when you do that sort of thing . . . confusion increases and the unfortunate accident. Mondale: I suppose people get so damned distressed and disappointed that they sometimes lose their efficiency too, don’t they? Jones: We may never know, but we’ll try to find out what hap- Mondale: Sure. Jones: . . . helicopter running into that 130 out there. It looked as though . . . if we accept the uncertainty of that helicopter . . . which we think now is probably aboard that 130, we could have gotten all our people out. We don’t have any indication of any casualties among the Iranians right now . . . Mondale: Uh huh. OK, thank you very much David. Jones: You’re welcome, sir. Mondale: Right, Bye. (Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–02–

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission TIME ACTUAL IRANIAN (ZULU) PLANNED EVENTS REACTIONS 1955 Trouble at DS1. Vehicle evaded roadblock. Injured 2010 7 helo’s depart DS1 for Helo Landing Strip 2020 Final MC130 departs DS1 for Masirah 2022

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission TIME ACTUAL IRANIAN (ZULU) PLANNED EVENTS REACTIONS JGS learned of event when he called them. 1425 Tehran Radio has report on bus passengers from Tabas Gendarmerie 1454 Students at Embassy say report is a lie. 2000 DELTA assaults Embassy 2100 77 Division reports 65 men ready to travel Tabas to relieve Gendarmerie 2210 C–141’s with hostages and DELTA depart Manzarieh 26 April 0211 CG, 77 Division files detailed report. Notes civilian tanker seen transporting fuel. Not captured. No traces this tanker 0545 Men of 148 Bn, 77 Div stopped at Tabas because of inoperable bus. 0631 Khalkhali in area Evening CO and 200 men of 23 SpF Brigade at Tabas airport. 28 April 1906Z Iran intel reporter says 3 low-flying aircraft seen in Chah Bahar area on 24 April

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission COMJTF to execute, delay, or cancel the mission based on conditions existing at the time of decision. Through the period 19–23 April, the forces deployed. By midafternoon on 24 April, the forces were in place and ready for execution. Execution and Abort

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Attachment Map of Rescue Mission Operations From the Iranian Border to Desert One3 Washington, undated 3 Secret.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 269. Editorial Note On April 25, 1980, the White House issued a short statement on the failed hostage rescue attempt. President Jimmy Carter followed this with a longer address to the nation at 7 a.m. that morning. In his address, Carter briefly outlined the rescue mission and then explained that the rescue attempt, which had been months in the planning, was executed only when it became clear that Iranian authorities “could not or would not resolve this crisis on their own initiative.” He also stated regarding the decision to attempt the rescue and the decision to cancel the mission: “The responsibility is fully my own.” (Public Papers: Carter,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Khalkhali held up a limb to show a wristwatch. He vowed that the bodies would not be returned to the U.S. Government because it was “unworthy.” (William Branigin, “Pledge to Return Corpses in Doubt,”

Covert and Overt Operations 270. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 27, 1980 SUBJECT Iran—Next Steps From the perspective of our negotiating strategy, it is essential that we build on and reinforce the central message that the U.S. is prepared to use extreme measures to get our people released. It is that underlying factor which lends credibility and urgency to all the other measures we are able to take. Nothing builds credibility more effectively than the fact that we believe in our own minds that there are valid options available to us. The underlying assurance and singleness of purpose in the various voices of the U.S. Government over the past several weeks has been unmistakable. That is an asset which must be preserved. Any future rescue operation must work. A mere demonstration that we are willing to keep trying—and failing—will do more harm than good. In any systematic evaluation of possible alternative rescue plans, several key factors must be taken into account: —Intelligence. We must at a minimum have confidence that we know where the hostages are being held and under what conditions. I suspect, as you do, that the Iranians may be bluffing about moving the hostages. But until we can confirm that with some degree of assurance, and until we can evaluate what changes have been introduced into the security patterns at the embassy (or elsewhere), any action would be irresponsible. —Regional Support. The Sultan of Oman is now skittish, and all other regional parties are going to watch us like a hawk. We must get our fences mended, since we cannot conduct any kind of an operation without at least tacit cooperation and access to regional facilities. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65,

Covert and Overt Operations —Deception. The press, the Iranians, and all other observers— including the Soviets—will not be easily lulled a second time. —Internal Unity of Purpose. Any new attempt must have the kind of dedicated purposefulness which went into the first. Certainly, an operation of this magnitude cannot be planned and run from the White House. Those who will be called upon to risk their lives must have a sense of participation. They must believe in what they are doing, not just be ordered to do it. We learned some important lessons in the first operation. The most important was that the Iranians are as disorganized and vulnerable as we suspected. We can with some confidence deliver men and materiel to points inside Iran with considerable confidence of remaining undetected. We should absorb that fact into our future planning to look at new possibilities. I recommend that a small group be assembled at some location (e.g. [less than 1 line not declassified] a Delta Team facility) for an extensive damage assessment effort. This would involve a total analysis of lessons learned, a complete assessment of assets and capabilities, and a mandate to recommend to the President alternative courses of action. This “total immersion” exercise should include, at a minimum, the key leaders of the team which made the recent attempt, the most capable and hard-nosed planners from the JCS, CIA operatives with on-theground experience and knowledge of overall Agency capabilities, and a few carefully selected individuals with knowledge of the political realities as well as an appreciation of the bureaucratic realities in this town. The group should be given at least a week to put something together. There are a series of specific alternatives which this group could be asked to flesh out: —Gradual infiltration of personnel on the ground in Tehran or vicinity, with a quick strike and evacuation by a few planes at the last minute. —Establishment of a base camp in a tribal area or remote location in preparation for a quick “snatch” and evacuation. —Examination of infiltration overland from Turkey by truck. —A one-shot operation using a C–5 or several large transports with their own transportation (APCs?) operating from a location as near as possible to Tehran. —“Commandeering” transportation from lightly guarded civilian (or even military) locations for initial exfiltration to the evacuation point. —A quick and powerful military strike to be used in the event the situation suddenly deteriorates or hostages are being killed.

Covert and Overt Operations Next Steps on Iran Dr. Brzezinski asked the group to step back and consider the longer track of our strategy on Iran. Before the rescue operation, we were proceeding with economic sanctions, allied pressure, and were considering a range of other alternatives including secondary boycotts, cutoff of food and medicine, and interruption of communications via INTEL- SAT. The allies have reaffirmed that they are prepared to follow through on sanctions. Should we take some additional actions of our own? (S) Secretary Brown said it was his inclination to let the allies proceed down their own track of sanctions as the focus of attention before we do something ourselves. Secretary Christopher agreed, noting that the reason many of the remaining actions available to us were not taken previously was because they had so many adverse consequences. State was preparing a paper looking ahead at the changes in our strategy which were required by the new circumstances. This would be completed and available for circulation by the end of the day. It could be discussed at the SCC meeting on Thursday.2 All agreed. (S) Mr. Cutler noted that the claims legislation was being completed. At this point the legislation does not include any standby authority to vest assets, which means that it has no real bite.3 Mr. Cutler thought the legislation should be reviewed before going forward. It was agreed that this issue would be taken up at the SCC meeting on Thursday. (C) Dr. Brzezinski noted that it would be useful to have a clearer idea of just what steps the allies are taking and what commitments they have accepted. We should also examine the impact these steps are likely to have on Iran. State and CIA agreed to prepare a brief paper on this subject.4 (C) Admiral Turner noted that he had met yesterday with a group of hostage wives and mothers. It had not been a pleasant meeting. He thought it would be useful if the “cash register could start ringing” for these people. He suggested an initial payment of $50,000 per family and $1,000 per day for each day of captivity, with the money to be taken from Iranian assets. Others argued that the amount of money would be too small to be of real concern to the Iranians, and the impression would be created that the families are getting rich as a result of the situation. Mr. Saunders noted that State had had some recent meetings with the hostage families which had not been as grim

Covert and Overt Operations 272. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, April 29, 1980 SUBJECT Items from the Restricted Session of the SCC Meeting, Tuesday, April 29, 1980 (C) 1. The Oman letter2 will be redrafted to make it less apologetic. Reg Bartholomew will deliver the letter but not as a Presidential emissary. As a sweetener, we will respond to their request for a “gift” of six M– 60 tanks by providing them these tanks as a “loan.” Bartholomew will explain that we have no grant military assistance. Defense will work out the details of the loan. (TS) 2. [5 lines not declassified] 3. Rescue Plan. DOD will proceed with further rescue planning, including: a. Short-fuse option in which the President decides to go on a very short-time basis in response, for example, to intelligence indications as to where the hostages are located; (TS) b. Long-fuse option in which we build up our resources and capabilities; and (TS) c. Emergency option; e.g., if we learn the hostages are being killed. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski also urged that we look at the question of a largescale option such as using the 82d Airborne. In this connection, General Jones said the key is what staging bases would be available. (TS) 4. Information for Congress. We have held the line against saying anything about the rescue operation past the point at which it was aborted. All the Congressional Committees are pressing for information on the rest of the operation so that they can make a judgment as to its overall feasibility and wisdom. There is, however, a grave danger of compromising important methods and techniques for the future. CIA 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

Covert and Overt Operations our various actions throughout this crisis. We are not in a classic bargaining position. If we are to help create a break in the situation—recognizing the hard fact that the odds are against such a break so long as the internal situation in Iran remains inchoate and the clerics dominant—we need a strategy which takes account of both the complexities of Iranian politics and the complexities of the Iranian outlook. It must combine elements of reasonableness with regard to the future without making the concessions now that Iranians take as weakness. It must convey a strong element of threat without implying retribution when the hostages are released. And the elements of threat must be both credible and conveyed in a way which does not so challenge their pride that they simply posture, blunder, and recall their history of martyrdom. Some Basic Propositions 1. We can start by eliminating two extreme options: —We have long since embarked on a policy of imposing costs on Iran for prolonging the hostage crisis, so no one is proposing a policy of negotiation without some form of pressure. —A policy of pressure alone cannot force a solution. For one thing Khomeini and the clerics are not susceptible to Western-style pressures, so we have to find a different approach to them. Even then, someone will have to work out a political strategy for engineering the release. We will have to play a role whether we want to or not. 2. Within Iran, different leadership groups have different aspirations, vulnerabilities and objectives in this crisis. Our strategy must play on these varying hopes and fears. Our strategy, therefore, must also be a mix of punitive measures and diplomatic initiatives, to try to help construct a solution which would be politically acceptable both to key groups of the Iranians and to us. The issues are (a) the mix of pressures and diplomatic steps and (b) timing. 3. Our first opportunity for a breakthrough could come, as the Iranians have said, with the convening of a new parliament. We should keep in mind, however, that the Majlis will be fractionated and unruly and perhaps without effective leadership. No date has even been set for its opening session. The major purpose of the Majlis may be as a device toward furthering a solution—or rubberstamping a consensus among lay and religious leaders that it is time to end the crisis. The Majlis is likely to hesitate to assume a leading role in forging a solution. But the period between now, the May 9 elections, and the date the parliament is convened will be a time of political flux in Iran. It seems sensible to focus our immediate efforts on this period. There will be relative calm in the political process. Delegates will have been elected, and they will be unsure how to use the new institutions. For a short

Covert and Overt Operations involvement in the management of the hostages’ welfare and in accounting for them. —To increase steadily tangible pressure by the OECD states and, where possible, to encourage other states to take more limited measures against Iran; in this context by portraying Iran’s holding of hostages as offensive to the world community, to broaden the confrontation to Iran vs. the non-communist world. —To engage key Iranians in discussions that could lead to an understanding on (1) a scenario for hostage release when the Majlis is convened; (2) the role of key leaders during the Majlis consideration; and (3) actions by the U.S. or third countries that would facilitate a release decision by the Majlis. The issues to be decided are the degree and timing of new pressures, if any, and the nature of a broader diplomatic effort. Maintaining Pressure We have the following range of choice in maintaining or expanding pressures on Iran: —We can maintain the sanctions the U.S. now has in place and press the Europeans to proceed on their present course by following through on the decisions made at Luxembourg.3 This would seem an essential minimum. —We could take some additional steps to expand our own sanctions (see Tab 2 for a list of possible steps).4 In deciding whether we should impose additional sanctions, we face the possibility that a new cycle of growing expectations and then deeper frustration could be stimulated within the U.S. and new divisions with the Allies created, conveying weakness to Iran at a time we should be emphasizing the strength of the Allies’ stand. Another issue is whether such steps would best complement a diplomatic effort now, or should be held in reserve as a threat during the Majlis’ meetings. Once implemented, we would have little left with which to threaten. —Additional pressures may be possible through covert action. A great deal of disruptive activity is already under way in Iran which has no U.S. involvement but which most Iranians assume is Americaninspired. These disruptions and the assumption of American involvement heighten fears in Iran that we have important assets that could undermine the revolution. In an Iranian context, the advantage of covert options is that although the Iranians will assume we are playing a

Covert and Overt Operations approved in January (Tab 1) with the possible addition of a statement that we have no intention of taking punitive military action against Iran once the hostages are released. But we would make no concession on the issues between us, since the Iranians would interpret this as weakness and a sign of still further concessions. The purpose of the approaches to Bani Sadr would be to determine how to package the January position and what preparatory steps might be useful before the Majlis receives Bani Sadr’s program. While this approach is being made to Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, other approaches would be made to the clerics (without a U.S. proposal) stating the arguments for ending the crisis in a way that might be more compelling to them. The Substance of Diplomatic Approaches More specifically, the separate approaches to the secular and religious principals in Tehran might go as below. —With Bani Sadr (and Ghotbzadeh) we would take the following line: —We recognize the importance to the Iranians of their convening parliament in completion of the task of putting into effect the Islamic constitution. We accept Iran’s constitutional process. —We expect that Iran-U.S. relations will be reviewed by parliament in the context of setting the course for Iran’s foreign relations. —We regret difficulties in relations between U.S. and Iran and believe it is in the interest of both countries to find an early resolution to our problems. —We believe it would be helpful for the President and Revolutionary Council to be able to present to parliament a basis for future U.S.- Iranian relations. We are prepared to discuss this with him on the basis of the position we have conveyed to him (Tab 1). But the Iranians should not expect any American concessions, or a relaxation of pressures until all the hostages are freed. We have no interest in talking on any other basis. At the same time, through different intermediaries and others who will not be acting in our name, we should try to develop an understanding by Beheshti and the clerics that the continued holding of the hostages will not be in their interest. The principal motivations of the clerics appear to be (1) desire for power and the construction of an Islamicdominated regime; (2) fear of the power of the U.S. to prevent them from achieving power; and (3) fear of a Soviet-dominated left. We would use themes that play on their fears and aspirations. Much of the work on the fear side is already well in train. The rescue mission itself signals U.S. ability to mount significant military operations against Iran. Hostilities with Iraq, the Kurds, the activities of Bakhtiar and Oveissi, and continuing sabotage and disruption within Iran are all assumed to have an American connection and play to the fears of the revolutionaries that we are out to overthrow them. We

Covert and Overt Operations leaders, that the Islamic Conference could act as an intermediary in resolving the hostage crisis. The Islamic Conference’s role would be particularly important in providing the Iranians with credible assurances that the U.S. would not take retaliatory action against Iran or act against the Revolution once the hostages are released. The Saudis have hinted to other Islamic states that they might be interested in exploring such an initiative if others would join them. The French, Germans, Turks and possibly the British could also be persuasive with the various clerics with whom they maintain contact. 4. Richard Cottam is prepared to go to Iran for intensive discussions with Ghotbzadeh, Beheshti, and other contacts. 5. Archbishop Capucci is possibly the single most influential foreigner with the militants, Khomeini, and the Revolutionary Council. He can be especially helpful with the religious leadership and with the militants. There are other channels that could be developed, but these are the ones that we might start with. These approaches are laid out in the table at Tab 3.6 In engaging our allies, the best approach might be to share at high level the outlines of our strategy for the next two months on a bilateral basis, asking each government to designate one senior official in its capitals with whom we can discuss our plans in detail on a highly restricted basis. An important element in enlisting overall allied support and specific cooperation of some close allies will be our position on the use of military options. Understandably, we will not wish to tie our hands completely, but we can assure the allies that (1) we have no present plan to use force; (2) we are prepared to wait for a reasonable period after the Majlis is convened to determine if a peaceful resolution is possible and if our joint diplomatic/political/economic efforts can bring this about; (3) we will consult closely with our allies if we subsequently conclude that the use of force is necessary; and (4) for tactical reasons, we will continue publicly to leave the option of using force open in this interim period, and expect the allies not to criticize us publicly on this point. Public Affairs Strategy Because the crisis is likely to continue for some time it will be important to reduce the level of public expectations and to attempt to 6 Tab 3, an untitled and undated chart, attached but not printed, lists intermediaries used in various negotiations, their role or special message, the date and place of their meeting with U.S. officials, their primary Iranian contacts, the suggested duration of their stay in Iran, and their means of reporting.

Covert and Overt Operations —A Saunders meeting with Ambassadors Brunner and/or Lang in Switzerland for their assessment and our presentation of strategy. —A meeting with Capucci, Bourguet and Villalon, and, if possible, Nobari on the same trip. —Messages to our allies or meetings with them outlining special roles for them: —For the Germans: To maintain contact with Tabatabai for improvement in the condition of the hostages; with Beheshti to develop a new relationship there; with Bazargan to encourage him to reassert his influence. —For the French and Turks: To become more active generally with the clerics to convey an “independent” European view. To work also with Bani-Sadr, Salamatian, and others with whom the Ambassadors may enjoy special access. —With the British: To concentrate on Beheshti and the other clerics on the Revolutionary Council or to solicit those clerics by other persons with better influence. —A trip by Richard Cottam for talks with as many leaders as he can arrange, especially Beheshti, whom Cottam has known for seven years. We would encourage Cottam to stay at least one week and perhaps return to Iran after consultations with us.

Covert and Overt Operations Iran cannot effectively address its economic problems. Once that stability is achieved the question of permanent leadership could be resolved. Therefore the exiles believe that a collegial form of leadership can be made to work in the early stages of a regime which would replace the clerics once they have thoroughly discredited themselves. General Oveissi is the man whom the exiles feel must take the lead in these early stages. Thereafter there could be agreement on the transfer of power to a civilian regime, perhaps headed by someone like Bakhtiar or conceivably a constitutional monarchy as provided by the 1906 constitution. The problems of collegial leadership in Iran are obvious but there is some recent precedent for this in General Zahedi’s departure for Switzerland after his restoration of the Shah and subsequent Prime Ministership.2 In addition, ancient Persian history reveals the successful conspiracy of seven Persian nobles against the Magian usurper and their agreement that one of them, later Darius the First, should be king after the Magus was slain. It is not clear to me the extent to which Oveissi’s role is in fact accepted by other exiled leaders. Moreover, they would be ill-advised to take decisive action in Iran until the clerics had produced widespread dissatisfaction through misrule. Other obvious problems which would have to be addressed during the planning stages by the exiles would include the degree of Westernization to be reestablished in a nation recently subjected to a strong dose of Islam; economic programs to promptly and effectively ameliorate the effects of unemployment, shortages of various kinds, and a generally stagnant economy; relations with other countries including assistance programs. To repeat, I do not suggest that we deal with any of these substantive issues now—only that we consider approaching the exiles to encourage the development of an alternative to the left following the inevitable collapse of the clerics. 2 General Fazlollah Zahedi became Prime Minister following the 1953 coup against Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh. In 1955 he became Iran’s Ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva.

Covert and Overt Operations wondered if, in the wake of the rescue attempt, we may not wish to toughen the legislation by adding such authority. Otherwise, the legislation provides nothing more than administrative regulations for handling claims which would be resolved either by litigation or negotiation with the Iranians. (C) Secretary Miller strongly opposed including vesting authority. He did not believe that this action would help free the hostages, but it does have very serious disadvantages for us by adding to the world view that the U.S. is unreliable as a recipient of deposits. Certainly such authority should not be put in merely for show; and if we really intend to use it—especially to vest assets abroad—there will be serious controversy with our friends and allies. One of the effects of vesting assets would be to eliminate immediately the present system of offsetting claims against deposits. Those institutions which have claims but no attachable assets will press hard for vesting out of pure self-interest. However, it will be a net loss to the United States and would have an adverse effect on the dollar. Miller hoped that we would not act in a way which would do irreparable harm to Western financial institutions in the interest of a short-term advantage. (C) Secretary Brown acknowledged the clear disadvantages, but noted that we must be seen to be doing something. The more we can do in the economic or other fields, the less pressure there is on us to do something else. Paying compensation to the hostages would be useful in that regard. He thought the rest of the world would understand that this is a totally unique situation and not aimed at others, e.g. Saudi Arabia. Dr. Brzezinski said that the question was what it does for the Iranians and what it does for the President domestically by showing concern and taking a tough line. It was true that it would not budge the Iranians. There is a real question whether this is the moment. He thought that this single step now gave the appearance of dribbling out our actions. Perhaps it should be reserved for use later as part of a package. (S) Henry Owen agreed with Secretary Miller that such action would hurt the dollar, and the symbolism of a weakening dollar would also hurt the President. Mr. Cutler made clear that there was no consideration of seizing assets outside the United States. We have no authority to do so. He acknowledged that this action will probably not budge the Iranians, but that was true of each individual act we have taken in the sanctions area. If the situation was sufficiently grave to justify the risk of a rescue mission, he thought we could take this risk. (S) The Attorney General said he believed there were advantages in the legislation as now proposed. It provides the basis for settling claims by hostages and others. Inclusion of standby authority to vest would immediately result in pressure to exercise the authority so payment

Covert and Overt Operations represented Capucci in his trial for gun-running in Jerusalem and could be helpful.5 Secretary Miller recommended an attempt to contact religious authorities in Mashhad and other areas who were influential but had been eclipsed by Khomeini. (S) Admiral Turner commented that the odds of accomplishing anything for the hostages in this manner were extremely slim. He wondered if we did not appear weak by starting negotiations again immediately after the failure of the rescue attempt. The Iranians will probably ask us to make more concessions. Secretary Brown said we want to establish contacts with a broad range of Iranian authorities in any event, since that will be important in the longer term. Mr. Aaron observed that we need an effective program which focuses public attention not only on the hostage issue but the larger dangers of a possible Soviet takeover. (S) Dr. Brzezinski said he was concerned that we were not focusing beyond the immediate crisis. He saw the danger of Iran merging with Afghanistan. We could find ourselves in the situation where the hostages are rescued by Soviet tanks. The key question is whether we wish to keep the pressure up or deescalate. Can we maintain a high level of pressure while continuing on the diplomatic track? (S) Mr. Saunders noted that Bani-Sadr has called a large meeting of Islamic and Nonaligned nations in Tehran to “view the evidence of U.S. aggression.” Without prejudice to the outcome of policy discussions this weekend, we will need to get messages out to key parties if we wish to have any influence on the event or possibly turn it to some useful purpose. He proposed selecting half a dozen key Islamic and Nonaligned leaders and sharing our thoughts with them in advance of the meeting. Mr. Aaron suggested using the themes developed in the strategy paper, for them to present in Tehran. All agreed. (C) Approve6 Avoid contact or association with this event 4. Legal Action Concerning the Shah. The judge in the New York court suggested in a bench conference that the issue should be resolved by Iran’s release of the hostages and some payment by the Shah. Mr. O’Dwyer (representing Iran) is now seeking permission to go to Tehran, while Mr. Jackson intends to meet with the Shah. All agreed that, if the Shah is unwilling to make an offer, it would be pointless—and possibly counterproductive—to raise the issue with the Iranians who are likely to demand payment of billions of dollars by the Shah. (C) 5. Islamic Conference. Mr. Cutler had been informed by the Saudi Ambassador that the forthcoming Islamic Conference will be held in 5 Bourguet. 6 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed in the right margin.

Covert and Overt Operations Dr. Brzezinski acknowledged the problem, but observed that a review of the actual testimony was the only means of clearly identifying those elements which should be protected. It needed to be reviewed by the group and, if there were areas of disagreement, it should be referred to the President for decision. He suggested that the hearing be postponed from Tuesday9 until later in the week if possible to permit a review. Admiral Turner said the testimony could be provided today. The SCC agreed to review it on an urgent basis. (S) Approve10 Other [Omitted here is material on Afghanistan.]

Covert and Overt Operations

Covert and Overt Operations Oveissi and insure that we use them for our own larger purposes rather than being used by them and the Iraqis for their own purposes. (TS) Admiral Turner said he would go to work on such a plan. [3½ lines not declassified] Mr. Christopher said we should not get ourselves in the position of making Bakhtiar our chosen instrument. Dr. Brzezinski said we should not encourage Bakhtiar and Oveissi to move forward at this time. (TS) Approve development of a strategy focusing primarily on the internal politics of Iran, rather than on an external approach. (TS) Offer monetary and planning assistance to Bakhtiar. (TS) Maintain contact with Bakhtiar, but withhold significant monetary and advisory assistance until an alternative strategy has been considered.8 (TS) 8 Carter approved the first and third options with checkmarks and initialed “J” beneath the options. 278. Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1

Covert and Overt Operations 279. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated Recommendation to the President —That we begin to work2 on the development of a diplomatic strategy, looking toward a late May or early June meeting of the Iranian parliament, when there may be an opportunity for a settlement of the crisis. —That we continue with our strategy of multilateral economic sanctions and diplomatic pressures on Iran, keeping ambiguous in the minds of the Iranians what additional steps we might take, while making clear that we plan no retaliation or intervention in Iran if all the hostages are released safely and under honorable conditions.3 —That we reopen contact with Bani-Sadr and Ghotzbadeh to explore how Bani-Sadr might present a program to the new parliament that would subsume the release of the hostages.4 —That in our initial explorations, we elicit Bani-Sadr’s ideas rather than presenting our own, while making clear that we will not relax our pressures or make concessions until the hostages are released.5 —That we ask selected allies to seek contacts with leading clerics to persuade them toward a consensus on release of the hostages.6 The allies could point out to the clerics that: Soviet and leftist ambitions for Iran are furthered by the continued holding of the hostages; that the Europeans and Japanese want to have good relations with Iran but can’t so long as the hostages are held; and that the US now is dangerous and unpredictable but would not take retaliatory measures if all the hostages are released safely and under honorable circumstances. —That we explore with selected non-aligned such as Algeria and Yugoslavia, and possibly the French, the prospects for their undertaking an exploratory role with the Iranians. We would elicit their ideas 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10. Secret; Sensitive. In the upper right corner of the paper, Carter wrote: “We should reassess all possible avenues & maintain a full court press—with minimum press comment.” 2 Carter underlined the words “begin to work” and wrote in the right margin: “expedite.” 3 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “Keep all options open.” 4 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “ok, but remember that B-S is a weak reed at best.” 5 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “We should try to reach Madani thru acceptable intermediary.” 6 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “FRG can help with Beheshti.”

Covert and Overt Operations On a strategic level, the violent anti-Americanism generated by the hostage situation: gives the Soviets and the Iranian left a unique opportunity to increase their strength and legitimacy by siding with Khomeini; diverts attention away from Soviet activities in Afghanistan; constrains U.S. freedom of action; and severely complicates U.S. relations with regional states and our allies. The slide to the left in Iran threatens to extend Soviet influence closer to the Persian Gulf and radically reorient the regional power balance. Current Policy. Europe and Japan are reluctantly prepared to proceed with economic and diplomatic sanctions in mid-May if there has been no decisive progress toward freeing the hostages. Basic Choices. We have no risk-free options. Status Quo/Diplomatic. We can use the period between now and the election of the Majlis to reopen channels of communication with some of the key Iranian actors, including Beheshti if possible. The key question will be whether we will offer any new inducements and/or intensify our military pressures. Escalate Pressure. We could enhance nervousness and fear in Tehran, and also complicate Iranian shipping, by overt military demonstrations (e.g. interrogation of shipping) and veiled threats. Although this would keep the Iranians off balance and worried, it could play into the hands of the hard-liners and the left. Military Operation. Another rescue operation or a blockade could be attempted in disregard of intense pressure from the allies. Covert Action. We could lend active support to some of the dissident groups which are becoming active. This would keep the political pot boiling, but probably would not free the hostages. [1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]

Covert and Overt Operations —A series of political crises which have narrowed the base of the revolutionary leadership and destroyed the original coalition. (from March 1979 and still developing); and —Eventual political and economic reconstruction. Phase two is not complete. The highly fluid current situation is characterized by competing factions striving to establish a solid political base upon which to begin building Iran’s brave new world. Phase two revolutionary politics are dominated by two fundamental questions. First, is the Revolution an essentially conservative movement designed to restore the prestige and influence of Iran’s traditional socio-economic elites i.e. the clergy and the bazaar merchants? Is it instead a process which will eventually revamp Iran’s entire social structure by instituting radical income and land redistribution policies, as well as bringing to the forefront a new leftist-oriented elite? Or is it some combination of religious fundamentalism and reform? These complex questions pit the religiously-oriented ruling entourage against various leftist groups. By and large, the dominant clerics are satisfied with the revolution’s principal achievement: the ousting of the Shah and his “henchmen”. Beyond re-establishing the predominance of Islamic law those clerics have little genuine interest in fundamentally altering Iranian society. The leftists, however, see the Shah’s fall as the first step in a process which will throughly restructure the Iranian socio-economic order. Bani-Sadr is in the middle between these two positions and is often attacked by both. A second question is simultaneously being debated within the current governing entourage: who will rule post-Khomeini Iran? In that connection, an intense power struggle has emerged, primarily between the young hardline clerical fundamentalists and the “Islamic technocrats” (i.e. those individuals who have been secularly educated— often in the West—but who claim to be devout Moslems). The leftists are not so directly involved in this question, preferring to bide their time for now. This framework helps to explain the seemingly incoherent twists and turns in Iran’s domestic politics: most of these machinations are part of the attempt to answer definitively the two previously mentioned questions. Even so macabre an issue as the return of the American dead, for example, is related to the second question: if President Bani- Sadr favored sending the bodies back to the US, then as a matter of principle, the fundamentalists would have to oppose his policy or risk a loss of prestige in their continuing struggle with the President over future pre-eminence. The Key Actors: Several actors are participating in this on-going drama. Ayatollah Khomeini, of course, remains the Revolution’s preeminent figure and the final repository of revolutionary legitimacy and

Covert and Overt Operations —The Tudeh (Communist) Party: This party, now reportedly legal, supports Khomeini and carries on various activities, such as organizing meetings and publishing a newspaper. The Tudeh has probably concentrated most of its activities in oil, military and bureaucratic circles. Its membership strength has not been accurately gauged. The intense competition among the basic three competing factions has increasingly radicalized the Revolution. Any individual who has tried to take a moderate stand on relations with the West and/or the US has been tarred as being anti-Islamic and anti-revolutionary. President Bani-Sadr could be the latest victim of this on-going, devouring phenomenon. Enter the Hostages: It is against this volatile, fragile, extraordinarily complex political background that the hostage issue must be viewed. Essentially, the hostages are involved in three levels of competition. First, they are pawns in the continuing overall struggle for power. For President Bani-Sadr, the hostages are a liability because the crisis has prevented him from consolidating his political position and moving on to his social and economic programs. By thwarting Bani-Sadr’s efforts to unilaterally solve the hostage crisis, Ayatollah Beheshti has kept Bani-Sadr off-balance and over the past three months has gravely weakened the President’s political position. Beheshti’s Islamic Republican Party won over half of the seats in the first round of the Parliamentary elections and should capture a majority of the remaining seats in the second round on May 9. As a result, Beheshti probably will be in a position to decisively influence the approval and eventual power of the new prime minister and cabinet. In an atmosphere charged with anti-Americanism and chaos, the left has openly thrived. All leftist factions have supported the Embassy seizure. In the process they have worked to expand their influence and strength. It was probably fear of the left’s growing influence which recently led the hardline clerics to attack and oust them from their university strongholds. As long as the hostages remain an asset for a majority of Iran’s clerically dominated factions, it will be difficult to devise a formula for their release. Moreover, any formula which is eventually negotiated must be the result of a consensus building process within Iran. Of course, the eventual consolidation of power by one faction would facilitate the possibility of negotiating a settlement. Second and on a deeper level, the hostages are living symbols of a perceived US policy which exploited and dominated Iran. Revolutionary Iran believes that the US used the Shah as its instrument to pillage Iran’s economic resources and rob it of its cultural heritage. The seizure of the Embassy is, according to this line of thinking, the result of 35 years of pent-up moral outrage. Thus, for the Iranians, the hostage crisis

Covert and Overt Operations broad consensus building around the concept that holding the hostages is no longer to the advantage of Iran or any of the competing political groups. —Although the Parliament has been given the assignment of solving the crisis, it will not make a decision until it has received the “correct” signal from Khomeini. It cannot be expected to act on its own initiative; —Khomeini will send the “correct” signal when he senses the public is ready to end the crisis. This perception, in part, will be generated by the advice he receives from his close confidants and advisors. 282. Message From the Department of State to the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Washington, May 13, 1980 We would appreciate it if the following message could be transmitted to Ambassador Lang in Tehran. 1. We have recently completed an assessment of our experiences in dealing with the hostage crisis and reached several conclusions which will guide us in this next phase of diplomatic effort. We regard the period until the new parliament convenes and addresses the hostage question as a crucial moment for preparing the ground for positive action by the legislators. Ideally, we would hope during this period to reach an understanding with the Iranian authorities as to how the hostage issue would be handled with the new parliament and what would be the most useful U.S. contribution. We would like to explore the best ways of doing that and would welcome your analysis and advice. 2. We consider that our previous efforts to negotiate release of the hostages failed largely because of the intransigence of the clerical leadership. We had concentrated our efforts on the secular leadership and left it to them to carry the arguments with the clerics. In this phase we want indirectly to try to be as persuasive as possible with the clerics. We believe Capucci may be best suited to this job, but we will explore whether others might also contribute to this process. We will be in 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Covert and Overt Operations 283. Memorandum of Conversation1

Covert and Overt Operations 284. Memorandum of Conversation1 Vienna, May 16, 1980 SUBJECT Meeting Between Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister Gromyko PARTICIPANTS Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie William D. Krimer, Interpreter USSR: Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the conversation by suggesting that he and Secretary Muskie conduct their talks in compact form since they did not have much time at their disposal. It was his understanding that there was no formal agenda for this meeting; thus they would be free to choose whatever topics they wanted to discuss. [Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.] Iran Turning to the question of Iran, Gromyko said that some political leaders had frequently asked him why the Soviet Union had not publicly advocated release of the American hostages, saying that this would ease tensions throughout the world. Gromyko would tell the Secretary that the Soviets had made very clear statements to the effect that the holding of U.S. hostages by Iran violates international law and all relevant international conventions. Moreover, the Soviet Union had undertaken a private démarche with the Iranian leadership through restricted channels, calling for the release of the American hostages. At the time of this démarche Washington had been informed to that effect; that was several months ago.2 But, instead of hearing thanks for its initiative, the Soviet leadership had heard nothing but an avalanche of unfriendly statements against the Soviet Union. True, there was a minor assistant who had expressed appreciation, in passing as it were, but the Soviet leadership had heard nothing from the President of the United States or from the Secretary of State. Let no one throw stones 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 5. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Krimer. The meeting took place at the Hofburg Palace. At the top of the page, Carter wrote: “Susan—Pers file. C.” For the full text of this memorandum of conversation, see Foreign

Covert and Overt Operations with Iranian authorities would demonstrate to them that their own best interests dictated release of the hostages. The Secretary did not know whether we will succeed or not. In any case, the failed effort had bought us some time.6 This was an election year in the United States and he did not know whether in the heat of the contest a policy of patience can survive. Gromyko knew who the contestants were and he could draw his own conclusions. Conservative opinion in the United States is on the rise and it has had its effect on questions involving détente, arms control, and defense spending. There are pressures on the President who is running for reelection and he cannot ignore those pressures.7 The Secretary suspected that he had been selected for the office of Secretary of State precisely because he had a political constituency that would take pressure off the President.8 He was willing to do that. In that spirit he had come to the present meeting in order to explore possible solutions. He hoped that its result would be more than simply he and Gromyko gaining confidence in each other. He hoped that some ideas for solutions would emerge from this meeting, enabling both sides to pick up the policy of détente, which in the Secretary’s view was the only sensible and serious course to follow. Both of them had said things to each other that were unpleasant, trying to be frank. Perhaps they would be able to communicate some of these sentiments to those they represented. Iran Gromyko first wanted to reply to the Secretary’s comments about the Tudeh Party. This was an internal domestic political force in Iran, and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it. It seemed to be an old habit of political leaders in Washington to refer to special relationships between the Soviet Union and such forces as the Tudeh Party. He could only say that these political leaders were victims of their own inventions. As for the Soviet radio broadcasts to Iran of which the Secretary had spoken, Gromyko could only point out that these broadcasts stated official Soviet policy, i.e., condemnation of the military means contemplated by the U.S., condemnation of the actions of the U.S. fleet of contemplated blockade and mining. That was official Soviet policy and it had been stated in the broadcasts. It was difficult for the Soviet Union to understand why such military actions were being contemplated or 6 Carter underlined the phrase “the failed effort had bought us some time.” 7 Carter underlined most of the previous two sentences and wrote in the left margin: “Election pressures on this subject not a factor.” 8 Carter underlined the last half of this sentence and placed a question mark in the right margin.

Covert and Overt Operations First, with Chancellor Schmidt, who said it is up to you Algerians to help the whole world by keeping Iran-US conflict from further deterioration. We know that the US has reached the end of its patience and will not hesitate to undertake drastic measures and military operations with foreseeable consequences. Furthermore, Schmidt asked Algeria to help Europe. Europe is in a conflict of conscience, for reasons of principle, Europe cannot tolerate a continuation of the violation of diplomacy represented by the seizure of hostages in Tehran. Europe must show effective solidarity with the U.S. but Europe is also aware of its own interests in the region, of the sacrifices involved for results that are not immediate. Europe also worries over the consequences of an isolation of Iran for whom the only salvation lies in Arab and European countries in the face of the Soviet option. The second meeting with Pertini was even more sharpened, Pertini spoke primarily on behalf of Italy for whom the situation is tragic and for whom Algeria is the one chance to lead Iran to its senses. 2.2. Both Schmidt and Pertini would like to get Algeria to act as intermediary so that the government or the leadership of Iran will be able to make “a decisive step” enabling the Europeans to postpone, or not take at all, steps that no one wishes to take. This step should occur before the 17th. 2.3. After his return to Algiers, the President summoned GB and discussed the matter with his government. Not only was the Algerian government impressed by the initiatives of Schmidt and Pertini, he also decided to make them its own and dispatched Deputy Minister (following GB’s advice) in order for him to meet with Ghotbzadeh and if possible with Bani-Sadr. 3. GB is a member of the Central Committee of the Algerian National Liberation Front and a member of the National Assembly. I have a great deal of esteem for him, his children and my children play together, for months he has been telling me: “if you wish to succeed here, forget conventional diplomacy and call things by their name. It’s the only way to get to some result, maybe.” He gave the same advice to his Deputy Foreign Minister who followed the advice, in part only, this being his first contact here. This is what he said: “If any country can understand Iran, Algeria is that country. We have suffered under colonialism and imperialism. We know all about what AMERICAN imperialism can do and has done but it is not the only imperialism. Hostage taking cannot be tolerated. As it continues the situation becomes serious, far more serious than you, the Iranians seem to realize. Indeed, if the US and most European countries were to take drastic measures that applied to all countries that would continue to trade with you or to help you then you should know that in spite of our friendship for you, we shall place

Covert and Overt Operations 6. (No numeral 5 in original) The Deputy Foreign Minister and GB then asked GHOTBZADEH for a meeting with Bani-Sadr, provided it is clearly understood that if Bani-Sadr is to merely repeat Ghotbzadeh’s theses then there is no reason to waste his time. The Algerians clearly expected an act of statemanship on the part of Bani-Sadr. Ghotbzadeh then telephoned Bani-Sadr and briefed him about what he had said. But the Deputy Foreign Minister who is leaving tomorrow has not yet been received by Bani-Sadr who nevertheless found plenty of time yesterday and the day before to meet with a number of journalists . . . and with my British colleague. 7. This is where things stand, says GB. So let us see what effect Waldheim’s statement issued after his meeting with Giscard will have. Let us see what Ghotbzadeh will tell us after Islamabad where the Algerian Deputy Foreign Minister is also going, perhaps together with Ghotbzadeh. Meager results so far. Lang 286. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Covert and Overt Operations cal treatment.4 At present, we are allowing visas virtually only for deathbed cases. Each case should be examined carefully in terms of need, but we should be more flexible in permitting cases of real need. He also suggested that we apply more liberal standards on permitting families to rejoin. At present this is limited only to mothers, fathers and children. He would propose extending this to include brothers, sisters, uncles and aunts.5 All agreed that some liberalization of the rules was justified, with careful verification of each case. (C) Approve some liberalization, with close verification of each case Maintain very tight restrictions as at present6 Iranian students are a special category composed of three different groups. The vast bulk of Iranian students, perhaps 50,000, were admitted on the basis that they could remain until they completed their studies. They are not a problem from the visa point of view. About 7,000 students have visas with specific time limits, some of which are expiring. Gary Sick noted that he had been contacted by the Provost of MIT on behalf of the National Association of Foreign Student Affairs pointing out several cases of students whose visas are expiring in the near future despite the fact that they are about to complete work on a PhD. The SCC asked for additional information to review this at a later time. A third group of about 100 Iranian students had valid visas for the duration of their studies but happened to be trapped outside the U.S. (e.g. a weekend field trip to Canada) when the order was imposed and they have not been able to return. Mr. Christopher found the application of the rule in these cases capricious and recommended permitting these individuals to return. The SCC agreed.7 (C) 3. Travel of U.S. Citizens to Iran. There are a number of possible cases emerging, from individual family members wishing to travel to Iran, to lawyers representing Iran who need to consult with their clients, to Ramsey Clark who apparently intends to attend the forthcoming conference in Iran related to the rescue mission. Dr. Brzezinski asked State and Justice to examine the various cases, define some rational distinctions, and provide recommendations to the SCC on those which require high level decisions. (C) 4 Carter underlined the phrase “for medical treatment” and wrote in the left margin: “ok, but only for serious cases where US offers unique treatment.” 5 Carter underlined “brothers, sisters, uncles and aunts” and wrote “no” in the left margin. 6 Carter approved this option with a checkmark, crossed out the phrase “as at present” at the end of the sentence, and initialed “J” in the right margin. 7 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.

Covert and Overt Operations 287. Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Constable) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, May 24, 1980 SUBJECT

Covert and Overt Operations crisis, but the reasons for his possibly believing so are unclear. So far there appear to have been very few acceptances to participate in the conference. The Iranians are attempting to persuade some Americans to attend, but realize that there could be difficulties for these individuals in obtaining validation of their passports for travel to Iran. 4. Bangladesh Initiative The BDG at the recent Islamic Conference in Islamabad may have floated the idea of putting together a “contact group” of a few Islamic countries which would go to Tehran to try to be helpful in resolving the US-Iranian crisis. We do not know at this point whether they had any positive responses from other Islamic governments, but are checking on it with our people in Dacca. 5. UN Initiative The Syrian advisor to President Assad, Adib Daoudi, arrived today in Tehran. His trip is at Waldheim’s request for the purpose of exploring possibilities for the UN Commission to resume its mandate. Waldheim has said that he will ask Daoudi to meet with religious leaders such as Beheshti, as well as with government officials. Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh has publicly disassociated Daoudi’s visit from the hostage issue. This stance probably reflects Ghotbzadeh’s doubts as to whether it will be possible to use Daoudi’s visit to contribute to a solution. Points to be Made —I would like to reconfirm our understanding that the Daoudi visit is truly exploratory, and that there can be no question of release of the commission report except in an agreed framework for release of the hostages. —We hope you will keep in closest touch with us, especially as regards the outcome of the Daoudi visit. —Assistant Secretary Saunders has been in Europe this past week consulting with our major Allies on ways in which their Ambassadors in Tehran can be helpful. —Saunders has also had long talks with the Swiss government, which represents our interests in Iran. The Swiss have agreed to play an active role and will attempt to be of assistance in connection with various initiatives that are underway. —Saunders has discussed with European social democratic leaders their plans for visiting Iran. Hopefully such a visit can also have a positive impact on the hostage question. —Archbishop Capucci is in Tehran at his own initiative attempting to explore the possibilities for Islamic countries playing a helpful role in building a consensus for the release of the hostages.

Covert and Overt Operations the actions of the Majlis. He agreed but said there was a lot of optimism around about the West German approach. I pointed out we had not been clued in on this other than a brief reference to it at this morning’s meeting.3 He said it came in a recent NODIS from Stoessel.4 The message indicated there was a suggestion that the hostages might be released within three weeks. [1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified] 4. I talked also about the rescue operation planning and how much support we should give to it.5 His response is that it is not a dead option but that we might have to look at it also in the event we come to an impasse on negotiations. We are going to have to make our own judgment as to how much of our effort we put in that direction. Basically, I think we have to go along with the DoD’s requests but we’ve got to be rather selective, i.e., DoD will cook up all kinds of options and be happy to have us explore each in great detail. We’ve got to hold back until their enthusiasm calms down enough to know which option is worth looking at seriously. We’ll also have to be pretty toughminded on what we are uniquely equipped to do for them and what they can really do themselves. In short, we must cooperate. We can footdrag, we can not volunteer, and we can insist that there be some signs of seriousness and a reasonable probability of success behind proposals that we expend much effort in supporting. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.] Stansfield Turner6 Director 3 Reference is to the Special Coordination Committee meeting that took place that morning at 9:30 a.m. The Summary of Conclusions of this meeting does not discuss the West German approach. (May 28; Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 14)

Covert and Overt Operations of releasing the hostages to the Non-Aligned Movement headed by Castro because they feel this would play into the hands of the communist interests. Villalon also says Ghotbzadeh wants the U.N. Commission to complete its work while Bani-Sadr wants it to fail. Villalon will only say that the Ghotbzadeh plan takes into account three elements: (1) Bani-Sadr’s ideas; (b) the past scenarios agreed with the U.S.; (c) the Islamic concept of forgiveness or pardon, pardon being one of the Imam’s prerogatives. There also seems to be an idea—which Capucci was pressing—of approaching Arab governments such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and perhaps Syria to generate approaches to Iran on behalf of Islamic countries to create a situation in which Parliament would merely endorse the Imam’s decision which itself would be folded into an Islamic consensus. A disturbing element mentioned by others than Villalon is the idea of releasing the hostages in

Covert and Overt Operations Justice John Harmon* JCS John Pustay DCI Frank Carlucci ICA Charles Bray* Robert T. Curran* * Not present for final item. ** Present only for last two items. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Travel to Iran. The Department of State proposed guidance for approval of certain categories of travel to Iran. It was agreed that this issue needed additional work before presenting it to the President. A working group of State, Justice, Treasury and Lloyd Cutler’s office will examine the issue.2 (U) 2. Iranian Students.3 The Department of State summarized the present situation. As of December, 1979, there were approximately 66,000+ Iranian students in the U.S. of which 56,000+ were registered. The 10,000+ who were not registered are in violation of the law; they are being pursued and will be deported. Of those registered, 6,700 were found to be out-of-status and deportation proceedings have been initiated. Approximately 300 have departed to date. Approximately 42,000 students are in status and in good standing, with visas entitling them to remain in the U.S. for the duration of their studies. They are not a problem. However, there are about 7,000 Iranian students who were granted visas with a specific departure date simply because that was the type of visa being granted at the time. These students now face deportation as their visas expire, terminating their course of study in the middle of a degree program or even in the midst of exams. These students are no different politically or otherwise than the 42,000 who can remain, but they are caught in a technicality. We have been receiving numerous calls from university presidents around the country 2 Subsequent to the meeting, the Department of State prepared a “Scorecard of U.S. Passports to Iran,” June 4, and, in consultation with the Department of Justice and Cutler, also prepared an action memorandum on travel to Iran, June 9. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 13) On June 11, Muskie sent Cutler a proposed memorandum to the President, which suggested that the Department approve travel requests on a case-by-case basis and that the Treasury make voluntary its requirement for notification of travel by journalists. (Ibid.) 3 The discussion was based on a June 2 memorandum from Saunders, Owen, and Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs Barbara Watson to Newsom, and its attached paper, “Inter-Agency Assessment: Iranian Students in the United States.” (Ibid.)

Covert and Overt Operations McHenry has begun that process in New York and will continue. The third step is to propose a resolution. All agreed that State should prepare a resolution comprising those elements of the ICJ decision which were agreed unanimously by the Court.7 Since the timing of such a resolution should be sensitive to events in Tehran and elsewhere, the resolution would not be submitted to the SC until it had been further reviewed by the SCC and the President. All agreed that this matter would be reviewed by the SCC next Tuesday, with the idea of submitting a resolution next week. (C) Approve8 Other 4. Tehran Conference. Developments concerning the Ramsey Clark delegation and the Iranian release of a purported message from General Huyser to General Haig were briefly reviewed.9 (JCS says the text of the message is probably accurate. It is unclear how the Iranians could have obtained a copy, although it is possible Huyser was working through the Iranian generals at some point.) All agreed that we should hold to our present posture of no comment on the Huyser message. The Attorney General supports prosecution of the Americans in the delegation on civil charges, rather than criminal charges, which would 7 McHenry circulated a resolution, a copy of which is attached to a June 16 memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Covert and Overt Operations a trial of some form may be the only way for the Iranian authorities to get out of their own dilemma. Essentially this is a political question. He recommended that any warning be delivered as quietly as possible, recognizing that it is difficult to sustain a private position in an election year when opponents might wish to use events against you. He had raised the general problem with Senator Byrd and the Democratic leadership this morning, and they had advised playing it as low key as possible. (S) Mr. Cutler observed that the ICJ decision prohibits trials or calling the hostages as witnesses. It also bars the U.S. from taking any unilateral action. We might wish to take a position, in light of the ICJ ruling, that we would pursue the matter through the Security Council, at least in the first instance. Jody Powell noted that the political situation here was affected not only by the outcome of trials but also the process. Some processes available to Iran, e.g. a trial of “U.S. crimes” in which hostages are cited but not called, could be consistent with the ICJ decision and we could probably stomach them politically. (S) Dr. Brzezinski said we need to differentiate between deterring certain actions by the Iranians and reacting to events. In the first instance, we may wish to signal to the Iranians certain types of procedures which we would protest but would be able to accept as a way out. But we should also make clear our intention to react to public humiliation of the hostages. (S) Secretary Muskie said he was inclined to emphasize the ICJ ruling and resort to the SC. The President’s Sunday statement was probably sufficient to recall the seriousness of our warning. The hardliners now appear to be in control; if we start with provocations or threats, we may only feed the hardliners, while focusing on the ICJ will leave them in some uncertainty about the November 23 message and force them to respond to the ICJ ruling rather than direct threats. We would be giving the hardliners less to attack, but our position would still be there. The choice of intermediary would be extremely important in delivering such a delicate message. The Syrian, Daoudy, on the UN Commission is one choice. Another is the Swiss. Mr. Saunders noted that the most delicate part is to give them enough room to grope their way out without starting a process we do not want to happen. The European ambassadors may be useful in putting some kind of protection around the hostages. (S) Dr. Brzezinski agreed it was a terribly dangerous business, with Iran still in a semi-revolutionary state and the possibility of a trial process getting completely out of hand. He suggested that State draft a message—or series of messages as appropriate—which would be

Covert and Overt Operations proposal, although they will not have seen the final draft. Frank Carlucci would very much like to get authoritative guidance on this proposal before he leaves on Sunday [less than 1 line not declassified]. —Can we reach consensus on forwarding this to the President? —Do we need to have a further meeting of principals? Guidance for Use With Contacts In my memo to you and ZB last week, I proposed an action strategy which would give CIA specific guidance on the “message” they can use with their various contacts. I was authorized to contact the various participants of this meeting in advance to try out this idea. I have talked with Frank Carlucci, Bob Komer, and John Pustay. I am scheduled to see Newsom this afternoon prior to the meeting. Komer and Pustay agreed wholeheartedly with the general approach of focusing our efforts on countering Soviet penetration and the growth of radical leftist forces in Iran. Carlucci thought my original formulation was too negative—stressing what we did not want rather than what we hoped to achieve. I have tried to incorporate their comments in the draft guidance at Tab A.3 I hope to get a preliminary reaction from Newsom prior to the meeting. The proposed guidance would serve three purposes: —It lays out a general overview of the situation from the U.S. point of view. In the past, our “message” to the various Iranian groups has tended to be imprecise and confusing, and this has hampered our credibility. Hopefully, this guidance would help us speak with one voice. —It makes clear our opposition to premature and ill-guided military operations launched from Iraq (the “White Russian” syndrome). Oveissi and his supporters are presently very active in this country and elsewhere (they saw Sadat last month)4 drumming up enthusiasm for a military coup. —It focuses the objective of our efforts on the internal situation in Iran, by encouraging the development of a coalition of forces to actively 3 Tab A is attached but not printed. The final version is attached to Document 293. 4 At their May 24 meeting, Sadat expressed his confidence in Oveissi’s ability to change events in Iran. He also acknowledged Oveissi’s monetary reliance on the Iraqis, but warned him to “be wary of Iraqi intentions.” Sadat advised him to line up the support of all the friendly Persian Gulf countries, to obtain U.S. acquiescence in this, to build his strength inside Iran (particularly through his ongoing broadcasts), and to avoid undue contact with the Shah. Sadat told Oveissi that, unlike the Soviet Union, the United States did not fully understand the seriousness of the Iranian situation and had to be “force fed like a baby.” (Memorandum of conversation, May 30; Central Intelligence

Covert and Overt Operations 293. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 6, 1980 SUBJECT Political Action Options on Iran (S) Some months ago, you approved several intelligence findings authorizing a significant covert action program toward Iran. During the February and March negotiations with Bani-Sadr, this program was conducted in a very low key to avoid disrupting the talks, although useful contacts were developed with a number of [less than 1 line not declassified] individuals which may prove valuable in the future. After the breakdown of the negotiations, all of our assets were devoted almost exclusively to the rescue operation. (S) Over the past month, we have again examined our options, with the objective of becoming more active in political action. The draft memorandum at Tab A represents the consensus of State, CIA, Defense, the JCS and myself about the present situation and the options available to us. Basically, it outlines a strategy for the long haul, in which we would build an infrastructure of contacts [less than 1 line not declassified] in order to maximize our ability to influence the course of events. (S) This strategy represents a more realistic reflection of current political realities and our actual capabilities. We are also aware of the danger that a premature direct confrontation with Khomeini, so long as he remains the symbol of the revolution, could give the Soviets and the radical left an opportunity to intervene. (S) Unless you disagree with this general approach, we would propose using the paper at Tab B as guidance for the Agency in their discussions and contacts [less than 1 line not declassified].2 It has been reviewed and approved by all of the appropriate agencies. (S) [2 lines not declassified] We believe the program outlined in the attached papers will provide the basis for a mutually consistent and effective political action effort.3 (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. Sent for action. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig, J.” 2 Carter wrote “ok” in the left margin. 3 In an undated memorandum to Turner, Brzezinski wrote that Carter had approved Tabs A and B as recommended at a June 5 SCC(I) meeting. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 16)

Covert and Overt Operations b. the ethnic option of dealing with some or all of the Azerbayjanis, Kurds, Qashqai, Turkomen, Arabs, and Baluchis inside Iran; c. the internal option of dealing with political figures inside Iran, both within and without the government. While each option can be described independently, we must recognize that our activities in one area clearly affect those in another, and success in one area will likely breed success in others. In short, the options are interlocking and overlapping. [portion marking not declassified] 5. The Internal Option. Since political institutions, aside from the religious, have been destroyed or badly ripped asunder in the course of the past 20 months, there seems to be little cohesion to the anti- Khomeini political movement in motion, and indeed no such movement may be capable of surviving as long as Khomeini lives. [portion marking not declassified] [14 paragraphs (88 lines) not declassified] Tab B Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff5 Washington, June 5, 1980 GUIDANCE FOR USE WITH CONTACTS 1. The Khomeini experiment in theocratic rule is likely to fail, not because of its “Islamic” nature but because the Iranian clergy will be unable to deal with the economic, political, social and strategic problems of Iran. Their shortcomings are becoming increasingly apparent, and dissatisfaction within the country is growing. 2. However, a large proportion of the Iranian population has been radicalized by the revolution, and Khomeini continues to stand as the ultimate symbol of the revolution. A premature direct attack on the revolution or against Khomeini personally will probably fail. 3. The greatest threat to the long-term independence and territorial integrity of Iran is not mullah rule, which is becoming increasingly discredited, but the emergence of a radical left regime and Soviet political or military domination under the guise of protecting the revolution. 5 Secret; Sensitive.

Covert and Overt Operations meets its political needs. The oral message transmitted herewith is intended for President Bani-Sadr, and you may also give a copy to Ghotbzadeh. We suggest that with others you simply use these ideas in conversations. 2. Begin text of oral message for Bani-Sadr: The Iranian radio, TV and various newspapers, as well as public figures, are again speaking of the possibility of placing our diplomats on trial. You are aware of our strong and very serious concern about the dangers of this procedure. We are confident our view is fully shared by almost all other governments who also reject the idea of further violations of the immunity of diplomats. The International Court of Justice has clearly expressed a unanimous judgment that our diplomats should not be involved in judicial proceedings.2 We are also sure that Iran’s leaders agree that it is essential to civilized international order to preserve the principle of diplomatic immunity. The American people and others throughout the world who have shown their sympathy for Iranian feelings would not understand or accept trials of innocent diplomats. By no standard of international law, human rights or religion could our diplomats reasonably be placed on trial. In the interest·of the stability of Iran and of its region, we want to see the present crisis urgently settled in a peaceful, honorable and harmonious manner, at the earliest opportunity. We have said, and we have understood Iranian leaders to say, that there is no wish to humiliate the other side. If the crisis can be resolved without acrimony or an attempt to debase the other side, efforts can be made to remove the damage to Iran which has resulted from the seizure of the hostages. An official trial of the hostages would seriously impair international respect for Iran for a long time to come and place in jeopardy diplomats of all nations, including Iran, throughout the world. We recognize the deep and abiding feeling in Iran that Iran’s grievances are not being adequately reflected in world opinion. We have said repeatedly that we have no objection to the provision of appropriate means for expressing Iran’s grievances if that would help solve the crisis. It was with this thought in mind that we cooperated in the establishment of the UN Commission. We understand that Iran intended the recent conference in Tehran for this purpose.3 We understand further that the new Parliament will examine the hostage issue. There should be sufficient opportunity in its deliberations for the

Covert and Overt Operations He replied to my questions as follows: 2.2. Ghotbzadeh is of the opinion that the most useful contribution to the release of the hostages is at present the unpublicized and discreet, though long and tedious work which consists in rallying the greatest possible number of members of Parliament to this thesis in order to prepare the groundwork. He added that he is working in that direction. 2.3. I then asked him if this meant that there was no way to speed up matters or bypass Parliament. Ghotbzadeh does not rule this out, but he believes that Parliament must in any event take up the highest priorities first and that “to bypass Parliament” is delicate and depends upon circumstances which have not yet materialized (a figure of speech to conceal the Imam’s permission). 2.4. Re scenarios, there are several in the air and it is not a bad thing that there be several scenarios, but at the moment, of course, there is no final version. 3. Given the climate of our discussion, I took it upon myself to tell Ghotbzadeh that rumors had reached the other side (i.e., the U.S.) accusing it of playing a political game with the scenarios, i.e., of giving preference to one group over another. I assured him that this was not the case at all, much to the contrary. The other party is anxious to have the hostages released soonest, without trial, never mind what scenario or what group. Furthermore the other side acknowledges the work and courage of certain leading figures, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs during the last few months. I added that this comment is even more valid when my own country, as protecting power, is concerned and that it does not want to meddle in any of these factional strifes inside Iran. I added that speaking personally I could only express the honor I feel at the confidence and spirit of cooperation that Ghotbzadeh has shown me and assured him of my loyalty. Ghotbzadeh replied that he appreciated my words very much and he added that all this should be attributed to the apprenticeship of democracy which is a long and difficult process. 4. Regarding Bani Sadr, I intend to try to see Sandjabi and if I do I will hand over to him a non-paper.3 3 A draft of the undated “non-paper” was attached to a May 15 memorandum from Precht to Newsom. It consisted of U.S. “observations” concerning the ability of the Swiss Embassy in Tehran to protect U.S. diplomatic and consular interests in Iran. It acknowledged that “present circumstances” did not allow the Swiss to protect the hostages or take possession of U.S. diplomatic or consular property but did expect the Swiss “to exercise such protection and take possession of such property as circumstances may permit.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State

Covert and Overt Operations nity in support of the rescue operation. He noted that he would skip much of the detail and leave that, and any other questions the Panel might have, for them to address after he finished his opening remarks or to be followed up by the General Wilson-DDCI/John McMahon channel. He then categorized our intelligence support into five distinct areas: —Positive intelligence —Training in the US —Planning and preparation assistance —Execution of the operation —Effect of secrecy [portion marking not declassified] 3. The Director then proceeded to describe our role in each of these five categories in more detail. a. Positive intelligence (1) He opened by saying that this was an undertaking shared in by the entire Community (State, NSA, CIA, DIA). (2) He stated that our primary requirement had been to provide information on where the hostages were. —He noted that we had high confidence that the hostages were, in fact, in the embassy.2 [5 lines not declassified] Prior to this windfall information we did have good confidence in the knowledge that the hostages were in the embassy, though there was always some question as to exactly how many hostages were in which specific building. The Director noted that the embassy compound was a very hard target to penetrate. (3) We also had a requirement to provide intelligence on the compound and its environs. —We were very good here. [4½ lines not declassified] —[6 lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] we were able to obtain the great amount of detail regarding the physical layout and conditions of the embassy, the stadium and other areas of interest to the planners of the operation. (4) NSA support. —He commented that NSA did a fine job of getting all the necessary information with regard to the Iranian radar and communications networks. —[4½ lines not declassified] —[3½ lines not declassified] (5) CIA/DIA military reporting. —He mentioned that a lot of collection, analysis and reporting had been done on the status of the Iranian military.

Covert and Overt Operations —The Agency then began examining photos of desert areas to see if another alternative might be possible. This led to the identification of Desert 1 as a possibility. —The Director then described the OTTER mission. [4½ lines not declassified] —He noted that while this (the OTTER flight) was conceived of in January, permission to carry out the mission was not received until the March full moon timeframe. (4) Communications support —[3½ lines not declassified] —[9 lines not declassified] (5) Farsi-speaking drivers. —He noted that we had provided the force with this capability. —[1½ lines not declassified] —[2½ lines not declassified] d. Execution phase (1) The primary intelligence contribution was that provided [less than 1 line not declassified]. —This enabled us to know that one of the aircraft (a C–130) had been detected. —[less than 1 line not declassified] the Iranian report was confused and it subsequently got lost in the air control network. —After the landing at Desert 1, and the subsequent unfortunate events, [less than 1 line not declassified] indicated that the word had gotten out. (2) [2½ lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] e. Secrecy (1) The Director alluded to the fact that he had just read a report (on 9 June) from John McMahon3 that raised an interesting issue: that the operation may have been so secretive that undue risks may have been incurred. —The Director commended to ADM Holloway that he and his group look into what price needed to be paid for a given level of secrecy involved in any future joint task force operation. (2) The DCI stressed that only two individuals in the Agency knew that an official “go” had been given. —He noted that many more, however, had been told to be ready to “go,” but stressed that even among those in the room, only he knew that a specific decision had been made. 3 Memorandum from McMahon to Turner, June 9. (Central Intelligence Agency,

Covert and Overt Operations Q (Holloway): Noting that one of the reasons for their visit (and one of their charges in general) was to explore what interfaces (with a future joint task force) would be necessary. He asked for our view on this (while noting that he felt that such Agency-JTF interface would be essential). A (McMahon): He described both the routine interface with DoD and the specific involvement on this mission. —[2 lines not declassified] —He also described that our terrorist branch works regularly with the Delta force both in terms of providing information and in training. —For the rescue operation he noted that we expanded our liaison with the Delta force in order to provide training and logistical support, and that we provided [less than 1 line not declassified] liaison to the Pentagon for planning assistance. —Further on the rescue support he noted that we virtually opened our warehouses as far as paramilitary stocks, operational devices, equipment, etc. were concerned in order to ensure that the team had everything it needed for advance training. Q (Holloway): He advised that the Panel’s preliminary view was that any future, permanent Task Force would be a field organization and would include the Delta force, dedicated transport, some Navy personnel and equipment (e.g. SEALS, possibly a submarine) and a command liaison cell in Washington (most likely in the JCS special operations area). He wondered how we thought the interface would, or should, be carried out in this case. A (DCI): He stressed that there are a number of areas for interface, at different levels, and that such interface with the Agency is essential. —He noted that future operations involving this JTF would be run as a military operation; but he mentioned that there is a need for the incorporation of clandestine skills [3 lines not declassified]. Holloway then made the following comment: —He said the Panel had discussed (but they had not yet reached any firm resolution) the fact that the JTF would most likely be a military organization. —The JTF was to be prepared for an NSC decision that a given operation was to be a DoD responsibility as opposed to (a) a negotiation approach to the problem (Holloway referred to this as a State responsibility); or (b) a clandestine approach to the problem (Holloway referred to this as an area of CIA responsibility). —i.e. their focus to date was to determine how, when the Chiefs were told to execute an operation, they could best do it. Q (Manor): He asked whether the initial detection by the Iranians had been picked up by their radar and whether it was a C–130 or a helo. A (DCI): It was a visual sighting of a C–130; it was not a radar detection.

Covert and Overt Operations —As regards the concern for traffic in the area, he noted that when the OTTER landed, several autos went by; he emphasized, therefore, that it was no surprise that traffic was on the road—in fact, that that is why a special Ranger unit was taken in on the 130s: to deal with any traffic that did come by. Q (Gray): He wanted to return again to the operational security issue. As they conducted their review of the planning process, he had become concerned that this operation was so compartmentalized that there was insufficient participation in the review of the plan through its various stages, noting that the Panel had been unable to find anyone except the DoD and JCS principals themselves who were aware of, and briefed on, the entire plan. He asked whether we thought that, with more leeway on the security issue, we could not have had a greater sense of confidence in whatever plan was developed. A (DCI): Noting that he wanted to be candid, he said that, at least three times during the plan’s development, he had not been entirely sure of what was going on; and he was concerned because he wanted to make sure that we were providing what was both wanted and needed in order to enhance the plan’s success. —He said that he saw Vaught on several occasions, but that Vaught was expressing a need for many things at once, whereas what we needed to understand was a priority listing of what was wanted so that we could dedicate our resources accordingly (since our limited resources did not permit meeting all of Vaught’s requests simultaneously). —He mentioned that on several occasions he had to ask CJCS to go over the plan in order to see if we were providing what was needed. —He commented that he had never seen a written plan, and mentioned that the closest we got to this was simply as a result of our [less than 1 line not declassified] liaison assigned to the Pentagon. —He mentioned that one of the unfortunate results of this (unawareness of the details of the entire plan) was that we did not know, nor did anyone ask us about, the taking of [less than 1 line not declassified] communications equipment and imagery products along in the helos which were going to be left behind; he opined that the resulting compromise of these materials may have been the result of the absence of any detailed review of the plans by all concerned. Q (Gray): He underscored his concern for what the Director had just described (the lack of adequate review which led to the unnecessary compromise of classified material). He stated that he was all for an unconventional JTF, one which, of necessity, would be small and welltrained; but he stressed that it was his belief that we (the USG) must always be reliant on other forces, whether attached to CINCs or whether belonging to the CIA. He was concerned that the JTF might migrate into the “roles and missions” of other agencies or organizations (noting that any JTF that tried to do all that some were considering doing would, in fact, be bigger than the CIA).

Covert and Overt Operations (Bob Ames [less than 1 line not declassified] concurred in this general summation.) [portion marking not declassified] 6. At this point the meeting adjourned and the Panel members left. Any subsequent requests for information will be relayed by Sam Wilson, either to John McMahon or the DDCI. [portion marking not declassified] J.H. Rixse PB/NSC Coordinator 297. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom)1 Washington, June 13, 1980 SUBJECT Contacts with General Oveissi General Oveissi left Iran shortly before the Shah—exhausted and in flight as one of the most hated figures in the Shah’s government. During his career as a military officer he was unpopular with his subordinates and owed his success primarily to his close relationship with the Shah. After a period of retreat in the U.S., he became active again among opposition figures and is now becoming—even more than former Prime Minister Bakhtiar—the most prominent oppositionist. The CIA began [less than 1 line not declassified] contact with Oveissi following the hostage crisis. DOD officers have been in touch with him since his arrival here. CIA disclaims that any tangible support is being provided to him and insists that we “need to stay in touch.” The impression in the Iranian exile community, however, is increasingly that the U.S. is supporting Oveissi. This impression has caused previously timid Iranian money to come forth for his cause and may have contributed to the decision of the Iraqis to give him facilities for a radio station. There are rumors that Oveissi was recently in Washington and that a group in DIA is seeking to arrange a meeting with Secretary 1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Records, Iran 80. Secret. Drafted by Precht. Cleared in draft by Miles Greene.

Covert and Overt Operations 298. Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 Washington, June 17, 1980 SUBJECT Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 17 June 1980 I covered the following items: [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.] 6) I told him the military was creating an inordinate drain on our resources in pressing for our participation in the development of another hostage rescue operation. For example, they were pressing us to buy trucks [less than 1 line not declassified]. They were claiming to have Presidential support on this. Brzezinski said that if we did do another operation we needed to do it right. I said I could agree with that but I had difficulty in working toward an operation which is unlikely to take place in the present context. [1½ lines not declassified] He acknowledged that we should have a plan in hand before Defense asks us to go off and buy trucks. Hence, he intends to convene a meeting shortly after his return to hear from Defense and us exactly what that plan may be. I think this will give us reason to hold Defense off for a bit. ([name not declassified] should be in touch with Brzezinski’s office on the meeting. [less than 1 line not declassified] we have been instructed to have a joint planning session with Brzezinski before we make any commitments [less than 1 line not declassified].) Frank C. Carlucci 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations to wanting the hostage matter resolved. The Imam reportedly wants no trials. —Ghotbzadeh says the March scenario is a dead letter. With regard to the mandate of the Commission, he continues, as we know, to maintain firmly that the Red Cross visit with the hostages took the place of a visit by the UN Commission. —Beheshti was pleased by the Secretary General’s attention in asking Daoudi to see him. His view is that the hostage issue will be solved by the parliament. He did not want to talk about how the parliament would solve the problem but he spoke of determination to resolve the problem. He said it must be left to the Iranians with no threats, sanctions, or military action. —Bani-Sadr remains committed to finding a solution. He believes that whether the parliament decides or not, the issue will go back to the Imam—either for confirmation or for decision. —Ghotbzadeh very much wants the UN Commission’s report available when the parliament begins to consider the hostage issue. Bani-Sadr did not want the report now. He felt that his enemies would see the Commission’s report simply as a cover-up for the release of the hostages. He felt that premature submission of the report would close out the Commission from a future role as an organ for conducting a dialogue between the U.S. and Iran to resolve the crisis. —The Iranian authorities have not reached agreement on a plan or on timing for presenting the hostage issue to the parliament. The timing is very much related to resolution of the formation of a cabinet. Against the background of his assessment, Daoudi said he felt strongly that “something must be done” as a result of his mission. The mission cannot be left as a failure because that would tend to close the door on a future role for the UN. He said he had considered as one option an interim report by the entire Commission, but he had ruled that out as too complicated since it would involve all members of the Commission. He had, therefore, come to a second option, namely submitting his own report on his mission to the Secretary General to serve some of the functions of an interim report. The remainder of our discussion with Daoudi and the bulk of my discussion with Waldheim centered on what might be accomplished by Waldheim’s sending a report from Daoudi to the Security Council. In outline, a report by Daoudi on his mission would cover the following ground: —He would describe whom he had seen on his current mission and the instructions he had from Waldheim. —He would then describe the background of his mission by stating where the previous work of the Commission had left off. He would

Covert and Overt Operations Daoudi and the Commission had been told in broad descriptive categories without passing judgment one way or another or presenting detail. We will be providing separately our thoughts on this particular question and on how it might relate to other possible initiatives. 300. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Algeria1

Covert and Overt Operations —There is a sincere appreciation in Washington for the quiet but very helpful role Algeria has played in the crisis. The Algerians are not only highly perceptive in analyzing the crisis, but they enjoy superb access and influence in Tehran. We would like to encourage them to continue their quiet contact work on behalf of an early settlement. Christopher 301. Memorandum From the Commander of the Joint Task Force (Vaught) to the Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Pustay)1 Washington, June 24, 1980 SUBJECT Hostage Rescue Mission (Operation SNOWBIRD) 1. (TS) Summary. Due to the lack of definitive intelligence, adequate force proficiency and available launch bases, development of a specific operational plan to rescue the American hostages held in Iran is not possible at this time. Force proficiency is expected to be realized by 15 July. Action is ongoing to produce an adequate intelligence base and some effort is being made to assure the availability of staging facilities near enough to Iran to enable the secure launch and recovery of the rescue force. 2. (TS) Intelligence. The location and security conditions of the hostages remain largely unknown. [4 lines not declassified] Several innovative technological approaches to improve intelligence gathering are being pursued. Despite the possible near-term future release of some of the hostages, it is expected that others will experience protracted detention and possibly trial. 3. (TS) Launch Bases. It is essential to at least obtain an indication that one or more of Iran’s neighbors would ignore our use of its soil for a rescue mission. No such indication is in hand. A survey is being made with a view towards the possible use of Turkey and Pakistan. [2½ lines not declassified]

Covert and Overt Operations 302. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Acting Secretary of State Christopher Washington, June 26, 1980 [Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Records, Iran 1980. Secret. 3 pages not declassified.] 303. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, June 30, 1980 SUBJECT Contingency Planning Should the Shah Die ISSUE FOR DECISION —How to reply to Atherton’s request for guidance should the Shah die.2 ESSENTIAL FACTORS Should the Shah die within the next few days, we will have to deal with a variety of political decisions regarding the ceremonies that may be held in Egypt. As yet, we do not know what Sadat plans. We believe it would be desirable to convey our concerns to Sadat’s staff quickly 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of

Covert and Overt Operations If an official mourning period is declared, we think it would be preferable for our Embassy to follow the practice adopted by the EC– Nine and other significant missions in Cairo. If the Empress expresses an interest in coming to the United States, we should reassure her that she is welcome. Depending on the circumstances—i.e., statements coming out of Tehran—we might wish to suggest that she defer her trip briefly until a more propitious time. We believe she would understand our concerns, and it is improbable that she will request permission to come here in the near future. Finally, should private Americans seek our advice on travel to the funeral, we should take a neutral position, neither recommending for or against, but point to the delicacy of the hostage crisis as an obvious constraint on public activities. RECOMMENDATION That you approve the suggested cable attached.4 4 There is no indication on the memorandum that the recommendation was either approved or disapproved. 304. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) and the Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (McMahon)1 Washington, June 30, 1980 SUBJECT Iranian Successor Regime after Khomeini 1. Reviewed the prospects for Iranian political action with [name not declassified]. He feels both Bakhtiar and Oveisi are not good bets because they have become so public. Oveisi, for instance, has advertised that he is working with the Iraqis. This is not going to endear him to the Iranian population who can’t see much good coming for Iran out of working with Iraq. He felt the basic principle was that there had to

Covert and Overt Operations satanic, the writing paper with the imperial emblem is satanic, even the brochure of North Korean propaganda showing female gymnasts in sport outfits is satanic . . . . I remarked to the Chief of Protocol that he still had the Iranian flag with the lion and sun in his office . . . he replied, “Thank you for pointing it out to me, but anyway who knows whether I will still be here tomorrow.” That’s nothing. Although it is difficult to understand how can it still be possible, drastic purges are beginning again. The criteria applied, it seems, to the National Iranian Oil Company, include the fact of having studied in the West, here the look of the client, there the opinion of a hard-line committee which considers that you do not pray fervently enough . . . Sic patria salvanda est . . . [Thus the country is being Lang 306. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1

Covert and Overt Operations 307. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Covert and Overt Operations 3. Payment of Interest on Blocked Iranian Accounts. Banks and other institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts have the use of this money without paying interest on it, which is a clear case of “unjust enrichment.” The Treasury Department believes that interest should be paid into these blocked accounts in order to increase the amount available for claims by hostage families and others at some future point rather than letting the holding institutions reap the benefits. The amount of interest on these blocked funds is very large, up to about $1 billion per year. The SCC agreed that it would be preferable to have the interest available to claimants rather than oil companies and banks; however, the public perception would probably be that we were forcing U.S. companies to pay interest to Iranians. In fact, Iranians might acquire some or all of this interest at some future date depending on the negotiations leading to release of the hostages. The SCC agreed that there was no logical basis for starting accrual of interest at this point, eight months after the freeze. Beginning at this point would constitute a windfall of about $600 million for the institutions holding blocked accounts. The Attorney General believes that a retroactive order will be tested in court and will probably fail eventually. However, all agreed that the outcome of litigation was uncertain, and there was no adequate explanation for why we should begin accrual of interest today as opposed to last month or next month. It would be better to make it retroactive and take our chances in court. Treasury has already informally advised companies that interest would probably be required. (S) All agreed that those institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts should be notified that they are required to pay interest on the Iranian funds retroactive to the date of the freeze, with the interest to remain in the frozen accounts. Treasury will take all possible steps to insure that this is understood as making these funds available to future claimants rather than the banks and oil companies holding these funds and explain that the timing of our decision is related to the preliminary completion of our census of frozen assets. (C) Approve.4 Disapprove payment of interest. Disapprove retroactive payment of interest. 4. Sanctions Against Iran. Through intelligence, we have identified 132 cases of material being transshipped to Iran via third countries as 4 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin: “Do not specify too tightly ultimate use of accrued funds. Ok not to go to banks and/ or oil companies.”

Covert and Overt Operations enough for the Iranians to act if they intended to. If we do nothing, we run the risk of sleeping on our rights and of trivializing the ICJ decision by not following up in the SC. Mr. Donovan commented that since the Iranians did nothing in response to the previous SC resolution, he anticipated no public question about why we were not going to the SC again in this case. Mr. Claytor said he would prefer to stand on the ICJ decision; we could be worse off if we went to the SC. All agreed that we should not introduce a SC resolution at this time. (S) Agree.8 Introduce a SC resolution based on the ICJ decision. 6. Iranian Claims to the ICJ. Mr. Cutler pointed out that we could suggest the ICJ as a proper forum for Iran to present claims against the U.S. Mr. Saunders noted that the problem was not the lack of a forum—it was Iranian unwillingness to take advantage of the forums available to them. Mr. Owen, the Legal Advisor of the State Department, noted that he opposed encouraging use of the ICJ for such claims. If the Iranians decide to use the ICJ, we could only accept. However, there is always the chance that we would lose a case charging us with illegal interference in Iran’s internal affairs. This could set an unfortunate precedent and could even involve massive reparation judgments. All agreed that this was not something we should suggest to the Iranians at this point. (S) Agree.9 Other. At that point the meeting was reduced to the restricted membership. 7. Diplomatic Strategy. Mr. Christopher summarized the results of our recent contacts as indicating that “All roads lead to the Parliament.” We now have the most active acknowledged channel we have had through the Swiss. Ambassador Lang meets with Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, but both of them say nothing will happen until the Majlis convenes. That will probably be around the end of July. We are trying to analyze the composition of the Majlis, but it is likely that any decision will come as a result of internal dynamics, not because of what we can do from the outside. The Iranians have to sort out their own power struggle, including the choice of a Prime Minister, before they can address the hostage question. Even if a decision is taken, it will probably have to go back to Khomeini. The formula they are considering is for the Majlis formally to empower the government to work out the problem, rather than the Majlis itself working out the details. Most of the 8 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin. 9 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.

Covert and Overt Operations 308. Editorial Note In early July 1980, the impending death of the Shah and whether the United States should have an official presence at his funeral, as well as the kind of statement the United States should issue on his death, became an issue of discussion between the Department of State and the National Security Council Staff. Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, wrote President Jimmy Carter a July 2 note advising that he should be aware of the draft telegram with instructions to U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Alfred (Roy) Atherton (see footnote 3, Document 303). Brzezinski suggested that the United States not send an official delegation to the funeral, but that Atherton attend the funeral. Carter approved these points, writing “ok” beside the first point, and “I agree” in the right margin beside the second. Carter also approved contingency draft letters of condolence. (Note from Brzezinski to Carter, July 2; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Covert and Overt Operations 309. Letter From Congressmen Guyer, Fascell, Gilman, and Broomfield to Acting Speaker of the Iranian Parliament Yadollah Sahabi and Members of the Iranian Parliament1 Washington, July 2, 1980 Dear Sirs: As you begin to fulfill your duties as Members of the new Iranian Parliament, the undersigned Members of Congress of the United States of America share with you a deep understanding of the magnitude of the responsibilities which you have assumed as the elected representatives of your people. It is this sense of duty and responsibility that motivates us to express our sincere hope that our two nations and peoples can reach a better understanding of each other’s goals and aspirations for the future. For this reason we express to you our deep concern about the deterioration of our relationships as a result of the continued holding of American citizens as hostages. Not only has this crisis resulted in a serious breach of U.S.-Iranian relations, but its continuation has created a critical global issue. At a time when free nations are under attack from the forces of growing hegemony and expansionism, it is in the best interests of both of our nations to resolve this serious bilateral issue in order to confront the more imposing threats to world peace. Accordingly, while we are aware of all of the important domestic issues confronting your government, we urge you to give the hostage issue your highest and earliest priority as the first step in solving the more immediate and crucial threats that free nations face in the world today. Sincerely, Tennyson Guyer Dante B. Fascell Benjamin A. Gilman William Broomfield 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-

Covert and Overt Operations Attachment Oral Message4 Washington, undated A representative of the United States Government is prepared to meet confidentially with a representative of President Bani-Sadr at an agreed location in order to begin discussions of issues between the United States and Iran, including: —The release of Americans held hostage in Iran. —The freeze of Iranian assets in the U.S. —The interruption of trade. —A relationship between the U.S. and Iran based on recognition of the Islamic revolution as a new reality in Iran and on the right of Iranians to determine their own future. —Resolution of other issues between the U.S. and Iran in accordance with principles of international law and the UN Charter. 4 Secret. 311. Editorial Note On July 3, 1980, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General David Jones, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner, and Brzezinski’s Military Assistant and Crisis Coordinator William Odom met to discuss special operations contingencies for Iran. According to the account of the meeting Odom prepared for Brzezinski, the participants made four decisions: “the Aaron Special Intelligence Group will prepare a short paper” on U.S. “intelligence policy toward Iran;” the CIA would “prepare proposals for accelerated development of general purpose intelligence resources as well as resources for the hostage” contingency; CIA and the Department of Defense “will make an intensified effort to overcome the intelligence gaps for ‘special contingency planning’ now in progress in Defense,” and these two agencies would proceed “with a trucking endeavor.” Odom recounted that Brzezinski asked for the first two actions “when you discovered that CIA has no accelerated programs

Covert and Overt Operations Information reaching us indicates that the condition of the former Shah is serious. We have not received any information forecasting the progress of his illness and we are not in a position to make any judgment ourselves in this regard. Our ability to provide information on the state of the health of the former Shah is limited by the absence of any direct contact with him. Although we are in touch with Egyptians who are informed on the state of the Shah’s health, there is necessarily a delay in receiving this information and we are not in a position to evaluate it accurately. Because of these limitations, we do not believe that private information on changes in the state of his health will reach us necessarily sooner than press reports. We will attempt, however, to keep the Swiss Embassy informed of any significant changes. (FORAMBASSADOR LANG: If Ghotbzadeh asks you about attendance at the funeral, you may say that you understand that Ambassador Atherton would attend if President Sadat decides on an official funeral and the Diplomatic Corps are to attend.)3 3 See Document 308. 313. Editorial Note On July 9, 1980, an attempted coup against the Iranian Revolutionary Government unraveled. The original plot was for 12 pilots with their F–4 and F–5 planes to defect to Iraq, but the plot grew in scope. Ultimately, it included units of the Iranian Air Force, ground forces, members of radio and television organizations, and tribal leaders including from the Qashqai. The plot called for Iraq to create an incident at the border between Iran and Iraq as a diversion under which Air Force supporters would bomb the Tehran Air Base, Mehrabad Airport, the home of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and Pasdaran headquarters and training centers. Ground forces would take over the airport and radio and television stations, then broadcast material, including a speech from Ayatollah Kazem Shariat-Madari, saying opponents of the coup were anti-Islamic. After 72 hours, control of Iran would pass to Shahpur Bakhtiar, the former Prime Minister and leader of the exile opposition group, the National Resistance Movement of Iran. Bakhtiar himself, the extent of whose role in the coup is unclear, moved the coup from its original August 13 date to July 10, and then again to

Covert and Overt Operations Ayatollah Sadegh Khalkhali had repeatedly stated that killers dispatched by Iran would find Bakhtiar and also mentioned that the Khomeini government had signed an assassination order on Bakhtiar in early 1979. (“2 Killed as Gunmen Raid Bakhtiar Paris Apartment,”

Covert and Overt Operations 315. Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 Washington, July 11, 1980 SUBJECT Meeting of the Aaron, Komer, Pustay, Newsom and Carlucci Group, 11 July 1980 1. The meeting was billed as an effort to examine and make suggestions on our intelligence collection and covert action program in Iran.2 I was asked to describe both. 2. I first ran over the collection priorities. A consensus emerged on the following: a. We should add a priority on Soviet activities in Iran as a separate item. This should follow priority c, government/internal stability. b. The military and economic developments priorities should be reversed. 3. In the more general discussion on priorities that ensued the consumer agencies had the following suggestions: a. More intelligence on religious groups would be very welcome. b. A high priority was the decision-making process (some argued that one did not exist). If we could describe the process consumers would welcome reports on the atmosphere that surrounds those in authority. c. Newsom laid considerable stress on more information from the Bazaaris. d. In connection with our efforts to penetrate the hostage holders, Newsom renewed an earlier suggestion. If we had the names and backgrounds of some of those involved and could identify the educational institutions in Iran that they attended, State could seek Aid people who may have taught at those institutions. They might have known those involved. The group asked that we update our information on the hostage holders and make it available to them. I would appreciate it if NFAC could do a paragraph or so on the nature of the group and enclose biographic information on those individuals we have identified. e. Komer asked if we had some [less than 1 line not declassified]. He suggested we explore trading information with them on the Soviet external threat for their assessment of Soviet activities inside of Iran. I said we would explore this possibility. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations 316. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (McMahon) to the Commander of the Joint Task Force (Vaught)1 Washington, July 11, 1980 SUBJECT Feasibility Study 1. Before he left town, the Director asked that I reply to your memo of 2 July on developing plans to infiltrate a hostage rescue force into Iran.2 We want to help all we can with this. We are concerned, however, that complying with the full scope of your request might take us into activities beyond the bounds of the Intelligence Community. That is, operational planning which involves considerations of the capabilities and tactics of U.S. forces is normally beyond the purview of intelligence agencies. 2. We therefore feel that all we can and would be most happy to do in support of your rescue planning is to provide opinions on and support for the infiltration plans which your joint task force develops. For instance, we can and should estimate the probability of detection under a given plan. We should estimate what our clandestine resources may be able to do in support. As a general comment in response to your 2 July memo, we do not believe that the governments of Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, or Turkey would agree to permit the use of their territory for a base of operations or through-port for a rescue operation. Moreover, none of these governments should be relied upon to safeguard knowledge of a planned rescue operation. [2 lines not declassified] Insofar as clandestine, or black, infiltration of the rescue force from any of the four countries is concerned (that is without the knowledge of the host government), we would not offer any hope that this is possible. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations airport where he was handed over to the Swiss. That was his first knowledge that he might be released. He had been concerned about his health—unsteadiness, dizziness, and recently nausea—since December. His condition had become acute in the last week or so. —Queen said he had a good relationship with most of his captors although he could not abide a few of them. He thought his adjustment had been as successful as any of the hostages he knew of. He said one of the captors told him privately just before he left that the others would be released in three or four months. —Queen is anxious to come back to the U.S. and interested in his next assignment. He cares deeply, of course, for the hostages left behind. At this point, we believe unless there are strong medical reasons to the contrary that he should be moved to the U.S. rather than Germany for further tests. This would emphasize the fact that he was turned over to his parents rather than to the U.S.G. and could lay a basis for subsequent releases in the future. —At White House initiative, Henry briefed the President, and the President also spoke to Queen in the afternoon from Georgia. —The Swiss were told by Sanjabi that the Iranians have found another body at the Tabas site. We checked with DOD and there is absolutely no possibility that the body is that of an American or an Iranian associated with us. We told the Swiss that the body should not be turned over to them or to the Red Cross for us unless there was information we were not aware of to indicate that the body was an American. —Ghotbzadeh told Richard Cottam last night that he had been responsible for the fast action to release Queen. Ghotbzadeh said he was afraid Queen might die while in Iranian custody and Iran would be blamed for having tortured him. —Ghotbzadeh said again that he would not take part in the new government under Habibi. When Cottam asked if the installation of a new government would be a setback for hostage release, Ghotbzadeh answered quickly, there was no question; the hostages would be released. He had fixed it so that would happen. —We attach an analysis of the new Parliament prepared by Bruce Laingen and submitted yesterday through the Swiss. —We also attach cables received today from the Swiss.3 3 The cable from Laingen and cables from Lang are attached but not printed.

Covert and Overt Operations inexperienced and generally extremist electees of the new Majlis are not good. In terms of domestic Iranian politics, the most attractive solution available to the Majlis is to hold trials in some form. It will take firm and skillful leadership to restrain that impulse, possibly by Khomeini personally, and our past experience offers no reason for optimism that such leadership will be exerted. (S) —A second problem is the progressive deterioration of public order in Iran. This is a vicious circle: incompetence by the Islamic regime leads to public dissatisfaction which leads in turn to more blatant purges and repression by the regime in self-defense which leads to more disaffection. No one knows how long this process will continue before the social structure collapses into a new round of general violence, but most observers believe it should be measured in months rather than years. A collapse of civil order would obviously place the lives of the hostages in jeopardy and would confront us with some urgent decisions. (S) —A third possibility is the death of one or more hostages, or convincing evidence that their physical safety is in immediate —Finally, there may be some act of desperation from within the country or in association with the various exile groups which attempts to split the country or establish an alternative regime. At the moment, the prospects for a successful movement of this type appear limited, but the possibility of an attempted revolt in Azerbaijan or an attempt to cut the Khuzestan oil fields away from the rest of the country, for example, cannot be excluded. Any such attempt would raise the danger of civil war and increase the temptation for the Soviets to intervene. (S) Each of these events would effectively be outside our control but would demand a response on our part which would again place this issue at the forefront of public concern—in this country and elsewhere. Our diplomatic strategy is focused on the first of these contingencies. We are attempting to establish redundant and reliable channels of communications to various elements in the Iranian power structure which will permit an exchange of ideas. We wish to insure that the Iranians understand that trials are totally unacceptable to us. We also wish to explore ideas about how the issue could be managed with the Majlis to avoid unpleasant surprises or, if possible, a new round of sterile rhetoric and confrontational demands. The general outlines of a negotiating framework were established in the position paper developed during the earlier negotiating phase in February and March,3 and our objective is to encourage key Iranians to think in those terms in 3 See Document 137

Covert and Overt Operations 320. Memorandum of Conversation1

Covert and Overt Operations officials should sit down with the Secretary. They should plan to bypass Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh and the U.S. Government. The sooner the better. The Iranians seem to be on the verge of choosing a Prime Minister. Katherine Keough said she would rather not rush. It would be worth waiting a bit to see if the new Prime Minister lasts. Gary Sick noted that the end of Ramadan may provide an appropriate moment for initiative. The President observed that Khomeini appeared to knock down anyone who sticks his head up in Iran. He recently criticized Beheshti and the clerics. Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh were not aware that Richard Queen was going to be released until they were asked to arrange transportation. Katherine Keough mentioned that the families had recently written a letter to Ahmad Khomeini on a person-to-person basis when there appeared to be a chance that he might become the Prime Minister. The letter is being carried to Tehran with Professor Ricks who is presently on his way. The President said that if they saw some positive sign or an opportunity, they should call him directly. Katherine Keough said one final point they wished to make was to propose the establishment of an international commission to deal with questions such as the sanctity of embassies, the inviolability of diplomatic immunity and the like, perhaps under the auspices of the UN. The President said we would certainly join such a commission. Katherine Keough said she hoped, if such a commission were formed, that the leadership of FLAG would be considered for membership in the U.S. delegation. The President asked how the families of the hostages get along among themselves. Katherine Keough joked that they fight. There is a continuing problem of those outside Washington vs. those inside. When those from other locations are brought in, they have unrealistically high expectations about what is known and what can be done. When their expectations are not realized, they are frustrated and tend to think that the government is doing nothing. By the time a meeting is over, they usually go away with a positive attitude which lasts 2–4 weeks before frustrations again begin to mount. Seventeen families were represented in the meeting with Richard Queen. Louisa Kennedy added that there was flak from those who were not there. It had been hard to arrange quickly for everyone. Richard Queen plans to call all the families. The President said that it was obvious that Queen was weak. Even though he was quite animated and excited during his hour visit with

Covert and Overt Operations 2) that delay in implementation until March 1980 was a function of a lack of reliable information on hostage location, fluctuating political circumstances in Iran, and preparation time; 3) that operational secrecy was essential; 4) that command and control had been “excellent at the upper echelons” but more “tenuous and fragile” at the intermediate levels; 5) that mission planning had been adequate, but that a larger helicopter force and better weather contingency preparation would have improved mission success; and 6) that preparation for the mission had been adequate except for operational readiness which would have benefited from a full dress rehearsal and for weaknesses in command and control that should have been addressed. Lastly, the Review Group wrote that the siting of Desert One near a road “probably represented a higher risk than indicated by the JTF assessment.” The Executive Summary contained two general conclusions. First, the Review Group cited the “ad hoc nature of the organization and planning” as a “fundamental concern.” They argued that “an existing JTF organization, even one with a small staff, would have provided an organization framework of professional expertise around which a larger tailored force organization could quickly coalesce.” Second, they argued that operational secrecy proved limiting: “Many things that, in the opinion of the review group, could have been done to enhance mission success were not done because of OPSEC considerations. The review group considers that most of these alternatives could have been incorporated without an adverse OPSEC impact had there been a more precise OPSEC plan selectively exercised and more closely integrated with an existing JTF organization.” These two conclusions led the Review Group to recommend that a Counterterrorist Joint Task Force be established within the Joint Chiefs, and that the Joint Chiefs give careful consideration to the formation of a Special Operations Advisory Panel. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Covert and Overt Operations and his offers of money to certain leaders among them was disruptive to the whole effort. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: Oveisi believed that an apparent loss of interest in him by the Egyptians was the result of the Shah negatively influencing President Anwar Sadat.) Saber returned to Cairo with Oveisi’s message and carefully presented it to the Shah and the royal family. The Shah told Saber that he appreciated Oveisi’s explanation, would heed his words, and wished Oveisi well. Shortly after Saber left, Zahedi called an aide of Oveisi and said that the Shah and the royal family had agreed to stop supporting the various factions. Zahedi explained further that in fact only one exile leader had actually been given money, and that was General Ariana in Paris who had received U.S. dollars 100,000.

Covert and Overt Operations The Minister is totally powerless in the face of these events and has resigned himself to them, especially since he will shortly step down together with the present government. My informant told me that since his return from Paris, Gotbzadeh has practically not shown his face at the Foreign Ministry any more. In my opinion, this snapshot makes amply clear that Khomeini’s constant deconsolidation orders are making it less and less possible to govern the country at all. Kaiser 325. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) Washington, July 26, 1980 [Source: National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Box I–023, SCC Meetings, SCC (I) Meeting Misc Agenda Items. Secret. 2 pages not declassified.] 326. Editorial Note On July 27, 1980, the former Shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, died in Cairo. The Department of State issued a press statement conforming to its final draft. See Document 308. The press statement is in Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, page 55. President Anwar Sadat announced that Egypt would hold a State funeral for the Shah with full military honors, but would not invite other governments or the diplomatic corps to participate in funeral ceremonies. U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Alfred (Roy) Atherton reported that most members of the diplomatic corps would not attend, some intended to put their flags at half-mast, and others had decided not to fly their flags at all. On the upper right corner of Atherton’s telegram, Carter wrote: “Atherton not attend service. Do not fly US flag. C.” (Telegram 16446 from Cairo, July 28; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff

Covert and Overt Operations 327. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Covert and Overt Operations about 80% were pro-Khomeini.4 Although a modest bail was set, the vast majority refused to identify themselves, and the judge ordered them to remain in jail until they presented proper identification. The failure to identify themselves may render them out of status and subject to deportation. The combination of this fact together with possible criminal prosecution in connection with the demonstration, may shorten the tortuous deportation process. All of the jailed Iranians have hired a U.S. lawyer to represent them. (C) Iranian Claims Litigation Justice is intervening as a “friend of the court” in a claims hearing against Iran in New York.5 Our objective is to persuade the court not to make judgment on the case because of its possible implications at a delicate moment in the hostage situation. Regardless of how the judge decides, it could complicate eventual negotiations for the hostages’ release. Mr. Christopher executed an affidavit last night and is prepared to testify in person if essential. The Attorney General does not favor using IEEPA to attempt to prevent the court from issuing a judgment in the case. He believes that such an effort would ultimately fail and would undermine the authority to use IEEPA in other areas. No decision on IEEPA is required until we see if the amicus approach is successful. (C) [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] With regard to the assets of the former Shah, there is no way to determine the extent of his holdings in this country. Property and other assets can be held in forms which do not reflect identity of ownership. The Iranians have filed a claim in New York to retrieve these assets, but thus far they have been unable to figure out where to look. Mr. Aaron commented that we might wish to issue a public call for such information at some point if it appeared necessary as part of the hostage negotiations. (S) 4 Rival demonstrations in Washington on July 27 pitted pro-Khomeini groups against anti-Khomeini groups, including the Iran Freedom Foundation founded by Tabatabai. More demonstrations were held the next day. (Donald P. Baker, “Iranian Groups

Covert and Overt Operations 3. On the NFAC paper,4 it seems to me we have real trouble writing a pro and con paper—I think our analysts all belong in the policy end of the business! Perhaps the situation is absolutely as bleak as [name not declassified] paper makes out—that is, there simply is no benefit whatsoever to be had from any of the non-lethal military options. I frankly doubt that. I really would like to see us lay out both sides of the story, or otherwise we surely will be accused of being subtle advocates. For instance, mining of exports as well as imports will surely have some substantial financial impact. In the past, we have judged this to be insignificant because of all the money the Iranians have banked outside of the country. I think that analysis is a little overdone in view of the fact that it would certainly cause some short-term dislocations if their income was cut off. Beyond that, I sense from intelligence reports of late that the Iranians may be having greater financial problems than we thought they would. Another benefit, it seems to me, would be a demonstration of U.S. resolve. In fact, rather than being a sign of political maneuvering if such a move were executed on 5 November, it could be a clear sign of U.S. determination to solve this problem when there was no political gain to be had (all assuming that the President is re-elected, of course). Still another benefit, it would seem to me, would be a clear demonstration to the anti-Khomeini elements that the United States was basically behind them. Isn’t there still a residue of suspicion in Iran that the United States has been behind Khomeini all along? Beyond this, I think we have stretched a little bit in some of the “anti” points just to be sure we make them. Let’s pare the “con” down to those that are most important and realistic. Finally, I don’t think we need our encyclopedia to review what everybody in the world is going to think about this. We’ve got to put our response in as succinct a form as possible if it is going to be useful. I’d appreciate your turning people loose on this quickly as I’d like to take a revised response down to Brzezinski on Wednesday, 30 July. [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner5 4 This July 25 paper, “Iran: US Non-Lethal Military Options,” concluded that none of these options would lead to the release of the hostages. (Central Intelligence Agency,

Covert and Overt Operations sensible attitude. It had attempted numerous actions which had worsened the atmosphere constantly and widened the gulf between the two countries. He cited the following examples: 1. The freezing of Iranian assets in U.S. banks had been an illegal action. These assets derived from the sale of oil which had been concluded at low prices, about 1/10 of the actual value. 2. Also illegal is the blockage of delivery of spare parts for projects which had been forced on Iran in the first place, with a guaranty of ongoing supplies. Fortunately, in the meantime, Iran is in a position to make its way even without these, partly vital, spare parts. 3. He referred to the strong U.S. pressure on its satellite countries to join the economic boycott. But Iran can stand on its own feet and bravely withstand the effects of the economic boycott. 4. The military offensive in Iran (Tabas), of which there are still many details missing.5 This act could in no way be put in a favorable light before the eyes of the world. 5. The continued active support of the Shah before and after his overthrow and to the very end, and the support for the minions of his regime in Iran and abroad constitutes an unfriendly act towards the Iranian people. 6. Extensive propaganda activities in the whole world with the object of defaming the Iranian revolution. After all, it is obvious that the Iranian revolution must be considered the most humane revolution in recent times, marked by the spirit of mercy and forgiveness. 7. U.S. support for leftist groups active in Kurdistan, Khuzestan, Azerbaijan, and Turkestan trying to weaken the Iranian revolution, although supporting these groups can certainly not be in the interest of the Western World. 8. Active subversive propaganda by the Farsi service of the VOA with the goal of bringing about a military coup as planned by Bakhtiar and other accomplices of the Shah. General U.S. support of all those who are actively considering a coup. 9. Active American involvement in the recent abortive coup.6 This coup was the work of all counterrevolutionary groups (Bakhtiar/the Shah’s people, etc.) as well as the United States and its mercenaries (Israel, among others). The names of those involved had been found in the U.S. Embassy. Only thanks to God’s mercy and the vigilance of the people, this sinister attempt had failed. 5 Reference is to the rescue attempt. 6 See Document 313.

Covert and Overt Operations jani two days earlier, the main concern of which had been the hostage problem, told me that Rafsanjani had told him that the question would be submitted to Parliament soon. This will depend first of all on how long and with what consequences the domestic power struggle (prime minister and subsequent formation of a cabinet) will drag on. Kaiser 330. Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Near East and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (Cogan)1 Washington, July 31, 1980 SUBJECT President’s Tasking of State Department for an Update on Options Being Developed in the Hostage Crisis Other than a Rescue Mission 1. You will recall that at a meeting at the Pentagon on 23 July the question of [less than 1 line not declassified] designed to create a means to infiltrate equipment and personnel into Iran, was discussed (see para 4 of the attached Spot Report). During the discussion Major General Vaught and Brigadier General Odom were informed that in CIA’s view a policy-level decision was necessary to permit us to explore this possibility because if a meeting were to be arranged [less than 1 line not declassified] between [less than 1 line not declassified] the US Ambassador [less than 1 line not declassified] should be briefed. General Odom said he would seek such a policy decision. 2. We subsequently learned from General Odom that word had come back from the President that he did not approve exploring this option and that he wanted a review of everything that is being done in the way of planning a second rescue mission. However, in a followup conversation on 31 July, General Odom provided an important and quite different clarification of this matter. He explained that what had happened was that the President, rather than approving the [less than 1 line not declassified] proposal, had instead decided to task the State 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations White House Zbigniew Brzezinski David Aaron Hedley Donovan Lloyd Cutler NSC Gary Sick SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Secretary Muskie opened the meeting by reviewing for the PRC an options paper for an Iran strategy over the next two months (Tab B)2 and a proposed memorandum to the President reporting the recommendations of the PRC.3 Some participants expressed doubt that the course of action would succeed in achieving the release of the hostages; however, all agreed that the strategy proposed was necessary as a first step toward developing the contacts and channels of communication required for further progress. After some minor revisions, the PRC unanimously recommended approval of the memorandum at Approve4 As Amended The bulk of the discussion related to the question of possible trials of the hostages. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that it may be useful to have a trusted intermediary on his own raise with or suggest to the Iranians a possible resolution of the crisis involving a swift trial and immediate expulsion of the hostages in no more than 48 hours. Although we should continue to stand by our public and private position of November 1979 that we would respond to trials by an interruption of Iranian commerce,5 we should also recognize that some form of trials may 2 Tab B, an undated paper prepared in the Department of State, “Strategy for Iran— the Next Two Months,” is attached but not printed. Tab B also included the U.S. Position Paper, Document 137. The undated paper summarized the May 8 strategy (see Documents 278 and 279) and listed developments since then. It also noted that “fanfare surrounding the alleged Bakhtiar-backed coup” had increased hostility toward the United States since Iran believed it had “detailed and convincing evidence” of U.S. support for Oveissi and Bakhtiar. The paper concluded that results of the May 8 strategy were limited because Iran was preoccupied with its own internal power struggle. The last half of the paper discussed future scenarios and U.S. options. (See footnote 8, Document 332) In a July 31 memorandum, Sick informed Brzezinski: “You do not need to read it.” (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 10) The CIA concurred with the paper’s judgments but believed that it was “virtually certain” the Majles would opt for trials. (Undated memorandum by NESA; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box

Covert and Overt Operations to be worked out among Cutler, Treasury and Justice. Dr. Brzezinski noted that it also affected our negotiating position on the hostages. (S) 332. Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1 Washington, August 1, 1980 SUBJECT A Strategy for the New Phase in Iran The Issue The purpose of this memorandum is to report to you as Chairman of the PRC the views and recommendations from the PRC meeting on Iran.2 A draft of this memo and the attached options paper (“Strategy for Iran—The Next Two Months”) were circulated before the PRC as a basis for discussion.3 The purpose of this exercise is to establish a strategy for approaching the new situation in Iran which you have described—the functioning of the new parliament, the formation of a government, the focus of the parliament’s attention on the hostage issue, Queen’s release and the end of Ramadan. Some elements of this new situation already exist; others may come fully into play in a couple of weeks; still others may not jell for a month or more. The strategy discussed incorporates the steps you have already directed as well as other possible initiatives. The attached options paper analyzes what we have done since you

Covert and Overt Operations The latter may well be even more intransigent on the hostage issue than the moderates; there is however at least a chance that their victory in this key phase of the ongoing struggle and their assumption of responsibility for the functioning of the government will lead them to want a final resolution of the hostage issue. We believe there is an opportunity for new efforts to resolve the crisis. We have concluded that—after reviewing the six options identified in the attached study8 —we should put together a new diplomatic effort, combined with family and Congressional initiatives.9 There is no assurance of success by this route, but given the fact that Khomeini has said the parliament would decide, it seems wise to act for the moment on the assumption that we have something new to work with and that we should pick the Iranians up on Khomeini’s prescribed approach. We will be refining approaches for the specific further steps that we may want to consider in the next few weeks. Elements of a Proposed Strategy The main objective of the proposed strategy would be to try to encourage the new government to take control of the hostage issue as it is put before the Iranian parliament so as to assure to the extent possible that the parliament’s decisions on the issue do not preclude a reasonable settlement. In pursuing this objective, we would work on two parallel tracks: —encouragement of private and Congressional initiatives to test the potential for a people-to-people approach such as you discussed with hostage wives10 and —a series of approaches through diplomatic and private channels to key Iranians to establish a negotiating channel with the most powerful elements in the new government. At the same time, we would try to generate renewed support from enough other quarters outside Iran to keep the Iranians alert to their stakes in resolving the crisis. During this period, we would continue— and would press our allies to continue—the economic and psychological pressures on Iran. Hostage Families. As you instructed, I am discussing with the leaders of the hostage family organization ways in which they might propose 8 The options listed in the strategy paper were: 1) intensify support for opposition groups in order to destabilize Iran; 2) implement a blockade or mining of Iranian ports and make efforts to block air transport links; 3) intensify negotiations; 4) make a humanitarian appeal for release; 5) develop a response should Iran demand trials as part of a release scenario; and 6) put any U.S. initiatives on hold and wait for Iran to make the next move. 9 Carter wrote in the left margin beside this sentence: “I agree—move on it.” 10 See Document 320.

Covert and Overt Operations give us a wide and immediate picture of what is possible in Tehran. We will assess the results of those probes as they come in to determine how to shape follow-on approaches. Those approaches under Steps 2 and 3—outlined below as illustrative of the kinds of moves we could make—would likely follow the actual formation of the government and our assessment, as the information from the first probes becomes available, of the best way to approach key individual leaders in the government and the new parliament. Step #1. As a first step, we would continue immediately to encourage a new series of approaches to key Iranian officials, i.e., the new Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, Beheshti and other leaders of the religious party, and Bani-Sadr. Specifically, we would instruct the following approaches: —The telegram that you have already directed13 instructs approaches to EC–9 members to ask them, now that the formation of a new government may be near, to reconsider a statement of their own along the lines of their Middle East statement14 and sending an emissary or a message to Tehran. We laid the groundwork for this approach in June by asking the EC to study such an approach. They replied that they were prepared to consider such an approach but did not feel the time was ripe in early July. We agreed. The advantage of our June approach is that they have now done their homework and should be prepared to move quickly at the right moment. —Also via the telegram you directed, we would approach key governments represented in Tehran, important members of the Islamic Conference, and other Europeans and ask them either to make direct approaches in Tehran or to make public statements appealing to the authorities in Tehran. The substance of these approaches would be an appeal to the Iranian government to take advantage of the convergence of the formation of the new government, the end of Ramadan, the death of the Shah, humanitarian concerns generated by Richard Queen’s illness and release to bring an end to the hostage crisis. —Ask Kreisky and his Socialist International group to consider an approach of their own either by going back to Tehran to visit the new leadership or by sending a message to the new leadership. —Urge both Waldheim and the President of the UNGA (if we can manage this without offending Waldheim) to establish either direct or indirect contact with both the new Foreign Minister and Beheshti (Waldheim) and the leadership of the parliament (UNGA President). The substance of the approach would be much the same as that described above. The appeal might not have all that much effect, but it might have some freshness for officials who have not been previously

Covert and Overt Operations —We might work out a direct message to Beheshti from a private or Congressional group to be delivered by the Algerian Ambassador or through their own contacts. One purpose of approaching Beheshti through the Algerian Ambassador would be to try to determine the basis for Beheshti’s participation in an agreed final solution. —A letter from Members of our Congress has been delivered to the new President of the Iranian parliament by the Swiss Chargé and he has reacted substantively.17 There might be a role for a more pointed Congressional message to him or to other members of the Iranian parliament. Once we have gauged Iranian receptivity, we might consider proposing to the Congressional leadership a bipartisan Congressional delegation to visit Tehran to seek the release of the hostages from the parliament. The delegation, as noted above, would presumably be in a position to assure an appropriate Congressional investigation of U.S.-Iranian relations once the hostages are released.18 —It is also possible in addition to the private approaches described above to make a substantive public statement at an appropriate moment. A written message to an individual may not be sufficiently dramatic or may not be politically useful in the Tehran context to catch the attention of the Iranians or to develop a situation in which those who want to resolve the crisis can proceed. We have hesitated to make public statements which would fall on deaf ears in Tehran, but if we thought the time was right we might say something about our policies toward Iran after the release of the hostages. Now that the Shah is dead, a statement incorporating our position that we will not stand in the way of Iranians who wish to seek assets in this country might have a political impact. Step #3. As these various approaches progress, our purpose would be to narrow the field and to identify a target in Tehran for a negotiating effort and to identify the best channel for communicating with that individual or group. Depending on responses to our more general approaches, our purpose at this stage would be to introduce a specific package on which the Iranians could focus and which could become the basis of a negotiation. We would try to design the approach and the package in such a way as to include a suggestion for the Iranians on how the hostage issue might be presented to the parliament. Our staff work will continue in a very small group to develop short papers on each of the main elements of a possible package so we will be ready to move promptly.19 In proceeding through these steps, we would start with the position paper which you approved early in the crisis and which we have used

Covert and Overt Operations side. While we have indications of where some of them might be, we still cannot be sure where they are at any given moment since we suspect they may be moved around periodically.23 Public Affairs Strategy It will be crucial for the Administration to enlist the support of the American people for its strategy. I believe that it will be possible to mount an effective defense of this strategy in the weeks to come, but we need an agreed and consistent position that will be used by all members of your administration who speak about it publicly. It will be important to stress that our overriding objective in dealing with Iran remains the release of the hostages while protecting this nation’s honor. There is a new situation in Iran (formation of a new government, death of the Shah, release of Queen, establishment of the parliament, end of Ramadan) which should be analyzed and explained by Administration spokesmen. It should then be possible for us to outline in general terms our strategy for pursuing the matter without holding out false hopes for an early resolution—and without identifying ourselves with family and Congressional initiatives which depend for their success on remaining independent of us. The problem in dealing with the Iranian authorities and terrorists should also be frankly stated. The rescue attempt has, I believe, made it less likely that you will be criticized for not taking further military action to try to free the hostages. If you are criticized for failing to take strong enough measures to obtain the hostages’ release, I believe that we are in a strong position to challenge the detractors of our policy to come up with alternatives that will produce safe and early release of the hostages. We can emphasize that our purpose is the return of the hostages with honor. We will not act in irresponsible ways. Any attempt to use this issue for partisan advantage would be irresponsible. I believe that you will continue to enjoy the private and public support of the hostage families if you adopt the strategy that I outlined. Recommendation: That you approve the strategy outlined above as the framework within which we will work in the weeks ahead with the understanding that we will continue to refine each of the steps on a contingency basis and as we begin to hear responses to our approaches.24 23 In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Keep up PR re hostage abuse & lack of accountability for them.” 24 Carter approved the strategy with a checkmark and wrote at the bottom of the page: “Put this now into action. Give me a plan—step-by-step with dates, for implementation.”

Covert and Overt Operations in following through on the memo which you sent to the President after the PRC.4 —We will provide a draft of a possible statement covering the past US role in Iran to see what range of choice we have in formulations that might meet the Iranian demand for “apology” in ways consistent with US dignity. —We will also have a draft of a message to the new foreign minister from you for consideration. Pending a decision on a comprehensive Congressional strategy, we believe we should carefully consider following up Rafsanjani’s reaction to the letter from 187 Congressmen. His comments to the press indicated there might be an opening there, and we recommend sending Swiss Chargé Kaiser back to see Rafsanjani with comments on his remarks and some further hints of the desirability of dialogue with the Congress. If you approve this approach, we would brief Congressmen Hamilton and Gilman5 on Rafsanjani’s response through the Swiss which you read Friday. We would then discuss with them the possibility of their sending an oral response to keep the channel open. We have developed a draft response (attached)6 to give the Congressmen an idea of what we have in mind. Rafsanjani’s reaction to this second approach would give us a somewhat better idea of the kind of man who we are dealing with as a member of the Iranian Parliament and could then provide a basis for deciding whether and when to try for a meeting. Approve approach to Hamilton/Gilman7 Other 4 See Document 332. 5 Congressman Lee Hamilton (D–Indiana) and Congressman Benjamin A. Gilman (R–New York). 6 Attached but not printed. 7 There is no indication that Muskie approved this approach.

Covert and Overt Operations hostages in Iran was tasked to the undersigned by competent civil authority on 26 April, 1980. In order to provide the best chance of securing operational security, a cover operation involving DRE was

Covert and Overt Operations the CTJTF commander and staff be phased in beginning on 15 August, participate in the JTF training during September and assume the SNOWBIRD mission on 1 November 80. In order to further define the JTF relationship with other organizations, it is requested that the OPSDEPS consider providing guidance as to a continuation or revision of JTF coordination with both the Department of State and the J–5 of the OJCS. Heretofore, the [2 lines not declassified]. Additionally, the JTF has been restricted in its coordination with J–5. Finally, it is recommended that the OPSDEPS consider actions to improve the national capability to conduct Special Operations. The DJS could be requested to task OJCS to identify specific deficiencies in the CIA’s ability to support the armed forces in clandestine operations and make specific remedial recommendations. This action could be forwarded to the NSC by the JCS on or before 1 November 1980. The OJCS might also be tasked to identify the necessary actions to expand and improve our military Special Operations capabilities by 1 October 1980. This action could be presented to the Secretary of Defense by the JCS by 30 October 1980. James B. Vaught Major General, USA

Covert and Overt Operations 40,000, and they were all good fighters with weapons. He said that for all practical purposes, southern Iran is in their control should they choose to exact [attack?] it, but they would need ammunition and antitank weapons to hold the area. He said that he was prepared to detail the names and groups of the military in Iran who would be involved. He said that the main contact for military matters outside of Iran is the present Khomeini military attaché in Iran, an Air Force colonel named Reziani (phonetic). He had a list of names which he wanted to give me but I did not take it. He said that he was prepared to arrange for contact with all of these groups.2 2 Shahpar also met with Sick on August 26. Sick, who found Shahpar “interesting,” noted that Shahpar’s plan was to use the Crown Prince as a figurehead around whom the people could rally based on his assessment that Bakhtiar was “getting nowhere and Oveissi was hopeless (‘He wants to make a coup through the newspapers.’)” [text not declassified] (Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, August 26; Carter Library, National

Covert and Overt Operations 338. Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia (Ames) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 NFAC 5634–80 Washington, August 12, 1980 SUBJECT Iran—Hostages, Options, Etc. 1. Action Requested: None; the following is for your information. [portion marking not declassified] 2. Background: As I begin my third year as NIO/NESA (or end my second) I have forwarded to you a series of papers that looked at areas of concern, principally the Arabian Peninsula and the Arab-Israeli issue. Nothing has taken more of my time during this period, however, than the problem of Iran. It was my baptism and, I fear, will be my cross as long as I have this job. I have saved my comments on Iran until last because I have no quick fix advice and as I review options and scenarios there is an aching feeling of deja vu. I believe it might be useful to outline for you some of my bottom line thinking based on two years’ intimate relationship with both sides of this problem: the analytical and the covert/operational. [portion marking not declassified] 3. The question of options is the one that is and has been the most frustrating. Can anything we do obtain the release of the hostages and save Iran from a chaotic fall into the radical/leftist camp? As an activist by nature, I cannot accept that we just monitor the events and make moves when we see an opening.2 This is the State view and is accompanied by keeping the channels of dialogue open. Although this may have some value in the hostage issue, it does nothing to address the long term political problem. [portion marking not declassified] 4. [9 lines not declassified] [5 paragraphs (31 lines) not declassified] Robert C. Ames 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations Because the Soviet threat to Iran is serious, but not immediate, (i.e., we see no troop mobilization evidencing preparation to attack within weeks), I have scheduled consideration of current developments next week. Ed and Harold are being appropriately briefed by their staffs. We must do our utmost to prevent leaks of this intelligence until we develop purposeful schemes for acting on it; a “war scare” that could fade after a few weeks would be very damaging, especially with allies and our own public. (TS) The next order of business is to prepare options for speeding up our deterrent military preparations, for accelerating cooperation with allies and regional friends, and for dealing with the Soviets. Following SCC review, such plans will be presented to you for approval. (TS) 341. Message From the Joint Chiefs of Staff Intelligence Directorate (J–2) Snowbird to the Deputy Director for Operations, Near Eastern Affairs, Iran Task Force, Central Intelligence Agency1

Covert and Overt Operations 342. Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence Carlucci to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 14, 1980 SUBJECT Possible Policy Options—Iran Our response to the second part of your July 17 memorandum on this subject was conveyed in a paper handcarried to you by the DCI on U.S. non-lethal options. This paper was dated 30 July.2 I am attaching a paper responding to the first part of your memorandum requesting an evaluation of possible stronger covert action against Khomeini. Frank C. Carlucci Acting Director Attachment Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency3 Washington, undated [3 pages not declassified] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box

Covert and Overt Operations in the region, i.e., Saddam Husayn in Iraq, Suleyman Demirel in Turkey, Anwar al-Sadat and Director, Egyptian General Intelligence, General Muhammad al-Mahi in Egypt, and unspecified individuals in the Gulf. d. An “Arab revolution” is underway that may sweep away many of the highly personalized, idiosyncratic, and largely unrepresentative elites in such countries as the shaykdoms in the Gulf, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Morocco, Syria, and Egypt. The Soviets and their surrogates are behind this revolution and are motivated by the need for new energy sources and foreign exchange and by the opportunity to fill the vacuum created by the U.S. Government’s weakness. e. The Soviets are moving large numbers of their supporters into Baluchistan, Azerbaijan, Kurdistan, and other regions around the Caspian Sea. These supporters are drawn from ethnic groups and new recruits. In many villages, the Soviet flag is flaunted openly with little recourse to government forces. f. The Palestine Liberation Organization is playing an increasingly important role in training the Pasdaran, in working closely with the Fedayeen-al-Khalq, and in providing praetorian guards for Iranian leaders such as Ayatollahs Khomeini and Beheshti. 2. Oveissi also observed that economic sanctions are being circumvented through sales by European and other producers of merchandise brokered via third-national invoicing, primarily in the Gulf. 3. Regarding Oveissi’s own political endeavors, he cited the following support: a. From the Iraqis, he has received 21 million U.S. dollars and a promise of more to come if he can show progress. He is also receiving from the Iraqis sizeable quantities of RPG’s, light and heavy machine guns, rifles, mortars, explosives, ammunition, and some transport. b. [7 lines not declassified] c. He [less than 1 line not declassified] counts among his supporters a number of ayatollahs, including Shariat-Madari, Qomi, Shirazi, and others. d. He claims to have assets among the military, including the entire “Rezaiyeh Division” (presumably the 64th Infantry Division headquartered at Urumiyeh—formerly called Rezaiyeh—West Azerbaijan). He also has the support of most of the Air Force pilots but not the Homafars (Air Force technicians). e. He says that the [2 lines not declassified].

Covert and Overt Operations I assure you that we will show the fullest respect for your independence, your territorial integrity and for the principle of non-interference. We recognize that the decision on dealing with the hostage crisis has been entrusted to the Iranian parliament as representatives of the Iranian people. We also recognize that in Iran, as in the United States, there are deep feelings as a result of grievances perceived in the past. There are many difficult issues between the United States and Iran. For our part, we are willing to proceed fairly and to approach each of these issues on a basis of mutual respect and equality. In order to begin the process of understanding each other better, I think it would be useful to establish a regular channel of communication. I would personally prefer that this be done directly, very discreetly if you wish, between representatives of our two Governments. Speaking frankly and directly is the best way of removing hostility and suspicion. If you would prefer, however, we would be pleased to deal through third parties who could transmit messages between us on a regular basis. The Swiss or the Algerian Embassies could play this role as they are already the protecting powers. Other persons, either official or private intermediaries, could perform the same function. I would hope that you would be prepared to give us your thoughts on points which might be usefully discussed in such an exchange. I look forward to hearing from you in the interest of our two peoples. Sincerely, Edmund S. Muskie

Covert and Overt Operations “. . . the (mission) abort . . . cannot be related to any alleged enemy radar intercept capability. . . . ” Why, then, was this point germane to the investigation? The facts are that [4½ lines not declassified]. I am dismayed if these two misleading references to intelligence are the only references in the report to the intelligence role in the rescue effort. The positive role of intelligence in making the mission possible— from hostage location to arrangements in Teheran [less than 1 line not declassified] and more—surely could not have been overlooked. A onesided, negative appraisal of the intelligence role—as suggested by the parts of the report I have seen—would be unwarranted, inaccurate and unacceptable. I hope my concerns are misplaced, but what I have seen of the report is not encouraging. Accordingly, I’d appreciate an opportunity to read the entire report before reacting further.4 Yours, Stansfield Turner5 4 In a September 4 memorandum for the record, Turner also conveyed to Brzezinski his displeasure with the Holloway Report. He wanted an outside Commission to look at the rescue operation for lessons learned. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the

Covert and Overt Operations mission, Turner said that it is more likely a general upgrading of contingency planning for the region to bring it to the level that we have observed for Europe and the Far East. [3 lines not declassified] There are, however, constraints on Soviet action: the weakness of the Turkestan Military District, adverse effects on détente, and problems in Poland. (TS) Turner estimated that an attack is not likely now, but if the U.S. enters Iran, or if there is an internal collapse, these external events might provoke the Soviets to move. [1 line not declassified] this will be an indication of much greater readiness and of offensive rather than defensive thinking on the Soviet part. (SNIE on which Turner’s briefing was based is at Tab C.) (TS) Discussion of the DCI’s Briefing Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we are dealing with a Soviet contingency plan which likely depends on the internal collapse in Iran. Therefore, we need a better assessment of the Iranian political situation. (TS) General Jones disagreed with the contingency plan notion. The Joint Chiefs believe there is a 50–50 possibility that the Soviets are themselves trying to control the timing, not just preparing to react to outside events. One of the Chiefs is sufficiently disturbed to recommend immediate deployment to the region in an effort to deter the Soviets. The Chiefs are more concerned with time than the DCI. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski summed up that we have reached no overall conclusions about Soviet intentions. (S) He then stated the next two issues: what to communicate to our friends, and what to communicate to the Soviets. (S) Communications to Our Allies in Europe [2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified] Muskie is seeing Francois-Poncet and Genscher on Monday.3 He agreed to have a general analytical discussion about the possible internal collapse of Iran, but he does not want to be sufficiently explicit on our concerns to encourage Francois-Poncet’s inference that we [less than 1 line not declassified]. (TS) [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] Communications with Countries in the Region Komer emphasized that only three countries in the region are significant, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey, for U.S. military reactions to the Soviets. The Saudis are at present more concerned with the 3 August 25.

Covert and Overt Operations Muskie was concerned that a defense of only part of the region would hurt our political credibility everywhere. Dr. Brzezinski agreed that this point is critical. Our credibility in the region and in Europe hangs on our willingness and ability to fight the Soviets on the ground in Iran and elsewhere, if horizontal escalation is necessary. (S) General Jones explained that there are two schools on how to defend Iran. One argues that we should put ourselves on a defense line in the Zagros Mountains and hold the Khuzestan oil fields. Another school, more interested in deterring the Soviet invasion, argues that we must begin to interdict their entry into Iran, making it impossible for them to invade without direct combat with U.S. forces. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski structured the discussion on this point with three military options: first, credible deterrence; second a confined defense within Iran; and third, a Persian Gulf strategy, which defends primarily Saudi Arabian oil. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski and others favored the first category, but they admitted that we do not have the capabilities. General Jones emphasized that not only do we not have them, they decline every day because we are trying to do things on the cheap. In comparison, the Soviets have done a great deal more in a region where they already have tremendous advantages. We plan for five years hence. They are upgrading for operations today. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski tasked Defense to prepare a point paper around the three military options for the next SCC. (S)

Covert and Overt Operations strategy. We should build into the baseline strategy a somewhat sharper concern about improvements in Soviet capabilities opposite Iran. 4. We should make no special effort with Turkey at this time. Any implication of trying to draw Turkey into Southwest Asian controversy, confrontation, or conflict e.g., the notion that we would use Turkey in an Iranian contingency to threaten the Soviet “flank” with dual-capable aircraft, would produce not the desired results but a new bilateral problem and possibly more insistent and unmeetable quid demands. (We believe the role of Turkey in our military strategy for Southwest Asia needs further interagency analysis). 5. Once the intelligence has been shared with our key NATO Allies, I should discuss our growing concerns with my counterparts in the course of regular contacts, including the September 24 Quadripartite meeting at the UNGA. 6. Our upcoming talks with the British, Germans, and Portuguese concerning “enroute access” should include our concerns about the Soviet threat to Iran. 7. In the interest of reducing the chances of Soviet miscalculation, I should convey to Gromyko in New York next month a clear message that: —We have no intention of invading Iran or intervening in its internal affairs. —By the same token, we would expect the Soviet Union to maintain its commitment to non-intervention in Iran’s internal affairs. —We have no offensive intentions in the region; our only purpose is to protect our vital interests. I propose that we address this plan at Friday’s SCC meeting.5

Covert and Overt Operations Agree that it should be vetted by the Special Intelligence Group, for recommendations to the SCC if appropriate. No. Set up an SCC at the Muskie-Brown-Turner level.4 4 The memorandum bears no indication of which option Brzezinski chose. However, Sick and Brzezinski discussed the memorandum on the evening of August 29. Brzezinski agreed that Turner’s proposal should be first discussed with the Aaron group. At the bottom of the page, Aaron wrote: “set up a meeting. DA,” with an arrow pointing to

Covert and Overt Operations want to be caught unawares again. In addition the Soviet Union is preparing to take advantage of several possible opportunities regarding Iran. It is preparing to move military forces into Iran if anarchy and chaos erupts. Similarly the USSR is preparing to react if U.S. military forces are introduced into Iran in any size, and while awaiting the advent of one of these possibilities, the USSR is busily laying the propaganda groundwork to capitalize on the above and justify a unilateral move on the pretext of countering the alleged presence of counter revolutionary forces operating in Iran against the Government of Iran and the Government of Afghanistan. 3. (TS) Hostage Situation: A. Dispersion outside of the Embassy compound must be accepted as fact; planning must consider multiple targets. Precise locations remain unknown due to tight security and deception measures employed by militants and clerics. During the past month most hostage relatives have received a letter from their loved ones. The letters indicate long periods of small group isolation, very little outside activity, no physical abuse, allowed to receive some mail, and at least three hostages, military and civilian, have implied they plus another 6 to 9 are being held in a prison or prison-like environment. B. Current estimates put upwards of a half probably in Tehran as

Covert and Overt Operations 350. Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia (Ames) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 NFAC–6021–80 Washington, September 3, 1980 SUBJECT

Covert and Overt Operations 7. We must consider what we want to say to the Soviets and how. We cannot give the Soviets “expressions of concern.” These are no longer credible. Aaron suggested that when Muskie meets Gromyko he should say something along the following lines: “In my short time in office I have come to realize that among the differences between us, nothing is more likely to lead to World War III than your miscalculation of our determination to keep the Persian Gulf for the West.” Muskie can also hand Gromyko a non-paper on this matter. It was agreed that the Newsom/Aaron/Carlucci/Komer group would work on some language for this statement and paper. [portion marking not declassified] 8. For the Friday meeting (5 September) the following items will be reviewed: a. Horizontal actions we can take; b. What we can tell our allies and how we might get this message to Iran; and c. Gen. Jones briefings—are there any action add-ons to these briefings. CIA was also asked, during the course of the meeting, to prepare a paper on European and regional reactions to a Soviet invasion. [portion marking not declassified] Robert C. Ames 351. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Sweden 233019

Covert and Overt Operations seen whether he will exercise his power to do that. But the situation is generically different than it has been over the past 10 months. I responded that I still didn’t think there was a critical mass of power in Iran; that Khomeini really didn’t want to make a decision on the hostages for fear of losing his constituencies; that the Majlis would not make a decision without Khomeini’s approval; and that hostage trials were an easy delaying and escape tactic for the Majlis. I further reiterated my feeling that Khomeini wanted to bring down President Carter and would move toward trials or other ways to embarrass the President between now and the elections. [portion marking not declassified] 3. I described the fact that we are working with Ambassador Spain in Ankara with respect to rescue option possibilities on the border with Iran. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran] 8. We talked about the [2½ lines not declassified]. I did express my alarm, however, at two things: First, the Soviets apparently were willing to [less than 1 line not declassified] (though we didn’t know where and whether this was part of a general scenario against NATO or perhaps whether it was purely a military worst-case operation); secondly, I was concerned at the extent of their planning ambitions, particularly [less than 1 line not declassified]. Muskie was clearly skeptical that the Soviets would [less than 1 line not declassified]. We had a debate as to whether this would be more risky from their point of view than going into Poland. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran] Stansfield Turner

Covert and Overt Operations issues. The Report avoids being personal, but the finger is pointed at Vaught on OPSEC. In fact, General Jones and others share this burden as well. 2. Independent Review of Plans The lack of an independent review group is underscored as a source of trouble. The Chiefs acted like their own “action officers” in the words of the Report. Sitting in one Sunday when the Chiefs were briefed, I wondered myself how they could know what they pretended to know about feasibilities. 3. Organization, Command and Control, and the Applicability of JCS [less than 1 line not declassified]3 [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified] —The Marine Colonel in charge of the helicopters had no staff, believed he was in charge of helicopters, but was never appointed as head of helicopters. He was an officer from Jones’ special staff group. Thus no Marine helicopter unit and commander were ever selected. Jones’ choice of Colonel Pittman insured an ad hoc approach to helicopter operations (one of the minor issues in the Report). —General Gast, USAF, was made a consultant on air operations, but his role in air operations, planning, and training was never clarified with the Marine Colonel, the Air Force, or the Navy. Again he was the Chairman’s ad hoc appointment. —The Air Force component commander, who managed the C–130 training, was given “on the scene commander” responsibility just prior to the mission with no chance to plan or rehearse. —No Navy component commander was ever designated. This is standard Navy practice to avoid being entangled in truly Joint organizations (the RDJTF today has no Navy component commander). Here you have the “joint system” at its traditional best: one or two of the services do not participate fully, usually the Navy, and the Chairman tries to by-pass the CINCs because he does not command them by law. The Holloway Report makes it seem that Vaught is at fault for the confusion in the air operations responsibilities. Gast as a consultant, however, and his special relation with Jones probably made it difficult for Vaught to manage Gast. No reason is given for no Navy component commander and staff. The Report also leaves the impression of a chaotic “Joint” air operations and training endeavor. The JCS has

Covert and Overt Operations 9. Alternatives to Desert One As the Report indicates, the road traffic at Desert One made compromise during the following day highly probable. An alternative, without this road problem, would have been preferable, but the intelligence does not readily reveal an alternative. The road problem was evident from the OTTER reconnaissance flight, but the JTF assessed the risk as acceptable—wrongly. 10. Handling the Dust Phenomenon The Report is comprehensive in exploring ways to anticipate and deal with the dust. Had any of a number of other weaknesses been absent—communications among the helicopters and with other aircraft, with the air weather service, inadequate navigation aides, the lack of a reconnaissance pre-run flight, or a pathfinder—the dust would not have caused at least one abort. I find the lack of a pre-run for weather reconnaissance surprising given the conditions. 11. C–130 Pathfinders

Covert and Overt Operations A second major implication is found in the Report’s comments on readiness and training evaluation. The only way we will get greater “factor productivity” in Defense is to look at the “output” of the Department more effectively. Exercises geared to real contingency planning are the single promising instrument for such output measurement. The JCS annual and five-year exercise program, already institutionalized, is the embryo for a future testing system. Finally, let me add a personal note. From the viewpoint of a military officer who has seen commanders relieved, and who has sent soldiers to jail, this Report is justification for forced resignations at a very high level. Such a sweeping step, of course, may be of dubious wisdom at present, but it is clear that the authors of the Report must have found themselves feeling as I do. They have hedged their judgments to avoid forcing the blame into the open, but the evidence encourages the unpleasant inferences. I feel that some of the blame should fall on me insofar as I encouraged you to have confidence in the operation. I rendered that judgment on too little first-hand observation of the rehearsals and staff organization. In the final stages, however, I was cut out of the briefings and NSC meetings so that I had a very imperfect view of the details of the operation. If you want a memorandum for the President on the Report, I shall prepare one, but you may want to reflect on this step for a time while you digest the full import of the Report.9 9 Odom underlined the phrase “while you digest the full import of the Report,” and wrote below it: “This report can be used for very large initiatives—if you desire— but we need to think through timing and choice of initiatives. WO.” 354. Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner Washington, September 3, 1980 [Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Cen-

Covert and Overt Operations 356. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Covert and Overt Operations Muskie insisted that he can reduce the ambiguity for Gromyko in his oral statement, but he does not accept this non-paper because of its explicit promise of a military reaction. Christopher called it “dangerous.” Muskie explained that he would make the following points to Gromyko orally: —We are extremely troubled by the military activities of the Soviet Union on Iran’s borders. —This region is vital to us. —Gromyko should understand the dangerous consequences that could follow from Soviet military activities. (TS/S) Muskie again insisted that we do not have a real military capability, and Christopher added that we must preserve the President’s option to judge what is in the United States interest at the time of such an intervention if it occurs in the future. (TS/S) Muskie offered the political judgment that the Congress would ask whether or not a nuclear war would be worth it for 11 percent of our Brown asked what would happen if the Soviets invade Iran and we do nothing. Do we really believe that our losses would be only 11 percent of our oil supply? (TS/S) Muskie retorted that if it means losing Europe, the American people might even accept that loss rather than risk nuclear war. (TS/S) Harold Brown countered, but what about a Soviet attack on Europe, would we accept the loss or attempt to defend it? (TS/S) Muskie insisted that NATO is different; we have forces there. If we cannot defend Europe, he added, we ought to ask what the Defense Department is all about. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski asked Muskie if he accepts the proposition that the loss of the Persian Gulf would lead to the loss of Europe. (TS/S) Muskie agreed that it would. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski then asked what the Soviets will see as their options in such a case if the U.S. leaves some ambiguity about whether it would respond militarily. (TS/S) Muskie insisted that he could remove all the ambiguity in his oral statements to Gromyko without the explicit text in the non-paper, in particular by telling Gromyko that there is a “high risk” of a military confrontation. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that we have given these kinds of warnings to the Soviets before but have failed to act when the Soviets ignored Muskie admitted that he did not know the record. (TS/S) Dr. Brzezinski said that Gromyko has heard all this talk before about Afghanistan—several weeks in advance of the invasion—but

Covert and Overt Operations 357. Letter From the Family Liaison Action Group to President of the Consultative Assembly of Iran Rafsanjani1 Washington, undated Dear Mr. President: We, the families of the American hostages, write to you, Mr. Rafsanjani, as the leader of the Islamic Consultative Assembly of Iran, the body of representatives of the Iranian people. We understand that you have been instructed by Iran’s supreme spiritual leader, Imam Khomeini, to find a solution to the problem of our beloved relatives, the fifty-two American hostages. We are writing to you privately as parents, wives, children, and brothers and sisters most directly and intimately affected by the enforced separation we and our loved ones have endured during these past long months. While we trust and pray that the hostages are being treated well in the true spirit of Islam, the grief and hardship imposed by such separation are barely manageable for us all. By saying that, we are, at the same time, aware that you and the people of Iran, a people with a profound sense of family ties, understand our anguish. We hope that this letter conveys a sense of our own sincere desire to communicate these family feelings common to us all. We understand the people of Iran have suffered untold indignities and wrongs in the past. We share your confidence and hope that the new times in Iran soon will bring about a better life for all your people and their families. We are writing to you at this point in time because we realize that you spearhead, in its vital beginnings, a new Parliament capable of overcoming and righting the wrongs of the past. We wish you well and pray that your efforts will achieve the goals you have set forth for your people. We are writing to you at this time, too, with the idea that there might be some way in which the hostages’ families could participate personally and directly in the solution of the problem which now divides the Iranian and American people. Might we be the bridge that brings the hostages home? Our families are prepared to come to any location you and your colleagues deem suitable. We feel our mutual concerns can best be discussed face to face, in an atmosphere of human trust. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Covert and Overt Operations 358. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 9, 1980 SUBJECT Clandestine Option in Iran 1. Several weeks ago I delivered a proposal to you for a clandestine option for helping to resolve the situation in Iran.2 [3½ lines not declassified] 2. A recent intelligence report on Iran has made it clear that the Iranians are seeing the development of an internal opposition to the Khomeini regime which is separate from the external elements that are generally tainted by association with the Shah. The following is a quotation from that report: “Because of the deteriorating situation in Iran, [less than 1 line not declassified] rumors of plotting were widespread. [less than 1 line not declassified] the recent televised trial of alleged coup plotters had further incited rumors that nationalistic groups were conspiring against Khomeini. [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranians who saw the trials had been particularly impressed by the comportment of the younger defendants. They had not asked for forgiveness, but defended their actions by stating they were acting on behalf of the country. Their sincerity, outspokenness and the fact they did not have any apparent ties to the old regime had convinced people that there were still nationalistic elements in Iran who were working to bring down the regime. [less than 1 line not declassified] the government had erred in broadcasting the trials. [less than 1 line not declassified] the stories regarding the activities of nationalistic groups were only rumors and [less than 1 line not declassified] no firm evidence to confirm their existence [portion marking not declassified] 3. Another recent intelligence report states, “With respect to the economic situation in Iran, Beheshti conceded that the impact of the American embargo and freezing of Iranian funds in the United States has been far more effective than the Government of Iran had anticipated. Beheshti stressed the point that the Iranian Parliament must begin solving economic problems immediately or face the prospect of civil unrest as food and fuel shortages become acute.” [1 line not declassi- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Covert and Overt Operations Cabinet, the Islamic Revolutionary Council, which had ruled Iran since January 1979, dissolved. The Council’s legislative powers had been handed over to the Majlis in May, and its executive powers were now transferred to the new government as of September 10. (Telegram 243049 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September 12; National
