226
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
view, lack of effectiveness is just as important an objection to the US ap-
proach as the risk the US approach poses to commercial and national
security interests. Israelyan said visits to declared locations, as pro-
posed by the US, might only create an illusion of compliance. USSR be-
lieves that a combination of national declarations and challenge inspec-
tion would provide the most effective verification system
7. Deputies made brief report on progress in the drafting group.
Focus was on substantive issues which need to be resolved in order to
complete the first three elements (basic prohibition, definitions, non-
transfer/non-assistance). More terms may have to be included in “defi-
nitions” element as work on additional elements is undertaken.
Sorenson
103.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 4, 1979
SUBJECT
Binary Chemical Munitions Facility
My memorandum of May 24, 19792 pointed out the concern felt by
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and myself regarding the need
to maintain effective means of monitoring compliance with any agree-
ment which is reached with the Soviets to ban chemical weapons. It
also requested review of the 1978 decision to defer funding for the bi-
nary munitions facility. Your response suggested we examine this deci-
sion in connection with the FY 1981 budget review process.
We have been participating in the bilateral negotiations with the
Soviets since 1976 and see little or no movement on their part to resolve
critical differences. In view of the continuing degradation of our deter-
rent stockpile and the serious asymmetry of capabilities in this area, I
directed that the binary chemical munitions facility be included in the
Department of the Army basic budget submission in the amount of $19
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 61,
Chemical/Biological Weapons. Secret.
2 See Document 100.
