Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —To reaffirm the continuity of U.S. policy toward Yugoslavia. —To establish a personal relationship with some of the key leaders who will guide Yugoslavia’s destiny in the coming years. —To make clear to the Yugoslav leadership, directly and personally, the basic outlines of your policy on key international issues, particularly arms control and relations with the Soviets. (C) The memorandum from Ed Muskie at Tab A2 effectively sets out the background, setting and issues for your meeting with the new Yugoslav leadership. (C) Your host for your opening substantive discussions on the morning of June 24 will be Cvijetin Mijatovic, who was elected President of the State Presidency on May 15. Mijatovic, however, will be your counterpart in name only. Under the system of rotating collective leadership set up by Tito, power is dispersed among a number of institutions and personalities in order to assure ethnic balance and representation. Mijatovic will be replaced in less than a year—as will Stefan Doronski the current Chairman of the Presidium (Politburo)—and he lacks the prestige and authority to provide the type of strong leadership which Tito provided. (C) The real focal point of power is an “inner leadership” composed of Dr. Vladimir Bakaric, head of the Croatian party and one of Tito’s oldest and closest associates; Milos Minic, the former Foreign Minister (whom you met during Tito’s visit to the United States in March 1978); Nikola Ljubicic, the Defense Minister; and Stane Dolanc, the former Secretary of the Presidium. These men formed the real locus of decisionmaking during Tito’s illness, and it is they more than Mijatovic or Doronski who will determine Yugoslavia’s destiny in the initial transition period. For this reason they have been brought into the substantive discussions, and your remarks should be addressed as much, if not more, to them as to Mijatovic and Doronski.3 (C) Bilateral Issues I suggest you begin any discussion of bilateral relations by noting the progress we have made since Tito’s visit and reiterating your high 2 In an undated copy of Muskie’s memorandum to Carter, the Department noted that the Yugoslav leadership was likely to “urge that more be done to help them with their most serious problem at this time—the need for Western financing to cover their balance of payments and defense needs.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 76, Trip: Box 27)
