First Responses 123 • This action is the natural corollary to Option 2 and the same considerations apply. Option 4. Request the key foreign central banks to advise their banks to proceed with calling defaults on Iranian loans and collecting by way of setoff or attachment. • If the key foreign central banks were to act, this would be the most effective way to ensure that all credits to Iran are collected. That would dry up at least another $2 billion of Iranian dollar assets. • The central bankers are in a position to advise their private banks that Iranian credits are unsafe and unsound, but they are not likely to do so without instructions or acquiescence from their governments. Option 5. Obtain agreement from the major purchasers of Iranian oil that they will only purchase, or facilitate the purchase of Iranian oil, through dollar contracts. • This would preserve the oil market as a dollar market and reduce possible damage to the dollar in the exchange markets. • Technically it may be difficult to make this stick for the long term because Iran might be able to switch a good part or all its oil sales to the spot market through non-major entities. • This would expose our allies to possible oil cutoffs by Iran. Option 6. Obtain the agreement of our major allies to prohibit their central banks from taking substantial increases in non-dollar Iranian deposits. • This would complement Option 5 and would have the effect of locking the Iranians in dollars. • On the one hand this would run counter to a general policy of free exchange rates and markets; on the other hand, it might appeal to Germany’s desire to avoid having the mark become a reserve currency. • So long as the Iranians were unable to find a way to hold large amounts of foreign currencies through intermediaries, this would strengthen the dollar. However, it is unrealistic to think that this type of action would be sustainable over the longer term as too many evasion routes are available. Option 7. Move to a full export embargo and get our allies to do the same. • In the longer term quite apart from other considerations, this would not be effective. • It might have limited appeal domestically as it is readily understandable. Option 8. Move to a broad range effort to mobilize overt multilateral support, of which some or all of the economic measures outlined above would be a part. • To be effective, even for a brief period, economic measures will require the active support of our allies. That may be best obtainable through a broader based appeal.
