September 18–December 16, 1978
411
121.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State1
Amman, November 1, 1978, 1622Z
8507. Subject: Letter to President.
1. There is below text of letter dated October 31 to President from
King Hussein which has just been received from palace. King told Am-
bassador earlier today he was sending letter on eve of Baghdad confer-
ence2 and as response to President’s answers3 which he regards as per-
sonal communication from President (signed original4 being pouched).
2. Quote: Dear Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for your letters5 which have kept me informed
regarding all the recent developments and your thinking thereon. I
wish also to take this opportunity to reaffirm our sincere appreciation
for the ceaseless efforts that you, Mr. President, and your top officials
are devoting in pursuing the goal of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East region.
As I prepare to travel to attend the Arab summit conference in
Baghdad. I feel I must communicate to you my thoughts on where we
stand and what questions and common responsibilities we face. We are
determined in Jordan to press for a positive summit conference. One
which would take responsible decisions and keep the doors open for a
just settlement of the Middle East conflict. We have been in touch with
other Arab countries which are close to us in thoughts and attitude to
cooperate in this effort. Allow me to summarize to you our views here
regarding the Camp David Agreements and what we regard as a viable
basis for future peace efforts. Some of these views were discussed with
you and relayed to Mr. Vance6 during his recent visit to Amman. I be-
lieve that we should share these views with frankness and openess
hoping this would lead to the clarification and understanding neces-
sary to reach positive conclusions.
From the very beginning there were some fundamental questions
in our minds regarding the results of the Camp David Agreements. I
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Jordan: King Hussein, 2/77–2/79. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in
the White House Situation Room.
2 See footnote 7, Document 91.
3 See footnote 4, Document 91.
4 A copy of the signed original of the letter is in the Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 56, Jordan: 11/78–6/79.
5 See Documents 61 and 91.
6 See Document 64.
