3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
agreement it would not only not build up forward-based nuclear
systems which, due to their geographical location were capable of
reaching the Soviet Union, but would take steps to reduce them. The
current position of the United States completely ignored this issue,
once again confirming that Soviet concerns on this score were well
grounded. In addition, this led the Soviet side to conclude that the
question of US forward-based nuclear systems (the Soviet Union had
no such systems) would have to be resolved within the framework of
the agreement currently under preparation. Such were the thoughts
that inevitably arose during an analysis of the current US proposals.
In conclusion, Brezhnev would ask Secretary Vance to transmit his
greetings to President Carter, and to tell him of Brezhnev’s sincere con-
viction that an improvement in relations between the Soviet Union and
the United States, establishment of good-neighborly cooperation be-
tween the two countries, was entirely possible, given the necessary
effort.
Secretary Vance said that he concurred with Brezhnev that the re-
sults reached in the current talks with respect to strategic arms were not
satisfactory. Indeed, we were deeply disappointed that no progress
had been made in our discussions of this subject, which was important
not only for our two nations but also for world peace. The proposals we
had presented had been prepared with seriousness and good will, and
no intention at all to try and enforce a one-sided approach. We believed
that the two proposals we had presented were fair and equitable to
both sides. The proposal about deferral, we believed, was fully consist-
ent with the accord reached in Vladivostok. The Secretary recognized
that Brezhnev held a contrary view, but he would tell Brezhnev that we
held our views with all seriousness. He said that he could not accept the
suggestion that we had gone back on the word of the United States, and
that we had cast it aside or had suggested matters that were incon-
sistent with the Vladivostok accord in our proposal to defer. In so far as
our comprehensive proposal was concerned, we had indeed suggested
steps that did go beyond the agreement reached previously, but this
had been done with the objective of moving boldly toward true arms
reduction in a fashion that would result in a balance fair to both sides,
and in greater stability in the area of nuclear weapons. Brezhnev would
note, of course, that our comprehensive proposal contained restrictions
on cruise missiles, and that it also accepted as part of the package the
earlier Soviet proposal regarding the Backfire bomber. The Secretary
looked forward to meeting Foreign Minister Gromyko in May. At such
time, they would be discussing questions relating to the Middle East, as
well as any other subject that either party would choose to raise.
Referring to the Vienna talks on Mutual Balanced Force Reduc-
tions, the Secretary said that we had not asked the Soviet side to be
