86 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII currently in the field, conferring with concerned station chiefs regarding their capabilities to implement the programs described in the attachment. We intend to draft a formal proposal for submission to the Special Coordination Committee when he returns on 12 February. On the other hand, if a paper is desired more urgently, we can solicit his views by cable and submit our proposal within the next few days.2 3. You may have already noted State 014844 (Tab B), which reports a request by the Afghan National Liberation Front for U.S. support of its activities against the Afghan regime:3 and Kabul 0528 (Tab C), which warns that overt contact with Afghan dissidents would be harmful and recommends that CIA therefore handle such relationships. We are working with State on this.4 All portions of this document are SECRET. Frank C. Carlucci5 2 See Document 38. Brzezinski underlined “returns on 12 February,” and wrote: “OK” and initialed “ZB” in the left margin. 3 Tab B is attached but not printed. In a memorandum to Brzezinski, January 22, Henze responded to Brzezinski’s January 19 request for comment on telegram 14844 to Kabul, January 19. Both the request and the telegram are attached to Henze’s memorandum. In the telegram, the Department stated that former Afghan Ambassador to the United States Karim met with Saunders on behalf of the Afghan National Liberation Front, during which Karim requested U.S. support for the Front’s activities against the DRA. Karim also asked if the United States would consider receiving former Afghan General Abdul Wali. Henze described the political situation in Afghanistan as “very fluid” and urged that maintaining contact with groups opposed to the Taraki government was in the interest of the United States. On the question of how the United States might assist such opposition, Henze noted both difficulties and opportunities: “Without some adjustments in the procedures for reporting this sort of thing to just about everybody in Congress, I doubt whether we could mount a program of any size or duration that could have an impact. CIA’s NE division chief, Alan Wolfe [text not declassified] knows Afghanistan well—the least we could do would be to charge CIA with learning as much as possible about opposition attitudes—I am intrigued by the Islamic aspect of all of this—it could prove to be Achilles heel for the Soviets, for I am coming across increasing evidence of a real Islamic underground in the USSR and resurgence of Islamic cultural/ political identity beyond what we have already known.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978) Telegram 14844 is also in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790027–0586) 4 Tab C is attached but not printed. In telegram 528 from Kabul, January 23, the Embassy assessed that “we stand to lose more than we might gain by receiving Abdul Wali in the U.S.” The gesture would “inevitably be read by the Taraki regime as U.S. Government support for the Afghan National Liberation Front (ANLF).” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790033–0855) 5 Carlucci signed “Frank” above his typed signature.
