Negotiating Channels 487 It was the most difficult but also the most honest and possibly the most successful session that we have had to date. I opened by saying that I had grown increasingly concerned during the week with some of Bani-Sadr’s claims that President Carter had to “apologize,” “admit the mistakes of the past” and enter a period of “self-criticism.” I said that we were prepared to do what we had promised to do last weekend in Switzerland,7 nothing more and nothing less. I told them that President Carter had personally authorized that we supplement his statement with certain things that he wanted to say, but I said that there should be no illusions on anyone’s part as to what we would say and would not say. I said that President Bani-Sadr should know that we would not “apologize,” that we would not “admit mistakes” nor do other things which we would consider a violation of principle. I told our French friends that we had taken seriously Bani- Sadr’s private statement that he had no desire to “humiliate us.” I told our French friends for us to say the kinds of things he had been calling for publicly would be humiliating and would not be said by President Carter. I told them that as much as we cared about the hostages, the honor of our country was even more important. And that the hostages could stay in Iran another two months or ten months before we would agree to a scenario “apologizing” or admitting “guilt.” Our French friends argued that Bani-Sadr, while endorsing the scenario, had created a tremendous problem for himself and consequently for us all by claiming that the U.S. would apologize. They said that they felt certain that he would have to have some knowledge of what would be in the U.S. statement before he moved to free the hostages. We all agreed that exchange of statements in advance was a bad idea as was the deposit of advance statements with Waldheim. A possible compromise would be an informal arrangement whereby our French friends informally reviewed the proposed statements by each side to insure that they conformed with the principles agreed upon at Berne. 7 See Document 180.
