This Government is prepared to admit that the expression “belonging within” as used to describe property, may be somewhat vague. It is not believed, however, that the use of the expression will give rise to any difficulties of interpretation in the United States and this Government would be glad if Austria would accept it. If, however, the Austrian negotiators insist on a more precise expression, you are authorized to suggest that the words “from sources within” be substituted for the words “from property of any kind situated or belonging within”. For the reasons already stated, this Government does not desire to accept the counter-draft of the first paragraph of Article XVI submitted by Austria. The provision in regard to the taxation of consuls in the language of the draft which was submitted to Austria was accepted in the treaties concluded by the United States with Germany (Article XIX), Hungary (Article XVI) and Estonia (Article XVIII). This Government would be glad if Austria would accept this paragraph of the original draft without change, or at least without other modification than the substitution of the words “from sources within” in place of “from property of any kind situated or belonging within”. The second paragraph of Article XVI of the draft submitted to Austria provides that lands and buildings situated in the territories of either Party of which the other Party is the legal or equitable owner and which are used exclusively for governmental purposes by the owner shall be exempt from taxation. The Austrian negotiators desired to have the word “governmental” omitted and the term “diplomatic or consular” substituted therefor. They fear that the term “governmental” is too broad in that the Government might use a building for purely commercial or industrial purposes and vet be entitled to exemption from taxation thereon because those purposes might be regarded as governmental. While this Government does not understand the word “governmental” as used in the second paragraph of Article XVI of the draft as embracing the meaning suggested by the Austrian negotiators, it is willing to accept the suggestion that the words “diplomatic or consular” be substituted therefor. Article XVI as rewritten pursuant to the foregoing discussion is as follows: “Consular officers, including employees in a consulate, nationals of the State by which they are appointed other than those engaged
