394 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 17) We should postpone the following meetings: the Joint Commercial Committee Meeting scheduled for April 14–15 in Washington; the Business Facilitation Talks scheduled for January 9 in Moscow; and the Civil Aviation Talks scheduled for February 13. In addition, Aeroflot’s scheduled service will be limited to the two weekly flights currently authorized. 18) The United States export controls on exports to the USSR will be tightened up on a case-by-case basis. The United States should be prepared to restrict export licenses to an even greater degree than our allies if it does not disadvantage U.S. business in comparison with our allies.5 19) There should be an examination of Soviet commercial expansion in the United States with a view to restricting it. The Department of State should forward proposals to this effect within one week. 20) Allocations to the Soviet Union under our Fishing Agreements should be restricted. 21) The United States should continue to urge our allies to increase broadcasts to Muslim countries and Soviet Central Asia on developments in Afghanistan. There should also be prepared in conjunction with our allies a periodic circular to be distributed at the United Nations on the status of the Soviet invasion and occupation in Afghanistan. 22) The United States will join in a letter to the President of the Security Council urging that the Afghanistan situation be placed on the agenda. Unless it would be a violation of the UN Charter, Ambassador McHenry will be instructed to tell other nations that it is our preference to also raise this issue at the current General Assembly.6 23) We will proceed on a case-by-case basis to implement the “Belgian Formula” for creating a de facto differential in COCOM favoring China in comparison to the Soviet Union. There will be no public statement of this policy. 24) We will consult with other countries to urge them to deny the Soviet Union further credit. 25) We will work with our allies to urge the IFI’s and countries with assistance programs to Afghanistan to terminate such assistance. 5 A CIA intelligence assessment, FR 80–10037, January 1980, entitled “Impact of Economic Denial Measures on the USSR,” is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 250. 6 At the request of 52 states, including the United States, the UN Security Council convened January 5–9 but, due to a Soviet veto, failed to adopt a resolution calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. An emergency special session of the General Assembly held January 10–14 adopted Resolution ES–6/2 denouncing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan. See Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp. 296–302.
