National Security Policy  183
new basic policy in the light of Council discussion at this meeting and 
of the joint study on capabilities for limited warfare called for by NSC 
Action 1881 (due June 1, 1958).
4. a. Now, as to Par. 41 (p. 20), which repeats last year’s guidance 
dealing with Communist China. This paragraph contains no guidance 
as to a future attempt by other nations to seat Red China, rather than 
the Chinese Nationalist Government, in the United Nations.
b. In this connection, the Planning Board considered:
(1) that the General Assembly in 1957 adopted the “moratorium 
resolution” by a vote of 48 to 27, with 6 abstentions and 1 absent;
(2) the current withdrawing of Chinese Communist troops from 
Korea;
(3) the indication by Prime Minister Nash of New Zealand that 
at some time he might have to honor Labor’s pledge to recognize Red 
China;
(4) the possibility that in 1960 (or perhaps earlier), in U.K. general elec­
tions, the victory may go to the Labor Party, which has repeatedly called 
for the admission of Red China to the UN; and
(5) informal estimates that the U.S. might not be able to hold 
enough votes to defeat some resulting move in the UN to seat Red 
China and to turn out the Chinese Nationalist Government as repre­
sentative of China.
c. Some Planning Board members thought the U.S. should be con­
sidering how, while it still enjoys its strong position in the UN, alterna­
tive ways of dealing with such a contingency, and of finding a way—so 
vital to U.S. interests—­to preserve the independence of Taiwan despite 
the loss of her status as representative in the UN of all-China.
d. Whether stated in the policy paper or not, should we now be 
thinking about how to preserve an independent Taiwan in a future con­
tingency that the U.S. might not be able to rally enough UN votes to 
prevent the seating of Red China in the UN?
SECRETARY OF STATE
Part III
1. There remain five split views to be resolved, all dealing with 
foreign economic matters.
2. Mr. Randall (who cannot be here today) has advised that the 
draft statement is generally satisfactory and consistent with U.S. for­
eign economic policy, with three exceptions relating to the three follow­
ing splits:
(1) Page 12, par. 27–­d
This paragraph, part of our economic policy towards less-­
developed nations (especial “one-­crop” nations) provides that the U.S., 
for political reasons, may on “occasion join in multilateral examination 
of price, production, and demand trends which might help to promote
