664 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Section 102—Vietnam—Prohibits the Commodity Credit Corporation from financing the sale and export of agricultural commodities under PL 480 for any exporter who trades with Vietnam or whose parent company, subsidiary or affiliates trade with Vietnam. Under the Trading With The Enemy Act of 1917 and Foreign Asset Control Regulations, US exporters must obtain a license to export to Vietnam. It has been the Administration’s policy not to approve such licenses, and therefore, Section 102 is redundant insofar as US exporters are concerned. However, foreign trading companies operating in the US are affected by it. Section 102, in effect, requires a foreign conglomerate to choose between trading with Vietnam or having its US subsidiary trading company conduct PL 480 exports. This proposed deletion should not lead to significant controversy in Congress. Section 103 (d)(4)—Egypt—PL 480 programming to the United Arab Republic (Egypt) unless the President declares such programming to be in the national interest. Egypt is currently our largest PL 480 customer and this provision is routinely waived by the President. Its deletion is not expected to arouse significant controversy, although staunch supporters of Israel may prefer to maintain the restriction. Section 103 (d)(3)—Cuba and Vietnam—Restricts PL 480 programming to countries that trade with Cuba and Vietnam unless the President declares such programming to be in the national interest. This provision, too, is routinely waived by the President. In the case of Cuba, deletion of the provision would be consistent with our policy of no longer attempting to require third countries to observe our boycott. In the case of Vietnam, deletion of the provision is consistent with efforts to normalize relations with that country. EA and ARA support deletion. Our soundings indicate there could be some opposition by conservative forces in Congress to removing the Vietnam clause, but no major controversy. Sections 103(d)(1), (2) and 103(j)—Prohibit PL 480 to Communist countries. The wording of the provisions affords some flexibility in certain cases, however, and may provide the Administration with the flexibility necessary to provide food aid to certain independent communist nations should it wish to do so in the future. Our soundings indicate Administration efforts to delete these proposals could evoke adverse Congressional reaction. Some would interpret the move falsely as a new Administration initiative on East/West matters.4 Section 411—Provides that no food aid shall be provided to Vietnam unless specifically authorized by Congress. Proposed deletion of the provision probably would be controversial in Congress. There is also the question of whether its deletion would be consistent with Section 109 of 4 Cooper placed an asterisk in the margin next to this paragraph. See footnote 5 below.
