664
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Section 102—Vietnam—Prohibits the Commodity Credit Corporation
from financing the sale and export of agricultural commodities under PL 480
for any exporter who trades with Vietnam or whose parent company, subsid-
iary or affiliates trade with Vietnam. Under the Trading With The Enemy
Act of 1917 and Foreign Asset Control Regulations, US exporters must
obtain a license to export to Vietnam. It has been the Administration’s
policy not to approve such licenses, and therefore, Section 102 is redun-
dant insofar as US exporters are concerned. However, foreign trading
companies operating in the US are affected by it. Section 102, in effect,
requires a foreign conglomerate to choose between trading with Viet-
nam or having its US subsidiary trading company conduct PL 480 ex-
ports. This proposed deletion should not lead to significant contro-
versy in Congress.
Section 103 (d)(4)—Egypt—PL 480 programming to the United Arab
Republic (Egypt) unless the President declares such programming to be in the
national interest. Egypt is currently our largest PL 480 customer and this
provision is routinely waived by the President. Its deletion is not ex-
pected to arouse significant controversy, although staunch supporters
of Israel may prefer to maintain the restriction.
Section 103 (d)(3)—Cuba and Vietnam—Restricts PL 480 programming
to countries that trade with Cuba and Vietnam unless the President declares
such programming to be in the national interest. This provision, too, is rou-
tinely waived by the President. In the case of Cuba, deletion of the pro-
vision would be consistent with our policy of no longer attempting to
require third countries to observe our boycott. In the case of Vietnam,
deletion of the provision is consistent with efforts to normalize rela-
tions with that country. EA and ARA support deletion. Our soundings
indicate there could be some opposition by conservative forces in
Congress to removing the Vietnam clause, but no major controversy.
Sections 103(d)(1), (2) and 103(j)—Prohibit PL 480 to Communist coun-
tries. The wording of the provisions affords some flexibility in certain
cases, however, and may provide the Administration with the flexi-
bility necessary to provide food aid to certain independent communist
nations should it wish to do so in the future. Our soundings indicate
Administration efforts to delete these proposals could evoke adverse
Congressional reaction. Some would interpret the move falsely as a
new Administration initiative on East/West matters.4
Section 411—Provides that no food aid shall be provided to Vietnam
unless specifically authorized by Congress. Proposed deletion of the provi-
sion probably would be controversial in Congress. There is also the
question of whether its deletion would be consistent with Section 109 of
4 Cooper placed an asterisk in the margin next to this paragraph. See footnote 5
below.
