102  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
22.	
Information Memorandum From the Director of the Policy 
Planning Staff (Ross) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, May 22, 1989
SUBJECT
Promoting Bipartisan Support for our START Approach
SUMMARY: Putting the Bush Administration’s START effort on a 
firm foundation—­one that will not only give our approach a promising 
send-­off when the talks resume in mid-June but will also help pave 
the way for eventual ratification—­depends on gaining sustainable, 
bipartisan support for an ICBM modernization program and a START 
negotiating position (particularly on mobile ICBMs) that are mutually 
reinforcing. Over the next few weeks, the Administration should initiate 
intensive, senior-­level consultations with key Congressional players aimed at 
achieving such wide support.  END SUMMARY
The NSC-­led review process is now preparing the way for a series 
of NSC meetings beginning the week of June 5 that will determine our 
START positions. Within State, there is broad consensus on several 
additions/modifications to the existing U.S. approach that would put a 
distinct and positive Bush imprint on our new posture. However, a few 
initiatives are controversial within the building, and you will need to be 
involved in determining State positions. I understand Reggie will soon 
be forwarding material to you on where we stand.
Here I’d like to focus on one of the candidate initiatives—­a ban 
on MIRVed mobile ICBMs—­both because it will likely be the toughest 
START issue the President will have to decide in coming weeks and 
because it is crucially related to our ICBM modernization program. 
In light of the President’s decision to pursue rail-­garrison MX as well 
as mobile basing for the Small ICBM, moving from our current pro-
posal to ban all mobile ICBMs to a position permitting at least single-­
warhead mobiles should be a relatively easy decision (although OSD 
may object). The harder issue will be whether to permit or seek to ban 
MIRVed mobile ICBMs, the Soviet SS–24 and our rail-­garrison MX.
Proponents of such a ban point out that the rail-­based SS–24 is 
hard to verify and that the Soviets would have 10 extra warheads for 
each clandestine missile. Opponents note that a ban, even if negotia-
ble, would result in additional deployment of less stabilizing silo-­based 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, STARS, Document 
Number 89170489. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Einhorn; cleared by Burt and Timbie.
