Paraguay 1007 inflationary pressures had to be resisted, and that a sound foundation for development had to be laid down. This Embassy has [text not declassified] supported the contract for continuing monetary stability between the GOP and the IMF.4 Our dealings with the Government have been a synthesis of respect and firmness, and we believe that it is not egotistical to suggest that this relationship has been one of the fundamental reasons for the unique success of the stabilization program in Paraguay since its inception in late 1957. At the risk of interrupting the narrative here, we want to make a point of the fact that the Resident Representative of the IMF in Paraguay, Kemal Kurdas, has cooperated with the Embassy so effectively and continuously [text not declassified] What has been said of Kemal Kurdas can also be said of Ing. Gustavo Storm, until a few days ago, President of the Central Bank. Ing. Storm has been a strong rampart of support for the stabilization program. His policies were formed in constant consultation with the Embassy, with the USOM/P and with the IMF. It can be added that there has been an atmosphere of complete integrity maintained between the Ambassador and President Alfredo Stroessner. It has been this pattern of honest and open dealing with the President that has made it possible for the Ambassador to obtain his cooperation with the stabilization program in the face of violent attacks—and there have been many violent attacks—by certain members of the Paraguayan cabinet. The credits extended in the public sector, e. g., the $2,500,000 for the Brasil Road in 1958 and the $1,000,000 for telecommunications in 1959,5 were timed so as to influence the renewal of the stabilization agreements of those years. [text not declassified] This avoided a crisis at the time the stabilization agreement was up for renewal and this action appears to have successfully forestalled the devious efforts of the communist organization to unleash a general strike. The Embassy received praise from the IMF representatives,
