Paraguay  1007
inflationary pressures had to be resisted, and that a sound foundation 
for development had to be laid down.
This Embassy has [text not declassified] supported the contract for 
continuing monetary stability between the GOP and the IMF.4 Our 
dealings with the Government have been a synthesis of respect and 
firmness, and we believe that it is not egotistical to suggest that this 
relationship has been one of the fundamental reasons for the unique 
success of the stabilization program in Paraguay since its inception in 
late 1957.
At the risk of interrupting the narrative here, we want to make a 
point of the fact that the Resident Representative of the IMF in Paraguay, 
Kemal Kurdas, has cooperated with the Embassy so effectively and 
continuously [text not declassified]
What has been said of Kemal Kurdas can also be said of Ing. 
Gustavo Storm, until a few days ago, President of the Central Bank. 
Ing. Storm has been a strong rampart of support for the stabilization 
program. His policies were formed in constant consultation with the 
Embassy, with the USOM/P and with the IMF.
It can be added that there has been an atmosphere of complete 
integrity maintained between the Ambassador and President Alfredo 
Stroessner. It has been this pattern of honest and open dealing with 
the President that has made it possible for the Ambassador to obtain 
his cooperation with the stabilization program in the face of violent 
attacks—and there have been many violent attacks—by certain mem-
bers of the Paraguayan cabinet.
The credits extended in the public sector, e. g., the $2,500,000 for 
the Brasil Road in 1958 and the $1,000,000 for telecommunications in 
1959,5 were timed so as to influence the renewal of the stabilization 
agreements of those years.
[text not declassified]
This avoided a crisis at the time the stabilization agreement was 
up for renewal and this action appears to have successfully forestalled 
the devious efforts of the communist organization to unleash a gen-
eral strike. The Embassy received praise from the IMF representatives, 
4 On August 13, 1959, the Government of Paraguay and the International Monetary 
Fund entered into a $2.75 million stand-­by agreement to facilitate continuation of its fis-
cal stabilization program. Pertinent documentation is contained in ARA/EST Files, Lot 
62 D 354, “IMF,” and in Department of State decimal file 834.10. See also, International 
Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 
1961 (Washington, 1961), pp. 28–32.
5 On August 3, 1959, the Development Loan Fund announced approval of a $1 mil-
lion loan to the Government of Paraguay to help provide improved telephone, telegraph, 
and teletypewriter service between Paraguay and other countries. Documentation on the 
subject is located in ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 354, “DLF.”
