3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 890 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI the first strike. If the Soviet Union did the same thing, nuclear war would become inevitable. Gromyko asked the Secretary to inform the President on behalf of Brezhnev that the Soviet leadership wants to know where this doctrine is leading. They want a reply to the question. This is not like allocating agenda items to committees in the UN but a truly serious matter. Gromyko asked the question be posed to the President. Gromyko then turned over Brezhnev’s reply to President Carter’s recent letter.6 Secretary Muskie said that the Soviets posed a legitimate question about PD 59, one he had looked into himself. The US had no intention of acquiring a first-strike capability and didn’t believe the Soviets did either. In any event, strategic capabilities are determined by weapons, not by doctrine alone. The purpose of the new US doctrine was to cover the full range of deterrents. PD 59 succeeds NSDM 2427 issued at the end of the Ford Administration. It reflects an evolutionary change from this doctrine, not a sharp departure. The evolutionary change is caused by changes in weapons themselves—their accuracy and numbers. The US does not believe that a limited war is conceivable and thinks that use of nuclear weapons will escalate to a full scale exchange. But we believe that a flexible doctrine is necessary in case someone else may consider nuclear war conceivable. The Secretary said he would convey Gromyko’s comments to the President and that he recognized the need to avoid any misunderstanding. This could be explored in the context of the SALT process. Iran and the Persian Gulf The Secretary turned over a copy of the attached non paper8 which he first read aloud to Gromyko. Gromyko said the US statement had “piled word upon word.” In light of what he had already said concerning Soviet policies, the US statement was wide of the mark. He urged the United States not to intervene and to keep hands off the region. Gromyko said he had already set forth Soviet policy concerning Iran and the Persian Gulf. Gromyko asked if we planned to publish our statement and said the USSR would make a suitable response in that case. 6 See Documents 299 and 301. 7 National Security Decision Memorandum 242, “Policy for Planning the Employment of Nuclear Weapons,” was issued on January 17, 1974. The text is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976. 8 Not found attached.
