1370  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
by the program planners in other countries. Moreover, the successes 
experienced by the U.S. in the execution of its experimental reactor 
program have added confidence to the U.S. approach. Reactor designs 
requiring partially enriched fuel also are receiving more favorable 
consideration as a result of U.S. policies on the supply and prices for 
enriched fuels.
21. It is expected that all of the power reactors being developed 
by the United States will be suitable for export in varying degrees. The 
projects include development of fuel cycles based on both source mate­
rials (uranium and thorium) and all fissionable materials considered 
applicable as fuel (U–235, U–223, and plutonium). The “exportability” 
of most of the designs being developed by the United States will be fur­
ther improved by development and demonstration of technology for 
recycling plutonium. Thus, many systems which require partial enrich­
ment of the core might be operated on an initial charge of partially 
enriched fuel, plus a natural uranium feed stream which is enriched 
with recycled plutonium. The development of plutonium fuel technol­
ogy has expanded. Construction of laboratories for further expansion 
in plutonium fuel development has been initiated. Construction of a 
Plutonium Recycle Test Reactor also has started at the Commission’s 
Hanford facilities.
22. The power reactor program has continued to explore power 
reactor designs which could operate on natural uranium. Pursuant to 
Public Law 85–162, extensive design work was performed on natural 
uranium gas-­cooled, graphite moderated reactors. In addition to use of 
natural uranium cores, consideration was also given to designs using 
partially enriched cores. It was concluded that with present technol­
ogy, there is a significant economic advantage to the use of partially 
enriched uranium fuel in this type reactor.
23. Development work on heavy water moderated power reactors 
which would be operable on natural uranium proceeded in accord­
ance with previous plans, but no acceptable proposal was received 
from industry for carrying out design and construction of a demonstra­
tion plant. Design work conducted to date has been inconclusive with 
respect to the economic promise of this system with natural uranium 
fuel, although indications are that it would have minimum penalty in 
ultimate performance and costs compared with partially enriched sys­
tems. Additional work, including construction of a Heavy Water Com­
ponents Test Reactor, is planned. Work on several of the cooperative 
projects under the Power Demonstration Reactor Program also is perti­
nent to the evaluation of heavy water moderated reactors which might 
be operable on natural uranium fuel.
