60  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
that the US can produce anything it wants better and faster than any­
one else. To the discovery that the USSR, too, is highly advanced indus­
trially, the Soviets have sought to add another element: the belief that 
the USSR is more interested than the US in the independence, devel­
opment, and security of the newer nations of the world. The USSR has 
also, and with some success, continued to attempt to establish itself as 
the symbol and proponent of change, movement, progress and devel­
opment. The US, on the other hand, tends to be regarded, particularly 
among some of the newer nations, as standing for slow and cautious 
amelioration or as defending what they regard as the evils of the past.
20. The US, of course, possesses great moral, material, and political 
assets. For many people throughout the world, it continues to represent 
the most important force standing for political freedom and constitu­
tional government. It is widely admired for its achievement in using 
its rich natural environment in the creation of an advanced industrial 
society and spreading the benefits among all classes of people. Other 
nations seek to benefit from US technical experience and economic 
resources. Many present and potential leaders in underdeveloped 
countries have been profoundly influenced by American institutions 
and ideas. Wherever people favor moderate, as opposed to extreme 
solutions, US objectives are highly regarded—­even where US methods 
and actions are criticized.
21. Nevertheless, during the past several years the USSR has 
appealed more successfully than the US to the emotional needs of 
many of the earth’s peoples. It has gained more credit for advocating 
the cause of disarmament; it has become more closely identified with 
the interests of the colored peoples; it has more consistently supported 
Afro-Asian nationalism against colonial rule; finally, well-­advertised 
Soviet and Chinese Communist economic progress since the end of 
World War II has appeared as a demonstration of the effectiveness of 
“socialist” methods.
22. In many respects it has been less difficult for the USSR and 
Communist China to raise themselves in world opinion than it has 
been for the US to retain or advance its position. A higher standard of 
behavior for the US has been set in men’s minds nearly everywhere; 
because we are richer, we are expected to be more forthcoming with 
aid; because we threw off colonial rule, we are expected to give undis­
criminating support to nationalist causes. Moreover, our shortcom­
ings are—­because of our democratic processes, freedom of speech 
and the press—­more obvious to the world. We cannot with the same 
ease as our competitors hide our race problems, adjust our trade pol­
icies to our foreign policy objectives, or commit ourselves in foreign 
policy without regard to competing domestic and foreign interests. 
Unfortunately, some of our most cherished traditions—­our regard for
