734
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(1) that the problem of limiting global arms transfers was urgent, and
(2) to hold regularly scheduled meetings to explore concrete measures
to promote Conventional Arms Transfer restraint.
—Events since then have underscored the existence of interna-
tional concern for such measures. In June, the UN Special Session on
Disarmament adopted a program of action4 calling for consultations
among suppliers and recipients on limiting arms transfers. US-Soviet
bilateral meetings are thus consistent with this program and represent
an effort to implement it. (Note: Brasilia may wish to eliminate or
modify this point, since GOB formally disassociated itself from this
part of the program of action.)
—In Latin America the June 22, 1978 declaration by the eight sig-
natories of the 1974 Declaration of Ayacucho calling for regional agree-
ment limiting Conventional Arms Transfers,5 and the diplomatic ef-
forts of Mexico toward the same end at the OASGA and since, have
given new impetus to recipient efforts to restrain arms transfers on a re-
gional basis.
B. The July Meeting: Agreement on Framework.
—In most recent (third) round of talks, the US and Soviet Union
agreed on a three-part framework for future talks, consisting of political-
legal criteria, military technical criteria, and regional application.
—(1) The political-legal criteria (or guidelines) are based on the
UN charter, UN resolutions, and other internationally agreed docu-
ments; and will identify (a) legal constraints on arms transfers; and
(b) relevant political factors to be taken into account in making arms
transfer decisions. Good basis has been established for the elaboration
of mutually acceptable language during the next round.
—(2) The military-technical criteria (or guidelines) will determine
how to regulate both types and quantities of weapons transferred. Both
sides agreed that a comprehensive and effective approach to arms
transfer restraint will require both types of criteria.
—Both sides have agreed to discuss the application of these criteria
in specific regional situations. This will give reality to the criteria,
which would otherwise be general and abstract statements of interest,
and will reduce the chances of future misunderstanding.
—Both sides agreed that any region or sub-region of the world
could be discussed, provided regional groupings were not artifically
contrived.
4 The text of the program is printed in “Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly,” June 30, 1978, Documents on Disarmament, 1978, pp. 411–439.
5 Documents on Disarmament, 1978, p. 391.
