478  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
of estimated order of battle, total Soviet active military personnel as 
of mid-1957 would be about 4,275,000, including about 2,650,000 in 
the ground forces, 825,000 in the air forces (including 110,000 Naval 
Aviation personnel), 725,000 in the navy, and about 75,000 personnel 
whose subordination is unknown.11
101. Because of the shortage of manpower in the Soviet economy 
and for various other reasons noted elsewhere in this estimate (Section 
VI, paras. 213, 215), the Soviet leaders probably believe that some fur­
ther reductions in the numerical strength of their armed forces would 
be desirable. The relatively great size of Soviet forces-­in-­being may per­
suade the Soviet leaders that some reductions can be made without 
undue prejudice to the security or other interests of the USSR. Whether 
Soviet forces are in fact reduced, however, will depend to a great extent 
on the degree of danger and tension that the Soviet leaders feel in the 
international situation. It is possible that they will conduct their policy 
in such a way as significantly to increase international tensions, and 
thus to require armed forces as large, or even larger, than they have at 
the present day. We think it more likely that there will be some further 
reduction in Soviet force strengths during the period of this estimate, 
but we do not believe that the reduction will be substantial.
102. Soviet Military Policy Toward the Satellites. The Soviet leaders 
regard the Satellite area in general as vital to the military posture of 
the USSR, both as an extension of the defense perimeter of the home­
land and as a base for Bloc offensive power. Even prior to the Polish 
and Hungarian uprisings the USSR probably had some reservations 
concerning the reliability of Satellite military forces, but we believe the 
events of last fall have reinforced Soviet determination to maintain sub­
stantial Soviet forces in and near the Satellites for an indefinite period. 
However, additional token withdrawals from East Germany may occur, 
and there may be some reduction in present Soviet strength in Hungary 
as the local situation stabilizes.
103. The events of last autumn probably reemphasized to Soviet 
leaders the desirability of using the Warsaw Pact, an ostensibly voluntary 
mutual defense arrangement, as the basis for Soviet-Satellite military 
relations. Under this pact the USSR will continue its efforts to develop 
and maintain reliable and effective Satellite forces, but it will probably 
not permit any significant expansion of these forces.
11 In addition, there are an estimated 400,000 personnel in Soviet security forces. 
For detailed personnel strength estimates of Soviet and other Bloc military forces in mid-
1957, see Annex, Table 1. [Footnote is in the original.]
