Chile 279 In these circumstances, the Embassy is unable to recommend that the MAP Program here be discontinued and, in fact, hopes that forward planning will become more definite so as to give the Chileans reasonable assurance as to what they may expect to receive from us during the next five years. As in the case of the technical cooperation program, a more thorough discussion of the Military Assistance Program may be found in Despatch 292 of October 9, 1959. The success of the Alessandri Administration in improving the living standards of the Chilean people will have a strong influence in strengthening democracy not only in Chile but in other countries of Latin America as well. Conversely, its failure would be a body blow to the principle of free enterprise and gain for anti-­democratic forces. Consequently, there is no room for complacency in the conduct of our relations with Chile. During the next few years we are going to have to be alert to every opportunity to improve our situation and enhance the prestige of the truly democratic elements in Chilean public life. If the Embassy is to do these things and at the same time keep the Department currently informed regarding developments here, it will be necessary to have the proper tools with which to work. The Embassy must be assured of reasonable stability in its personnel so that painstakingly acquired knowledge of the local psychology and an acquaintance with key individuals may not be wasted. Our primary problem is not more personnel, although there are certain urgent requirements the Department has been unable to fill; what we need most is a reasonable degree of continuity so that our limited staff can be effectively employed. Frequent changes of assignment not only reduce efficiency but lower morale. It is also essential that allowances be adjusted promptly and adequately to reflect changes in living costs if the United States Missions are to maintain an adequate level of morale in the face of the constantly worsening inflationary pressures felt by all members of the government staff here and their families. It is recognized that the Department faces many difficulties in the management of its numerous Foreign Service establishments throughout the world and that special circumstances will necessitate departures from normal standards of personnel administration. However, it must always be borne in mind that the operating efficiency of the U.S. Government in Chile is dependent in large part on the maintenance of a reasonably stable and adequately compensated staff.5 5 The enclosure, “Specific Objectives, Country Programs and Other Implementing Operations,” is not printed.
