602
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and Protection of Minorities, a sub-body of the Commission on Human
Rights. The group will meet annually, beginning next summer. The res-
olution was adopted by the Sub-Commission September 5 and spon-
sored by Sub-Commission experts from France, Egypt, and Peru (who
do not serve as government representatives).
To date, the United States has not ratified any of the treaties listed
except the slavery conventions. We therefore can expect to receive a
letter from the Secretary-General requesting an explanation, which the
working group will examine next summer. We also can expect interna-
tional and public spot-light on our non-ratification record in a forum
where we already have been subjected to considerable embarrassment
on this score. However, in the past, our record was predominantly cited
in speeches by communist countries and other states seeking to dis-
credit us. In the future, our non-ratification record will be the subject of
formal UN examination and by a wide spectrum of states.
In the absence of ratification, the new procedure will tend to make
it more difficult to obtain support for the human rights objectives we
pursue at the UN.
194.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, October 22, 1979
Goals and Objectives for the Next Eighteen Months
Bureaucratic
—Full participation for HA in the Foreign Policy decision making
process. Despite the high priority the President has assigned to human
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, unlabeled folder. Secret. Drafted by
Salmon and Derian. The memorandum is a response to a Department-wide effort to
prioritize goals during the last 18 months of Vance’s service as Secretary, following
Vance’s decision that he would not serve in a possible second Carter administration. In a
June 9 memorandum to Vance, Tarnoff and Lake discussed the intellectual framework
for such an undertaking. (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Goals and Objectives) The mem-
orandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Founda-
tions of Foreign Policy.
