Costa Rica  393
Mr. Echandi has informed our Embassy that he is authorized to 
discuss this method of increasing revenue on behalf of the Presidents of 
Guatemala and Honduras.4
Suggested Reply:
It is suggested that Mr. Echandi be told the Executive in the United 
States does not have the authority sometimes found in other countries 
to modify tax liabilities of taxpayers. Taxpayers have well settled rights 
under United States laws and the regulations that are issued to imple-
ment those laws. Consequently, we cannot give an opinion as to whether 
the method for allocating the income of the United Fruit Company can 
be changed. However, to the extent that the present method may not 
adequately reflect the regulations and the law, the Treasury would be 
prepared to discuss the question with the United Fruit Company.
It could be suggested that this matter be worked out between the 
United Fruit Company and the Treasury. Treasury has informed us that 
there would have to be a detailed study before any decisions could be 
made on this proposal.
Suggested Subjects You May Wish to Discuss With Mr. Echandi:
(1) Inter-American Highway:
It is suggested that you point out to Mr. Echandi the importance 
of the Inter-American Highway to Central America. In this connec-
tion Mr. Echandi’s attention could be drawn to the expected increase 
in United States automobile traffic to Central America, with resulting 
additional revenue for the Central American countries and a closer 
tie between the people of the United States and the people of Central 
America.
On March 17 the Legislative Assembly authorized the Costa Rican 
Government to negotiate an increase of $4 million from the EXIM Bank 
for completion of the highway in Costa Rica.
(2) Elections
You may wish to comment on the orderly, honest, democratic 
Presidential and Congressional elections which took place last February 
second. The Costa Ricans have taken great pride in these elections as 
they were intent upon showing other Latin American countries how 
free democratic elections should be conducted. As President Figueres’ 
party will have a plurality in the new Legislative Assembly, any com-
ments Mr. Echandi has concerning how he expects to get his program 
through the Legislative Assembly will be of interest.
4 Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes and Ramón Villeda Morales, respectively.
