592
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
allies, who count on us not only to maintain strong military forces to
offset Soviet military power, but also, and equally important, to man-
age successfully a stable East-West relationship. SALT is at the heart of
both these crucial efforts. That is why the leaders of France and Great
Britain, Germany, England, Canada, and other nations have voiced
their full support for the emerging treaty.
Some nations which have so far held back from building their own
nuclear weapons—and at least a dozen other nations on Earth now
have that capability—will be strongly influenced in their decision by
whether the two nuclear superpowers will restrain our weapons. Rejec-
tion of the new strategic arms limitation treaty would seriously under-
mine the effort to control proliferation of these deadly weapons. And
nothing, nothing, would more surely damage our other critical efforts
in arms control—from a ban on all nuclear testing to the prevention of
dangerous satellite warfare in space; from equalizing NATO and
Warsaw Pact forces to restraining the spread of sophisticated conven-
tional weapons on Earth.
Every President since the dawn of the nuclear age has pursued the
effort to bring nuclear arms under control. And this must be a contin-
uing process.
President Kennedy, building on the efforts of Presidents Truman
and Eisenhower, signed the first agreement with the Soviet Union
in 1963 to stop the poisonous testing of nuclear explosives in the
atmosphere.4
In 1968, 5 years later, under President Johnson, the United States
and the Soviet Union joined other nations throughout the world in
signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty, an important step in preventing
the spread of nuclear explosives to other nations.5
In 1972, under President Nixon, the SALT I agreement placed the
first agreed limits on the number of offensive weapons, and the antibal-
listic missile treaty, the ABM treaty, made an enduring contribution to
our own security.6
President Ford continued in negotiations at Helsinki and at Vladi-
vostok.7 Each negotiation builds on the accomplishments of the last.
Each agreement provides a foundation for further progress toward a
more stable nuclear relationship.
4 See footnote 5, Document 56.
5 See footnote 4, Document 2.
6 See footnote 5, Document 109.
7 For information about the November 1974 Vladivostok meetings, see footnote 5,
Document 2. For information about the July–August 1975 Helsinki meetings, see Foreign
Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Documents
171–174.
