1978 419 use actual or prospective improvements in relations with one communist power to induce greater cooperation from the other. As the PRC becomes more aligned with the West, however, the U.S. ability to do this declines, and the Soviet Union, instead of attempting to forestall Sino-American cooperation, reacts negatively to it (as it has done in its global propaganda during the past six months). There is, thus, a trade-­ off for the U.S. between the gains to be secured by using the PRC to counter Soviet expansion, and those to be secured by using it to induce Soviet cooperation. At present, the balance is shifting from the latter to the former. How far and at what rate it is in the interest of the U.S. for that shift to continue is a central issue for U.S. strategy in relation to the major communist powers. C. Diplomatic Support and Political Appeal. The improvements in the diplomatic balance and in the attitudes of foreign publics towards the U.S. stem largely from the new policies, new promises, and new style of the Carter Administration. Unlike Soviet gains which, as in Ethiopia and Afghanistan, tend to be concrete and difficult to reverse, these U.S. gains with respect to the attitudes of foreign governments and publics are less deep-­rooted and could be much more ephemeral. In some respects, indeed, they result simply from the fact that the Administration is new. Thus, the increased attention which the Administration paid to some countries was a significant factor in the improved relations with those countries. Unless the attention is escalated, however, which is likely to be impossible, the impact of that increased attention will fade over time. Similarly, the Administration’s emphasis on human rights has had an apparently major positive impact on foreign public opinion. Again, that impact seems likely to diminish over time as human rights becomes a familiar element in U.S. foreign policy. Consequently, in order to maintain the favorable trends of the past 18 months, it would seem desirable to explore ways in which improved U.S. relations with key countries could be secured by more institutionalized ties based on common interests. D. Economics and Technology. The trends in these areas have three major implications for U.S. policy. First, the U.S. can move much more decisively than it has to take advantage of the Soviet Union’s current and prospective economic weaknesses. In particular, U.S. technology is of central importance to the Soviets in postponing the decline in their oil production and U.S. technology and credits could play a major role in developing Soviet natural gas and oil reserves. This situation is now ripe for exploitation by the U.S. One possibility would be for the U.S. to express its willingness to cooperate with the Soviets in developing their energy (particularly natural gas) resources on a massive scale, through such means as the $6 billion Yakutsk natural gas project, provided the Soviets
