March 27–December 31, 1979 925 acceptance of any resolution we could reasonably support—especially following the PNC meeting in Damascus;3 and 2) the benefits to be achieved with Jordan and Saudi Arabia (though, to be sure, the costs of a UN veto with these and other Arab countries remain). (S) Bob Strauss has left Begin and Sadat with the understanding that we are at the moment going forward with a resolution that will indicate support for 242 and 338, affirm Palestinian rights, and deal with the refugees in some general way. (Despite press reports to the contrary, Strauss impressed upon Begin that he could not promise to recommend to the President against moving forward). Both, however, have high expectations that their own personal appeals to the President will have an effect, in getting our position changed. Both appealed for a face-to-face meeting with the President (Khalil, Begin) before we proceed; and both urged that the President not destroy through this act what he has built up in the Camp David process. (S) What next? I discussed with Bill this evening the thinking that went on today in Washington. It parallels ours on the plane, to wit: —we should not go forward with a resolution of our own; —we should seek to get the UN business behind us this week, instead of trying to stretch it out. (S) Bill’s three options seem best (and parallel to ours): —seek a postponement (the attached cable4 indicates an inclination in Beirut on that point as well; if your meeting Tuesday5 morning goes in this direction, following up on this conversation with Tueni should be done urgently); —Go for a neutral “consensus” statement out of the UNSC; —simply veto. (S) My own sense is that we should pursue them in the order stated. (S) Strauss’ inclination is to give a press conference tomorrow, indicating that we will not put in a resolution (indicating that we had been exploring several, but met negative reactions in both Israel and 3 In telegram 5410 from Damascus, August 16, the Embassy conveyed a report on the August 12 meeting of the Palestinian Central Council in Damascus. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790372–0360) 4 Not found attached. In telegram 4641 from Beirut, August 20, Dean relayed a conversation he had with Tueni in which Tueni stated that he had called on Arafat on August 19 to “probe his receptivity” to a postponement in UN consideration of a resolution on Palestinian rights. Tueni told Dean that he had found Arafat “very receptive” to a postponement “in the event nothing constructive could be achieved at this time.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850029–2494) 5 August 21.
