1190 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement friendship with the United States and there is no quarrel at all between the Cuban and the United States peoples. Castro has behaved as a wild man, contrary to the interests of Cuba and of the hemisphere; and now has become linked to the Soviet bloc. The irresponsible seizure of property is having a direct impact upon investments in the other American Republics and the latter should be gravely concerned. The President recognized the appeal of the initial Castro revolutionary program then as agrarian reform, particularly the students and related groups throughout the hemisphere, but [illegible in the original] that [illegible in the original] groups should be [illegible in the original] equally at least with the need for private investment as a means for economic growth. Also the President said that the direct Cuban-United States problem can be considered a small one, and although small problems can be much more of a nuisance than big ones, his principal concern is with the broader implications which originate from it. The Councilor interrupted frequently during the course of the President’s [illegible in the original] in order to present his views. In essence, the Councilor [illegible in the original] must be found to push Castro against the wall and [illegible in the original] him to state his position, clearly once and for all, on his attitude toward the United States and toward the other American Republics [illegible in the original] what it is that he wants. This can be achieved, he said by [illegible in the original] a committee of four or five nations, including Uruguay, to discuss these matters directly with Castro. The Committee should express the concern of all of the American Republics regarding U.S.- Cuban relations and ask Castro where he stands, if he [illegible in the original] a solution, what can be done, and [illegible in the original] to solve the present crisis. A final objective would be to make him choose between the American Republics and the Soviet bloc. In response to the President’s remarks to the effect that Castro may already [illegible in the original] quite clear where he stands, the Councilor insisted that Castro’s [illegible in the original] may be clear to the United States and perhaps to some other [illegible in the original] groups but that it is not clear to the Latin American peoples. The Councilor continued to stress the need for a committee of nations which could force Castro into a final declaration, to be understood by everyone. Toward the close of the conversation, the President referred to his faith and confidence in the United Nations but indicated that he had as much or more regard for the Organization of American States as a regional entity of fundamental importance to the United States and to all of the American Republics. The President said that he hoped, before leaving office, that he would be able to take actions demonstrating further the importance which he attaches to the OAS. He has made plans to visit the United Nations and, during his visit there, he hopes
