793.11/1103a [Document 540] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge WASHINGTON, December 15, 1924. MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have the honor to invite your attention at this time to the matter of the exercise of your authority in remitting to China the balance of the Boxer Indemnity. This remission is to be in accordance with the provisions of the Joint Resolution of May 21, 1924, (a copy of which is enclosed),90 at such times and in such manner as you shall deem just. The steps heretofore taken are these: On June 14 the Department transmitted to the Chinese Minister in Washington a copy of the Joint Resolution. Mr. Sze then stated that his Government intended to intrust the administration of the funds to a Board which should be composed of Chinese and American citizens, to avail itself of the services of experts in working out the details of this arrangement, and, upon the formulation of a definite plan, to lay it before the Department for its consideration. In pursuance of this plan, Doctor Paul Monroe, Director of the Teachers College of Columbia University, proceeded to Peking last August at the instance of the Chinese Government, and held conferences with Chinese officials and educators. As a result of conclusions thereby reached, a Presidential Mandate was issued on September 17, creating the “China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture,” and appointing nine Chinese and five American citizens members of the Foundation and trustees of the funds to be realized from the successive remissions of the balance of the Indemnity. It is my understanding that, by this action, the Chinese Government definitely divorced itself from any future control or supervision over the funds of the Indemnity, surrendering the authority, which it would otherwise normally exercise, to the Foundation, which, under the terms of its constitution is a self-perpetuating body. While not undertaking to give formal approval to the measures which the Chinese Government has thus far adopted, the Department has made known
