448 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 169. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 28, 1980 SUBJECT Iran—Next Steps The strategy developed by Hal Saunders and Ham Jordan2 is an intelligent and cautious outline of an approach intended to maximize our very limited access and leverage. It is unlikely in the extreme that the scenario will in fact play out in the way it is supposed to, but the key is not the validity of the scenario, it is the fact that we have concrete proposals to put before Bani Sadr (and Ghotbzadeh) which will draw them into a substantive negotiation process. We are justified in taking some calculated risks to get such a process going, but we should do so with our eyes open. So let me start by listing the grounds for skepticism: —The political analysis by the two Frenchmen was dead wrong. They expected Habibi to win the election as a result of maneuvering by the “master political leader” Khomeini. This was their view as late as last Friday.3 There is a persistent element of wishful thinking throughout their analysis. I suspect that their scenario is cut from the same cloth. —If the Frenchmen were right that Khomeini intended Habibi to win, then how is he likely to react to Bani Sadr’s triumph? Probably by cutting him down to size as quickly as possible. If, on the other hand, the election went as scheduled, then our Frenchmen are not nearly as well plugged in as they would have us believe. Are they really in a position to work with Bani Sadr? —The time scale is totally unrealistic. Step One (establishing the channel) must take at least a week. Step Two (setting up a commission of inquiry by the UN) can not be done in less than a week or ten days, knowing the speed of the UN and all the consultations and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 1/11/80–1/31/80. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. In the upper right corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “GS, Show to Ham & return to me.” 2 See Document 168. Brzezinski sent a copy of the paper to Sick under a January 28 covering memorandum, asking for his assessment. Sick submitted this analysis to Brzezinski and a shorter one on January 29 recounting the meeting he had with Jordan at Brzezinski’s request. He sent both memoranda to Aaron and Hunter under a January 31 covering memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 1/80) 3 Friday, January 25; see Document 164. Bani-Sadr was elected President that day.
