678 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 116. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, May 12, 1990, 1240Z 05140. Subject: DST—Where are the Soviets after five years? We have passed the fifth anniversary of the Defense and Space Talks (DST). Some would say they have long been deadlocked, others would point to major advances. Both are correct. The Soviets have repeatedly fallen back from unsustainable tactical positions, but their asserted substantive views have changed much less. They still strongly oppose SDI, especially any space-­based part, probably fearing SDI would give us strategic advantage. At times, the Soviets openly imply their technological and economic weakness, and their fear of being unable to compete in this Ultra-­High-­Tech area. Main features of the Soviet negotiating position have been its inconsistency with active Soviet programs in the ABM area and the great secrecy about them. Following are key changes and constancies over five years. — The Soviets began DST hoping to execute the Shultz-Gromyko mandate of January 1985 to “prevent an arms race in space.” They sought a ban on “space-­strike arms.” The Soviets were then conducting a strident worldwide anti-SDI campaign. Debates raged in Europe and the U.S. — Many in the west found favor with a “grand compromise.” SDI would be given up as a bargaining chip to get START and INF. Private experts said SDI would never work. Some advised that SDI be traded away while there was still time to get a quid. As late as a year ago many analysts still predicted that the Soviets would not accept START without a D&S agreement on Soviet terms. They (and I) foresaw a Soviet squeeze play on DST in the START endgame. — Now, in retrospect, Soviet outrage and threats about SDI in the midand late 1980s may have been as hollow as those on INF in the early 1980s turned out to be. In five years the Soviets have jettisoned a stunning array of demands—­a ban on space-­strike arms, a ban on purposeful SDI research, no INF and START treaties unless SDI is killed, stringent constraints on SDI testing in space, a period of nonwithdrawal from the ABM treaty, and a new D&S accord as a price for START. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D900434–0331. Secret; Priority; Stadis. Also sent to Moscow.
