National Security Policy 339 weapons and with maneuver. A nuclear projectile for the 8-­inch how­ itzer is now in the stockpile. Additionally, Army has developed Army Missile Commands capable of rendering nuclear fire support to allied ground forces by various ground delivery systems. Addition of a lim­ ited number of helicopter units has provided Army with increased bat­ tle mobility. Principal limitations on effectiveness of Army forces are related to lack of modernization of non-­nuclear fire support and an insufficiency of combat and logistic support because of manpower and budgetary limitations. b. Naval. Increased nuclear capabilities of U.S. naval forces add materially to their effectiveness as a part of the ready forces. Included in naval forces are Fleet Marine Force divisions and air wings, with an organic surface and aircraft launched nuclear capability, capable of reacting to local aggression or general war. The new vertical helicopter assault doctrine provides a high degree of mobility for landing forces in assault and subsequent operations. c. Air Force. USAF forces include units of Tactical Air Command, tactical air units of overseas theater air forces, and SAC bombardment forces described in previous paragraphs. USAF tactical air forces world-­wide have been reduced from a total of 55 (including 15 airlift) wings on 30 June 1957 to 45 (including 13 airlift) on 30 June 1958, further to be reduced to 35 (including 11 airlift) by 30 June 1959. The effectiveness, however, of both strategic and tactical air units to respond to local aggression or general war has not decreased since the 30 June 1957 status report as a result of the growing nuclear delivery capabilities of tac­ tical air weapons and the improving reaction time and mobility of strategic bombardment units. d. In the succeeding paragraphs the ready forces capable of responding selectively and flexibly to local aggression and general war are treated by geographical areas. [Omitted here is the remainder of Section II, JCS Evaluation of Actual and Potential Capabilities.] III. EVALUATION BY THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF OF OUR ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE CONTINENTAL DEFENSE SYSTEM. A. OBJECTIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTI­ NENTAL U.S. DEFENSE PROGRAMS (Based on NSC 5802/1). To be pre­ pared at all times to counter an attack on the North American Continent in such a way as to deter Soviet attack, or, if an attack occurs, to insure our survival as a free nation. Such preparation requires that the United States achieve and maintain, in collaboration with Canada and other Free World nations, a continental defense readiness and capability which will protect and permit the launching of our nuclear retaliatory
