The general manager of Grace and Company has called on me twice with regard to great diminutions in the consumption of nitrate of soda in the United States during last year, due to increasing use of substitutes and synthetic nitrate of soda. He is convinced that this increased use of substitutes is due to two causes: (1) American desire to get nitrate of soda at lower prices; and (2) the belief of the United States that it ought not to remain dependent for an article necessary in peace and indispensable in war upon a source of supply in a remote country which will not earnestly strive to settle a dispute with a neighboring nation which has long caused severance of diplomatic relations and on various occasions mobilization of troops, and which is now provoking in both countries a marked increase in military preparation and which at any moment may result in a war that will interrupt the shipment of nitrate. [Paraphrase.] I believe that the general manager of W. R. Grace and Company is quite correct in his deductions, fears, and facts, particularly should the Plebiscitary Commission declare that a plebiscite was impracticable and should Chile then insist on remaining in control of the province, as she undoubtedly would. The general manager went on to say that if the Secretary of Commerce would give out an interview in which he intimated that [end paraphrase] the reestablishment of cordial friendship between Chile and Peru would increase the export commerce of both by removing the fears of importers of nations that the source of supply might be cut off, such interview would have enormous effect here at this moment when the nitrate business is depressed and the Government and the business world is alarmed as to national revenue and business conditions. [Paraphrase.] I believe that the general manager is correct in saying that such an interview given out by the Secretary of Commerce would have the excellent effect of causing the Nitrate Producers Association to set a much lower price for the coming year at its meeting in June, and it would also be a most powerful influence in bringing about a diplomatic settlement of the difficulties. The Chileans are influenced more by a peril to their nitrate trade than by anything else. It would be much more effective, however, if such an interview were given out by the Secretary of Commerce rather than by the Secretary of State and presented purely as a commercial proposition. I
