460 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV improves its overhead reconnaissance to achieve an intelligence cycle time short enough to allow targeting of dispersed transporters (which will probably not happen until at least the late 80’s). It is, of course, hardly effective against a “bolt-­out-­of-­the-­blue” attack since we could not move the missile very far in the few minutes warning we would get from an SLBM attack.9 On balance, though, it would be a strong move—­both militarily and politically—­if coupled with a solid program for dealing with the longer term solution to the problem. This move is particularly valuable if we decide on the air transportable ICBM basing mode with its later IOC. III. SLBM Modernization The SLBM modernization plan has four major components: (1) Begin production of TRIDENT I missiles in 1979 and deploy them on 21 of the POSEIDON submarines (336 missiles deployed) by 1985. Replacing POSEIDON missiles with TRIDENT I will give us our most immediate and effective increase in striking power to offset in part the military and political effects of the Soviets’ major increase in ICBM RV’s. (2) Begin the development of the TRIDENT II missile in 1979 by taking advantage of the commonality of two propulsion states with the ICBM described above. [2 lines not declassified] If we decide to pursue MAPS as the ICBM basing mode, then we need not rush to deploy the TRIDENT II; in this case we envision a 1990 IOC. However, if we decide to pursue the air transportable basing mode for ICBM’s, and if ways of communicating with SSBN’s in a post-­nuclear attack environment improve sufficiently, then we may want to accelerate the ­TRIDENT II IOC in order to compensate in part for our reduced capability to attack time-­urgent hard targets. In either case the TRIDENT II would be deployed on the new TRIDENT subs as they come off the production line and later backfitted in the earlier subs that had been fitted with TRIDENT I. (3) Continue production of the TRIDENT submarine at a rate of 1½ per year. I believe that the major startup problems are behind us now and that maintaining this program through the 80’s is the proper course of action.10 The latter conclusion is subject to a size-­connected vulnerability to ASW that I think a theoretical possibility, though not a practical one, during the next 15 years. 9 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this and the preceding sentence: “Could move every night.” 10 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to the phrase “I believe that the major startup problems are behind us now” and wrote: “optimistic view?”
