496 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the students.” The Revolutionary Council lacked the unanimity necessary to order the hostages released. Villalon counseled a wait-and-see attitude. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 2) 190. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 25, 1980 SUBJECT Passive Displays Some time ago I briefed you about a possibility that Ben Huberman and I were pursuing to create a large ominous cloud which could be deployed as a psychological display, possibly in connection with the use of carbon fibers or other techniques under development.2 With your approval, DOD has conducted some initial tests which show that the creation of a large, stable cloud of foam particles is feasible. We saw a short movie of the tests, which included the creation of a 500-foot long red cloud. Although the cloud was smaller and thinner than we would want, the technology is clearly available both for production and delivery. We are also assured that the cloud can be made phosphorescent. Ben and I encouraged DOD to proceed with the manufacture of the necessary quantity of red, phosphorescent particles and to examine three alternative delivery systems: [less than 1 line not declassified]. We believe that the availability of this material is justified in the event we need a passive but striking demonstration at some point. It is not 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 2/80. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. 2 In a January 14 memorandum to Brzezinski on this subject, Sick suggested that a “non-violent trick” could have a “psychological effect.” Sick reported on two alternative technologies available, the deployment of a non-toxic and biodegradable “black cloud” made of a foam material that could hang over cities, such as Qom or Tehran, and the use of carbon and aluminum fibers to “create electromagnetic effects to disrupt power generation.” (Ibid.)
