Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 631 D. Relations with Allies: Despite the absence of specific disagreements, our relations with major Allies (especially the Summit partners) are not strong. It is unfortunate but true that our key friends are slowly losing confidence in the Administration’s ability to lead both domestically and internationally. You and Harold Brown are the only senior officials of the Administration whose standing remains high. The Governments in the U.K., Canada, France, Japan and probably the FRG are likely to be in place well beyond the 1980 U.S. elections; this fact gives them a certain over-confidence, not to say arrogance, in dealing with an Administration perceived to be in political trouble. Your time and attention on key issues between the U.S. and our Allies—TNF deployments, energy—is probably indispensable.15 E. Southern Africa: Your personal stature with the British, South Africans and key African players—as well as in the Congress and the American black community—is such that you will probably want to remain fully involved in both Namibia and Rhodesia.16 Additionally, our African policy could run into heavy weather in coming months. For you to distance yourself from the difficulties could be perceived by the Africans and much of the Third World as an abandonment of the one policy that most distinguished this Administration from its predecessors. F. Central America and Western Asia: These areas are very different from each other except in one crucial17 respect: they will be the scene of crucial Administration decisions on how to manage change and a positive evolution, in terms of U.S. interests, of regimes that are repressive, weak, unrepresentative and pro-American.18 As you know, the Administration is deeply divided on this issue, and our policies have zigzagged in every case. These developments are also a subject of domestic political interest. II. Old Issues to be Delegated. It is always difficult to step away from an important issue, especially when it has not been successfully resolved. If we recommend less of your involvement in these areas, it is because we believe that they 15 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “yes.” 16 Vance underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “is,” placed a vertical line in the right-hand margin next to it, and wrote “yes.” 17 An unknown hand placed brackets around this word and wrote “important” in the right-hand margin. Vance placed a checkmark above “important.” 18 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “Correct. I will have to keep a close eye on these while delegating as much as possible.”
