Venezuela 1311 VE–52. Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Coerr) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Knight)1  Washington, December 7, 1960. Dear Mr. Knight: As you aware the United States Government agreed by an exchange of notes signed December 8, 1956 and February 5, 1957 to furnish the Government of Venezuela credit totaling approximately $180 million dollars over a period of ten years for the purchase of military equipment and material. The terms specified in this agreement are: “A suitable down payment followed by semi-annual installments over a three-year period at three percent per annum interest on the unpaid balances”. In view of a difficult budget situation which arose and the need to reduce military expenditures, a representative of the Venezuelan Ministry of Defense visited Washington on November 25, 1959 to inquire about the possibility of modifying the credit agreement to provide more favorable credit terms. This representative was advised at a joint State- Defense meeting that a reconsideration of the interest rate in light of the prevailing rates would most likely result in a higher, not a lower interest rate, and that it was virtually impossible to extend the repayment terms beyond three years because of the accounting limitations and the inflexibility of the three year limit on revolving fund financing. Nevertheless, it was indicated that some adjustment of repayment terms might be worked out, without exceeding the three-year limit, in order to afford some relief to the Venezuelan Government. It was suggested that a formal request for adjustment be submitted through diplomatic channels and the representative was informed that the United States [illegible in the original] concerned would expeditiously consider the request. By a letter dated December [illegible in the original], 1959 to the Chief of the United States Army Training Mission in Venezuela, the Venezuelan Ministry of Defense requested extension of the credit repayment terms from three to ten years.2 Since the extension of credit beyond three years meant that repayments revert to the United States Treasury and no longer become available for credit financing, there were logical objections at the time to accommodating the Venezuelan 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/IAS Files, Lot 65 D 285, “Defense Affairs: Mansfield Amendment.” Secret. Co-­drafted by John J. Intersoll and Allan F. McLean of the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs on November 29. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Coerr’s typed signature. 2 The reference letter was not found Department of State files.
