1977  173
more years would be needed to develop new planning guidance and 
fully translate it into a new general war plan (SIOP). It would be essen-
tial that a comprehensive policy statement be in effect in the interim to 
provide focus and guidance for nuclear employment planning.
(S) I further recommend that action continue under the leadership 
of the Secretary of Defense to refine and support implementation of 
NSDM–242, especially in those areas unlikely to be affected by possible 
future policy adjustments. Such action should include:
—Continued action to familiarize you and your senior advisors 
with the content, capabilities, limitations and risks of the nuclear oper-
ational plans developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in support of the 
national nuclear employment policy, and to familiarize decision mak-
ers with the critical factors to be considered during the nuclear decision 
process.14
—Initiation of actions needed to enhance the definition by you, 
with the advice of the National Security Council, of political objectives 
and criteria to assist the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their preparation of mil-
itary plans for limited nuclear employment options when required by 
the President during a crisis. We also need to assure in peacetime that 
in crisis and war there will be adequate interaction and coordination of 
political, diplomatic, and military measures (including both operations 
and intelligence) in any attempt to control escalation through the lim-
ited employment of nuclear weapons.15
—Initiation of a comprehensive review of deterrent concepts 
to include alternative strategic targeting criteria which could serve 
as a basis for refinement of nuclear employment planning guidance 
(NUWEP) issued by the Secretary of Defense.
	
Tab C
	
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense16
Washington, undated
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING NUCLEAR WAR
(TS) Limited Nuclear Conflict. The primary command center for 
conduct of a limited nuclear conflict would be the National Military 
Command Center (NMCC). The Secretary of Defense and Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, operating from the NMCC, would monitor the conflict through 
inputs from the commanders of unified and specified commands 
(CINCs) and the National Military Intelligence Center (NMIC) and 
14 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok JC.”
15 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok—Zbig do this.”
16 Top Secret.
