1184 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 358. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 15, 1980, 3:02–5:10 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Vice President Walter F. Mondale Secretary of State Cyrus Vance Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President Ambassador Samuel Lewis, United States Ambassador to Israel David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Ambassador James Leonard, Deputy Negotiator for the Middle East Autonomy Negotiations Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker) Prime Minister Menachem Begin Yitzhak Shamir, Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr. Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Ambassador of Israel to the United States Chaim Kubersky, Director General, Ministry of Interior Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Professor Ruth Lapidot, Legal Adviser to Foreign Ministry Gilad Stern, Assistant to the Minister of Interior (From 3:05 until 3:30, the President and Prime Minister Begin met privately on the Rose Garden Terrace and in the Oval Office.2 They then joined the others in the Cabinet Room). The Vice President said that Prime Minister Begin looks handsome. 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial Xs—(4/15/80–4/30/80). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. The memorandum of conversation was found attached to an April 25 covering memorandum from Hunter to Brzezinski upon which Brzezinski indicated his approval of the memoranda of conversation from Carter’s meetings with Begin. Also, in the covering memorandum, Hunter stated that copies of the memoranda of conversation were to be sent to Linowitz and Moses. (Ibid.) Carter’s handwritten notes related to this meeting are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 4/79–11/81. 2 No memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found.
