652
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
4. It is important that U.S. Embassy officials be most circumspect in
initial contacts with members of a new Iranian Government.
5. A visit to Tehran by the Secretary of State, should he be passing
through the Middle East at a time when a new Iranian Government has
become firmly established, would have important effect and he might
wish to consider such a visit in the light of the situation existing at the
time.
Private
1. Concealing the foreign hand to the maximum extent possible,
both the Shah and the successor to Mosadeq should be informed at an
early date that the U.S. is eager to assist in any way feasible the success
of the new government.
2. Both the Shah and the new premier should be informed through
private non-American channels that the U.S. and U.K. realize that for
the new government to raise the question of an oil settlement before it
is firmly established is far too dangerous a matter to be considered.
Naturally, private assurances that the oil dispute will be settled on rea-
sonable terms may be sought, but it would be disastrous for a new gov-
ernment to be forced immediately and publicly to attend to the oil dis-
pute which engenders such fanatic emotions in Iran.
3. Recognizing the importance of a propaganda machine in sup-
porting the new government and repressing opposition, the U.S. might
covertly assist in subsidizing some pro-government newspapers and
could openly make radio equipment and technical advice available to a
new government’s effective operation of Radio Tehran.
II. Military Measures
Public
1. Any ostentatious increase in U.S. military aid to a new Iranian
Government would be likely to create public antagonism in Iran both
to the U.S. and the new government, since Iranians are so sensitive to
fears that their country is being prepared to serve as a foreign military
base. Certainly any displays of foreign armed might, such as a visit by a
foreign naval force or flights of foreign aircraft, would be disastrous to
the establishment of a new government.
2. In consultation with a new government, arrangements might be
made for the U.S. Government to pay the costs of U.S. military advisory
missions presently representing a financial burden to the Iranian
Government.
Private
1. Privately the new government could be assured of U.S. will-
ingness to provide military aid to any reasonable extent desired. A par-
