place, it appears to be the thought of your Government that the proposed
multilateral treaty be signed in the first instance by France and the United
States alone and then submitted to the other Powers for their acceptance. In
the opinion of the Government of the United States this procedure is open
to the objection that a treaty, even though acceptable to France and the
United States, might for some reason be unacceptable to one of the other
great Powers. In such event the treaty could not come into force and the
present efforts of France and the United States would be rendered abortive.
This unhappy result would not necessarily follow a disagreement as to
terminology arising prior to the definitive approval by any Government of a
proposed form of treaty, since it is by no means unreasonable to suppose
that the views of the Governments concerned could be accommodated
through informal preliminary discussions and a text devised which would
be acceptable to them all. Both France and the United States are too deeply
interested in the success of their endeavors for the advancement of peace to
be willing to jeopardize the ultimate accomplishment of their purpose by
incurring unnecessary risk of disagreement with the other Powers
concerned, and I have no doubt that your Government will be entirely
agreeable to joining with the Government of the United States and the
Governments of the other Powers concerned for the purpose of reaching a
preliminary agreement as to the language to be used in the proposed treaty,
thus obviating all danger of confronting the other Powers with a definitive
treaty unacceptable to them. As indicated below, the Government of the
United States would be pleased if the Government of France would agree
that the draft treaty submitted by M. Briand last June should be made the
basis of such preliminary discussions.
In the second place, and this point is closely related to what goes before, M.
Briand’s reply of January 5, 1928, in expressing the willingness of the
Government of France to join with the Government of the United States in
proposing a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war, apparently
contemplates that the scope of such treaty should be limited to wars of
aggression. The form of treaty which your Government submitted to me last
June which was the subject of my note of December 28, 1927, contained no
such qualification or limitation. On the contrary it provided unequivocally
for the renunciation by the High Contracting Parties of all war as an
instrument of national policy in the following terms:
