Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1103 11. Nazarkin said he had instructed his delegation not to worry about whether or not there were asterisks on pages. Brooks said that he expected to be in a position to propose formally the deletion of asterisked pages later in the week. The two ministers had made it clear that nothing was agreed until everything was agreed, and there was no need to further document that fact by the use of asterisked pages. 12. Nazarkin said that Soviet legal advisor Kalinkin was reviewing the various exchanges of letters and side agreements and hoped shortly to be in a position to discuss the topic with U.S. legal advisor Brown. Brooks said he would pass this on to Brown. Brooks urged that Kalinkin also expedite his preparations for conforming the protocol on the joint compliance and inspection commission. The document needed to be printed in the next few days. Nazarkin agreed. Bear D Exhibitions 13. Brooks said that there would be one significant problem with side letters. The new Soviet position on Bear D exhibitions would cause considerable problems. Nazarkin said that he was aware of the potential problems. Nazarkin recalled that he had asked Brooks about the letters in question shortly before the Washington ministerial. It was Nazarkin’s belief that the text had not been agreed. Brooks said that Nazarkin was correct, but noted that there had never been any hint from the Soviet side of the new positions presented in Washington. Brooks further noted that inspecting all B–1s was a Soviet request, just as inspecting all Bear D’s was a U.S. request. Brooks had not, however, heard any suggestion that the Soviet side would pay for such inspections. Nazarkin said that he took the point. Reentry Vehicle Inspections 14. Brooks asked whether Moscow had approved the use of the global positioning system (GPS) during reentry vehicle inspections. Nazarkin said Moscow had not. Nazarkin then asked if Brooks had given further thought to a possible trade in this area. Brooks said he could agree to ten reentry vehicle inspections, with no additions for downloading, in return for Soviet acceptance of the GPS. Nazarkin said that the Soviet side could accept ten inspections, but not the explicit trade of inspections for GPS. MOU Issues 15. Nazarkin said that the U.S. side, while agreeing to exchange of site diagrams 30 days after signature, also proposed exchanging draft site diagrams in advance. This would delay work, Nazarkin asserted. Brooks said he would be prepared to drop the U.S. proposal, but asked for time to consult with Curtin before doing so.
