Costa Rica  401
Costa Rica’s democratic principles, but would not tolerate their engag-
ing in subversive activities within or outside the country. He stated 
that political exiles could continue to find a place to live in Costa Rica 
and provided they lived there peacefully as law-­abiding citizens they 
would not be molested.
Political and Economic Philosophy
Mr. Echandi stated that he was a strong believer in democratic 
principles and private initiative. He stated that it was his desire now to 
unite the various political parties within the country in looking towards 
the best interests of the country. He said he was making an effort to 
have his Cabinet composed of representatives of the various parties 
and in this respect he had offered Rossi (the Independent Party candi-
date for President) a Cabinet post. He said that it was not his intention 
to change any of the government autonomous entities already func-
tioning, but that he hoped additional economic development would 
be carried out through private enterprise by both foreign and domestic 
capital.
Banks
President-­elect Echandi said it was his desire to see private banks 
established in the country. He said that he hoped while in the United 
States to talk to some bankers with the idea of interesting them in setting 
up branches in Costa Rica. He thought that private banks within the 
country would help provide needed loans for the agriculturists, such as 
the coffee growers, and for small industrial enterprises. Mr. Rubottom 
asked him if it would be necessary to change the law of 1948 under 
which the banks were nationalized before private banks could function 
within the country. Mr. Echandi said changes in this law would have 
to be effected.
Larger Share in Taxes of the United Fruit Company
Mr. Echandi said that he had talked with Treasury officials this 
morning in regard to his desire to obtain an increase in the portion of 
United Fruit Company profits subject to Costa Rican taxation. He spoke 
appreciatively of the way he had been received by the Treasury officials 
and seemed pleased to know that his request would be given every 
possible consideration in accordance with United States tax laws. He 
indicated that the United Fruit Company would endeavor to work out 
this matter with the Treasury.
Conditions in Other Central American Countries
Mr. Rubottom asked Mr. Echandi if he had any comments he 
would like to make concerning observations of the Central American 
countries he had so recently visited. Mr. Echandi said that in El
