Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administration of Jimmy Carter. As with previous volumes in the Foreign Relations series, this volume provides only a snapshot of the global character of Cold War politics. Therefore, this volume is best read in conjunction with other volumes in the subseries, in order to better understand how policies toward Eastern Europe fit into the full breath and scope of the Carter administration’s policies in the Cold War. The most important volumes in the subseries include Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VII, Poland, 1977–1981 (which also covers the first year of the Reagan administration up to the imposition of martial law in Poland in December 1981); Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union; Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe; Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. I, Foundations of Foreign Policy; and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVIII, Organization and Management of Foreign Policy. Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX The focus of this volume is on the Carter administration’s policy toward the Communist governments in Eastern Europe, specifically Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Romania, and Yugoslavia. Albania is not included as the lack of any meaningful diplomatic relations with Albania meant there was no separate policy toward that country outside of the general policy toward Communist regimes in Eastern Europe. Also covered in this volume is the formulation of policy toward broadcasting to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union as an extension of the administration’s policy toward that region. Poland is covered in a separate volume by virtue of the August 1980–December 1981 crisis. Eastern and Central European countries not dominated by Communist regimes, such as Finland and Austria, are covered in the Western Europe volume. Documentation in the volume covers the Carter administration’s formulation of foreign policy toward Eastern Europe as a whole, broadcasting in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and toward individual countries. Policies toward Eastern Europe remained defined by the nature of the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union. The Carter administration continued some of the policies implemented IX
