1168 Foreign Relations, 1958ﻗ°±1960, Volume III, Supplement overseas. For all other Naval forces, the general war objective will not exceed 90 days combat support. (d) Attain an additional level of war readiness reserve stock of those items necessary to sustain in limited war for 180 days designated Naval forces, plus a maximum of 180 days training support for the other Naval forces. (2) Budgetary limitations have precluded reaching these logistic readiness goals. The most important shortage is modern conventional weapons and ammunition, such as ASW torpedoes, electronic equipﺁﺝ ment (sonar, radar and ECM), and guided missiles. c. Air Force. U.S. Air Force wartime planning and programming documents, upon which emergency war plans are formulated, presﺁﺝ ently reflect the force and war readiness materiel requirements for limﺁﺝ ited war activity as well as for general war. In order to support the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved contingency plans of the unified commands in consonance with Secretary of Defense memorandum, dated 15 March 1960, the Air Force has segmented the total package authorized for limﺁﺝ ited war actions and has distributed them on a global basis. Detailed Air Force plans provide for world-ﺁﺝwide base prestockage rather than the portrayal of the force and attendant war readiness materiel assets in one location or area to meet limited war threats. The separation of War Readiness Materiel (WRM) for general and limited war will enable the commander to identify readily those items of WRM which are specifﺁﺝ ically designated for limited war and prevent degradation of general war assets. Additionally, the Air Force has revised its policy on WRM to provide for prestocking and prepositioning materiel in support of approved contingency plans. The concept provides for locating the materiel at or near the point of planned usage. d. Marine Corps. Mobilization planning is current through the FY 1961 period. These plans provide guidance under conditions of cold, limited or general war, and reflect actual Marine Corps capabilities including provision for assembly of resources available. Mobilization plans are designed to permit incrementally phased activations of units in the event partial mobilization is required. Current actions to improve mobilization capabilities include a reorganization of the Marine Corps Reserve to support more accurately specific mobilizaﺁﺝ tion requirements. 3. The general statue of war reserves by Service, is: a. Army (1) The status of war reserves, based on the guidance for the develﺁﺝ opment of FY 61/62 Logistics Program, is being computed and anaﺁﺝ lyzed at this time. Therefore, the following information on the general status of war reserves is a qualified estimate, based on available data.
