Colombia 331 this as a further indication that we must ourselves think this problem through. It seems to me probable under the circumstances that the Lleras administration will try to sweep this whole matter under the rug to the best of its ability. I think it reasonable to surmise that the Lleras administration, like the present Government, will try gradually to ameliorate the situation, will take remedial action in more flagrant cases, and will make concessions from time to time. I doubt, however, that we can expect any drastic shift. Lleras may indeed try to shove the whole issue into the courts on constitutional grounds and thereby delay matters further. Given the present situation in Colombia, I also question whether we can afford to press Lleras into a corner on this issue. The probable alternative to Lleras is chaos, and in the coming years it may be quite hard to prevent precisely that. Given the social unrest in Colombia, the growing Communist activities, and Colombia’s geographical position, to mention but a few of the more obvious considerations, I do not believe that we can afford to finger the rug under Lleras on an issue which is not vital to the United States. 5. What, then, should be our course of action? The present Government has one month to live. I doubt it would be willing in that month to take any action which might annoy or upset a great many people in Colombia. We do not have the time to prepare the ground for further vigorous representations. We are not likely, therefore, to get any important remedial action from it. We should not, as I have already pointed out, make vigorous representations during the early part of the Lleras administration. We may hope that the situation will gradually improve. We may properly make representations in specific cases or press gently when the moment seems propitious, but we should be careful how far we go. We should try to clear the air of the poisonous fumes now in it by a positive program of publicity. Obviously, such a program should be geared to the tempo of our representations. If the premise that we should go slow regarding representations is accepted, then our efforts to clear the air through publicity may also be pitched in a low gear. In sum, I have the feeling that this is another example of what Talleyrand meant in his comment about zeal in diplomatic affairs. Like the violence which is still desolating the Colombian countryside, this situation is one which it may take years to correct, and it can be corrected only as the democratic warp and woof in Colombian life are strengthened. We should also bear in mind the possibility of solving this religious problem by court action. When the state of siege is lifted, as it presumably will be as soon after the inauguration of the new administration
