722 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement It is statistically impossible to determine precisely how much trade is affected by these restrictions. However, it has been calculated on the basis of the latest figures available, that is for 1957, the trade affected by these restrictions represented about $2.1 billion or 28% of US imports of competitive items. Out of this total oil products account for approxi­ mately $1.5 billion and the remaining items account for about $600 mil­ lion. These figures are subject to a number of qualifications. For one thing the more effective the action in restricting imports the smaller the trade. You will note from the map that some countries are affected by only one restriction, whereas others are affected by as many as twelve. Venezuela for example, has been affected only by our restrictions of oil imports, but oil directly involves more than 80% of that country’s exports to the United States. I would like to comment briefly on several of the more important cases shown on the chart. First, Heavy electrical equipment—Our decision on the Greer’s Ferry case created an uproar in the United Kingdom. One extreme sector of British opinion called for immediate discrimination against purchases in the United States. The British consider the pending OCDM heavy electrical equipment case “the most important subject in economic relations between the United States and the United Kingdom since the institution of the Smoot Hawley Tariff.” Lead and Zinc—When quotas were imposed Australian press and official comments were unusually severe in their criticism. Our action became a major political issue. The case has clearly affected our posi­ tion in a country which is the southern anchor of our Pacific defense perimeter. In Canada our lead and zinc action was viewed in the context of a number of other United States policies and actions which have been the source of increasing resentment, such as our restrictions on agricultural imports and our surplus agricultural disposal operations. Mexican press, labor and management officials were also very critical. Intensely emotional demonstrations and condemnation of the United States occurred in Peru. Petroleum—The Venezuelans have asked for equal treatment on the grounds that their oil, like Canada’s, is vital to the defense and security of the Western Hemisphere. We are worried that the Venezuelans will institute oil pro-­rationing and export controls to the disadvantage of US companies. We have to recognize that they may want to change our bilat­ eral trade agreement drastically and possibly abrogate it. Either course of action would seriously hurt our large export sales to Venezuela. The second chart shows that there are now outstanding 13 requests for restrictions on imports. These represent trade valued at
