682 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI conventional) SLCMs the sides would deploy in exchange for the Soviets not insisting on any kind of real verification. Assuming they are willing to make that deal, there are at least two potential sticking points: — Maximum number of deployed nuclear SLCMs. The Soviets have proposed 600. The draft NSD says “approximately 1000.” The maximum number of nuclear SLCMs we now plan to buy is about 750. The Navy POM cuts this number to about 650. Nobody has any plans or intentions to buy more than 650–750 for the foreseeable future, i.e., for the duration of the START Treaty. — Range threshold. We want the “politically binding SLCM declaration” to apply to all nuclear SLCMs with a range in excess of 300km. The Soviets want to set the range threshold at 600 km. Since it will be a declaration, not a limit, one can argue that it doesn’t matter much where the range threshold is set. Following are the arguments usually adduced in support of 300 km: – It is a precedent for what could become a limit in START II. – Given the concentration of interesting targets along the U.S. coastline, a 300 km Soviet nuclear SLCM is a “strategic weapon” – Most Soviet SLCMs are less than 600 km. We therefore could be “embarrassed” by a 600 km range threshold that made it look as though the U.S. has many more SLCMs than do the Soviets. – We are making “major concesssions” on the SLCM issue and we ought to get something for it. The range threshold is the “something.” Mobile ICBM Sublimits. A sublimit of 1200 is unlikely to affect any Soviet programs and certainly will not interfere with ours. The problem is that mobile sublimits don’t make sense in principle, and are hard to reconcile with the “stability” rationale that undergirds our approach to START. The only mobile sublimit that might make sense would be one on MIRVed mobiles. START II. The draft statement for follow-­on negotiations is attached at Tab 2.4 JCS and ACDA have cleared it with no changes. I assume that State will too. Steve Hadley hates it because it drops all of the references to “strategic defenses” and the Defense and Space talks. He will try to spin up Cheney to get some of those references back in the statement. We might be able to respond to some of these concerns without at the same time provoking a violent reaction on the part of the Soviets by including as an objective, the achievement of “the proper balance between strategic offenses and defenses.” Both we and the Soviets agree that this is an important question, even though we disagree strongly about what is the right answer. The statement could be easily adjusted to refer to “steps that reduce the concentration of warheads on missiles” (vice ICBMs), and to make clear that MIRVed ICBMs, especially mobile ICBMs, have priority. 4 Attached but not printed is a May 12 draft Joint Statement on Follow-On Strategic Negotiations.
