176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
in many countries are so great, however, and the proposal does not
give the U.S. much leverage over offending countries where the need
for food assistance is recognized to be great.
At a minimum, we should inform missions that we plan to give in-
creased emphasis to human rights considerations in the allocation of
food aid. We should avoid using food aid to chastize poor human
rights performance but seek to encourage improved performance by
recognizing progress in our negotiations. Measures beyond this should
be implemented only in extreme cases, due to the high visibility, hu-
manitarian justification, and domestic support of food aid programs.
For these same reasons, Title II should not be considered as a
source of leverage to achieve human rights objectives.
59.
Briefing Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, June 16, 1977
Status Report on the Main Issues of Congressman Fraser’s
Memorandum
1. Annual Reporting of Human Rights Conditions in All Countries.
Congressman Fraser recommends that we publish annual unclassified
reports on human rights conditions in all countries. Background: We are
required by law to send annual reports on human rights conditions in
all countries which receive security assistance. The reports we sub-
mitted this year were unclassified. Their publication took place among
cries of outrage from some of those eighty-two countries which consid-
ered themselves our friends and allies.2 It was widely perceived by
press, public and some other nations as an example of our uneven ap-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 16, Human Rights—Don Fraser. Confi-
dential With Secret/Exdis Attachment. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the
memorandum. Christopher sent the memorandum to Vance under a June 18 covering
memorandum indicating that he would be happy to prepare a response to Fraser based
on Derian’s status report. (Ibid.) Derian prepared the report in response to Fraser’s
June 10 memorandum (see Document 56). Attached at Tab B is a copy of Fraser’s
memorandum.
2 See footnote 6, Document 17.
