4 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 thing which might be helpful.4 The SCC agreed that a public statement by the Shah at this point would not be helpful. (S) 4. Contingency Plans. A small group of State, Defense, CIA and NSC will examine steps which we might have to take in the event hostages are harmed, if we are faced with threats from Iran, or if the country begins to come apart. This examination will be conducted with the greatest possible discretion, and no tangible steps will be taken without further review. The focus will be on possible rescue operations and on the integrity of the oil resources in the south.5 The SCC agreed that diversion of the Midway Task Force should be retained as an option in the event we are faced with direct threats to our people in Tehran. (TS) 5. Another meeting will be held tomorrow. (C) 4 The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center released a November 5 update on the former Shah’s medical condition, citing his recuperation from a choledochotomy, the need to remove an additional stone in the bile duct, delayed chemotherapy for his malignant lymphoma, and radiation therapy for a tumor in his neck. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah, Oct–Nov 1979, Vol. III) 5 According to handwritten notes of the meeting, Brown and Brzezinski discussed taking Iranian airfields, cooperating with the Iranian military, and seizing the southern oilfields should Iran have a major civil war. The bombing of Qom was briefly discussed. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 97, Meetings File, 11/5/79: SCC re Iran) 3. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 5, 1979 SUBJECT Seizure of U.S. Embassy and Personnel PARTICIPANTS Ayatollah Seyed Mohammad Beheshti Henry Precht, Country Director for Iran 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Memoranda of Conversation. Secret. Drafted by Stanley Escudero (IO/UNP). Copies were sent to Christopher, Newsom, Saunders, and Sick. Beheshti was in Tehran; Precht was in Washington.
