In regard to the first of them, however, they desire to say nothing at the
present moment. In deference to what they understand to be the desire of
the Conference they reserve their proposals until a later stage. His Majesty’s
Government do not think these proposals are likely to occasion any serious
difficulty, but it is clear it is under this head that the most important
economies may be anticipated. The questions raised by any proposal to
limit the number of cruisers are of a more complex character. The
suggestions of His Majesty’s Government are broadly as follows:
They propose to divide cruisers into two classes—heavy and light; and to
adopt for heavy class the same principles as those adopted at Washington in
the case of capital ships. They think, in other words, that their size and
armament might with advantage be limited and that the numbers permitted
to each treaty power should be in the Washington ratio.
This seems to His Majesty’s Government to be a reasonable application of
an accepted principle to the case of heavy cruisers. But when light cruisers
come to be considered wholly different conditions must be taken into
account.
It is of course true that a fleet of a given size requires auxiliary vessels of a
given number whatever may be the position of the country to which the
fleet belongs or seas in which it is required to operate. On this point there
need be no dispute. But in addition to these auxiliary vessels cruisers are
required by all maritime countries to perform duties quite unconnected with
organized fleets and by no country so much as by the British Empire.
Special position is of course due to a geographical subdivision which has no
parallel in history. In times of peace small difficulties and disorders wholly
without international significance which in states differently situated would
be dealt with by police or a frontier guard may often make it necessary to
send cruisers. In times of war the insular position of Great Britain and the
seas which divide it from its colonies and from self-governing communities
with which it is associated within the Empire present even greater
difficulties—difficulties not always present to the imagination of those who
live and think in terms of great continents. During the Washington
Conference this point was dealt with by Mr. Balfour in words which it may
be worth while to recall.57 “Most of my audience (he said) are citizens of
