Afghanistan Party). The coup was executed in reaction to the government’s arrest of Communist leaders. Given Soviet contacts with Afghan leftists and the armed forces, it is possible that the Soviets learned of the coup in advance, although perhaps by only a matter of hours. There is no evidence to suggest that the Soviets tried to encourage or discourage the leftists, but Moscow and the Afghan Communists have been pursuing the long-term goal of establishing a Communist government in the country. The New Government: Communist Background The present movement dates from the early 1950s, when Afghan Communists aided by Communists in the USSR, Iran, Pakistan, and China, began a serious attempt to organize. The major impetus for its growth and organization clearly came from the Soviets, who trained civilians and military personnel in the USSR and Eastern Europe, and introduced Soviet military and technical advisers into Afghanistan. Soviet clandestine activities and propaganda also played a role. Aside from a small faction that broke with the majority and formed a small pro-Chinese party, there has never been any significant ideological differences between Afghan Communists and the USSR. Afghan Communists, however, were never happy with the fact that Moscow considered its relations with the Afghan Government as more important than supporting the interests of local Communism. Kabul’s arrest of Communist leaders, purges of leftist officials, and restrictions on Communist political activity, for example, never interfered with Soviet- Afghan relations. Infighting among the Afghan Communists themselves—on the grounds of personality rather than ideology—added to tensions, with rival Afghan factions vying for Moscow’s support and the Soviets attempting to resolve disputes. The present party is the result of the union last year—under Soviet pressure—of two competing Communist parties, and there apparently is still considerable tension between the two groups. Consolidating Power Afghanistan’s new rulers, despite their quick seizure of power and the absence of any current significant resistance, not only inherit the weak institutions that permitted the overthrow of the last two governments, but lack some of the assets that helped keep their predecessors in power. Central government authority is almost non-existent in some parts of the country, and even in those areas where Kabul exercises limited control, the government’s laws and policies have little impact on the lives of most of the people. Although most Afghans would not be favorably disposed to a Communist-controlled government, they
