1086
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with Iran once the hostage issue is behind us. The natural reaction in
the United States after the hostages are released would be to punish
Iran for mistreating the hostages.
Prince Saud wondered what we meant by mistreatment.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that they had been isolated and bound. The US
public will feel fiercely when they are finally released.
Mr. Christopher noted that the real issue was mental scarring from
their treatment. He noted that Schmidt had remarked on the effects of
only three days of being a hostage in Somalia;5 whereas, these people
have been held for over ninety days.
Dr. Brzezinski said in any event we will resist the inclination to
punish Iran for this. Iran and Pakistan together provide the forward
line and depth against Soviet incursion so we are going to pursue a six
part strategy: on the Arab-Israel question; relations between Saudi
Arabia and Egypt; to build up our own military strength; to cooperate
with Saudi Arabia on Yemen; to reinforce Pakistan; and to leave the
door open for cooperation with Iran. This is different from our strategy
in Europe but if we pursue it we think there is a good chance of stabi-
lizing the area. We would also like to open a dialogue with other Arab
states. Dr. Brzezinski had spent several days in Algeria recently and
now we have a relationship with them that we didn’t have before. We
would like the same thing with Libya and also with Iraq if that does not
threaten Saudi interests.
Prince Saud said that on the Israeli problem the United States asks
us to look at it dispassionately; we also ask you to look dispassionately
from Camp David. How will we meet the real threats. The real hope in
dealing with this issue is not to govern our actions with respect to the
psychology of the Israelis. This will not make them willing to accept
compromises and it will alienate the Arab side which is also needed in
this process. The Saudis need national backing just the same as the
United States does. It is incomprehensible here why the United States is
not providing Pakistan with military support of the same level and na-
ture that it does to Israel. With regard to Egypt and the speed of the
progress on the Palestinian core issue we have long had relations with
Egypt and we know the swings of activity, which are not new. They
have existed since Nasser’s6 time. Prince Fahd has said that if we are
frustrated it is because Sadat is not succeeding, not because we want
him to fail. Sadat has taken the lead in this process. He took the lead on
242 and all the rest of the Arab nations followed. He went to Camp
5 Reference is to the October 1977 hijacking of a Lufthansa airliner by members of
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
6 Gamal Abdel Nasser, President of Egypt from 1956 until 1970.
