3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 729 18) The United States export controls on exports to the USSR will be tightened up on a case-by-case basis. The United States should be prepared to restrict export licenses to an even greater degree than our allies if it does not disadvantage U.S. business in comparison with our allies. 19) There should be an examination of Soviet commercial expansion in the United States with a view to restricting it. The Department of State should forward proposals to this effect within one week. 20) Allocations to the Soviet Union under our Fishing Agreements should be restricted. 21) The United States should continue to urge our allies to increase broadcasts to Muslim countries and Soviet Central Asia on developments in Afghanistan. There should also be prepared in conjunction with our allies a periodic circular to be distributed at the United Nations on the status of the Soviet invasion and occupation in Afghanistan. 22) The United States will join in a letter to the President of the Security Council urging that the Afghanistan situation be placed on the agenda. Unless it would be a violation of the UN Charter, Ambassador McHenry will be instructed to tell other nations that it is our preference to also raise this issue at the current General Assembly. 23) We will proceed on a case-by-case basis to implement the “Belgian Formula” for creating a de facto differential in COCOM favoring China in comparison to the Soviet Union. There will be no public statement of this policy. 24) We will consult with other countries to urge them to deny the Soviet Union further credit. 25) We will work with our allies to urge the IFI’s and countries with assistance programs to Afghanistan to terminate such assistance. 26) We will seek an amendment in the Foreign Assistance Bill to except Pakistan from the restrictions of the Symington and Glenn Non-proliferation Amendments so that it will be possible for us to provide FMS and ESF. The Department of State should immediately inform our allies of our intention to take these actions and should urge appropriate allied support.5 Zbigniew Brzezinski 5 On January 4, Carter addressed the nation, focusing on the continuing hostage crisis and the invasion of Afghanistan. Carter addressed how U.S. bilateral relations would change with the Soviet Union, in an effort to underscore both the importance and severity of the situation. Trade would be restricted in three areas: no strategic technological items would be sold to the Soviet Union, fishing privileges would be curtained, and grain purchases would be further restricted. For the text of the address, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book I, pp. 21–24.
