December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 645 tional period of five years would start from the time of the Gaza autonomy. This was not agreed at Camp David and it is not written. This is a contradiction to Camp David. The letter19 also talks of the two Camp David Agreements being attached to this letter. I have not agreed to this. This is a novelty to me. The letter as now written talks about the self-governing authority with full autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. This is a complete deviation from the Camp David framework. We are not talking about autonomy for or to the West Bank and Gaza, but only for the inhabitants. It is written so. (Mr. Rosenne reads from the Camp David Framework.) These are two worlds apart. If the self-governing authority provides full autonomy to the West Bank, this means that the territory has full autonomy, and Israel will have no right to be there. But we do have that right, because this is the Land of Israel. We suggest that the inhabitants have full autonomy and this is the way it is written in the Camp David Agreements. It should be this way in the draft letter. For several weeks, in our drafts we suggested that the negotiations should deal with the modalities of elections, the powers and responsibilities, and “other related issues”. Why was this latter phrase deleted? It is important to us. The Camp David Agreements talked about security for Israel in the transitional period and beyond. This is what we meant by “other related issues”. We are concerned about security beyond the transitional period. These words were deleted. These are my remarks. We cannot accept these proposals. We have prepared counterproposals for you to study. I would like to sum up my observations. We have agreed on Article 4. Article 6 must stand without any notes. We have rephrased the letter and we ask that you study it. Now I want to raise the question of oil. We have a commitment from you in 1975 on oil.20 Recently you were asked at a press conference and you said that you would honor this commitment. Israel has been prudent and diversified its sources of oil even before the Shah fell. The Shah had already hinted that he might withhold oil from Israel in some circumstances and we could not afford to rely on one man. Israel provides a bridge for oil from Iran to reach the Mediterranean through our pipeline, but now that pipeline is dry. We used to get 60 percent of our consumption from Iran and now that is lost. We have looked for other sources, such as Mexico, Indonesia, 19 See footnote 5, Document 182. 20 As part of the Egypt-Israel Agreement signed September 1, 1975, the United States and Israel agreed through a separate memorandum that in the event Israel was unable to meet its oil requirements through “normal procedures,” the United States would “promptly make oil available for purchase by Israel to meet all of the aforementioned normal requirements of Israel.” For the text of this memorandum see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXVI, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1974–1976, Document 227.
