880 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI That is one big step. Second, I have a statement I want to make to you on our pattern of cooperation with the UK. I ask you to give it the weight it deserves. (Read him the statement at Tab 3.)34 If you put together what we have done to meet your concerns, and the further steps I am now taking on third country basing, and the Hurd statement, and the statement I have just made to you, this should meet your political concerns.35 This package makes clear that US/UK cooperation has not been and will not be a vehicle for undermining the balance or undermining arms control agreements.36 Let us agree on this comprehensive solution to all the third country issues.37 — The already agreed treaty article, agreed statement, and unilateral statements on non-­circumvention would stand. — We would accept a prohibition on basing strategic offensive arms outside national territory beginning six months after entry into force. — The agreed statement I gave you would make clear that ballistic missile submarine port visits or temporary deployment of heavy bombers to overseas locations do not constitute basing. — The USSR would drop as unnecessary its proposal for inspections in third countries. — And you have the statement I have just made to you, plus the statement you received from Foreign Secretary Hurd. (If he says suggests the way out is for the Soviets to make a unilateral statement that they are free to withdraw if the US/UK program goes beyond SLBMs.)38 I have given you a lot today. Look forward to your considered response.39 We will consider your alternative in Washington.40 34 Baker underlined “one big step,” circled “Second,” and underlined “a statement I want to make to you” and “Tab 3.” He numbered this point 6. 35 Baker underlined “put together,” bracketed this point, and numbered it 7. He delineated the sentence: (a) “what we have done to meet your concerns”; (b) “the further steps I am now taking on third country basing”; (c) “the Hurd statement”; and (d) “the statement I have just made to you, this should meet your political concerns.” 36 Baker underlined “This package,” numbered this point 7A, and placed three asterisks in the left-­hand margin beside it. 37 Baker drew a horizontal line above this section, numbered it 8, and placed two asterisks in the left-­hand margin beside it. 38 Baker drew a horizontal line above this section and underlined “unilateral statement.” 39 Baker underlined “I have given you a lot today. Look forward to your considered response.” 40 Baker underlined “We will consider your alternative in Washington.”
