Delegation. He said that it seemed quite necessary to discuss the Chinese plan, and that while everyone earnestly hoped and expected that likin might be abolished, the duty of the American Delegation, under the terms of the Washington Treaty, was to come to an accord with China as to the manner in which it should be abolished. He reminded the Chinese Delegation that the Chinese Government owed it to the other Powers with which it had treaties to come to an agreement as to the manner in which likin could be abolished. Colonel Peel supported this view and said that it would be necessary to discuss the abolition of likin because part of the revenues which were to be given for the abolition of likin would come from the proposed increase of the customs duties. The Chairman remained obdurate and addressing Mr. Strawn said that he desired to point out that the Chinese proposal presented at the plenary session did not say that tariff autonomy was to be enjoyed by China as a result of the abolition of likin. Mr. Strawn remarked that he had so interpreted the Chinese proposal and the Chairman again read the two points in the Chinese plan concerning tariff autonomy and likin, as follows: First, “The participating Powers formally declare to the Government of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and agree to the removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties;” Second, “The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff Law.” Dr. Wang then said that Tariff Autonomy was a principle which the Powers had already conceded and that China had agreed to the abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff Law. Mr. Strawn remarked that he understood that to be a condition precedent to the enforcement of the National Tariff Law, that is, that likin should be abolished. On being again informed by Dr. Wang that the Chinese Delegation had presented the different measures for the abolition of likin to the various delegations, Mr. Strawn said that it was his understanding that the time had arrived, or would soon arrive, when the Delegates would take up in an orderly way and discuss the different measures and that he did not understand that the Chairman had put the proposals on the table and said, “Take it or leave it.” It was pointed out that the American Delegation did not put its proposals forward as an ultimatum, but as the basis of discussion. On inquiry by Dr. Wang as to whether the Chinese proposals were satisfactory, Mr. Strawn replied that that was the very question which the Delegates wanted to discuss. Mr. Strawn quoted the language of the
