992
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In our approach to the meeting with Dr. Peter Bourne and other
agencies, I believe we should take the following basic tack:13
—The present report is too lengthy and diffuse14 and needs consid-
erable reworking before it is officially reviewed or further dissemi-
nated within the United States Government.
—We make this recommendation because we strongly support a
sensitive and integrated international health policy and the expansion
of our efforts in this field. We fear, however, that the present report
may harm rather than help this process.
—We are prepared to provide detailed comments and if appro-
priate a new draft of the Chapter V section: in any case it should be re-
viewed again by staff and then by the involved principals.
—The Department of State itself intends to upgrade our health ca-
pability but this must be from within the context of the whole range of
foreign affairs issues and responsibilities, including such issues as envi-
ronment, non-proliferation, population, energy, etc. We will establish a
new health office in OES but a bureau is unrealistic.
—We have some serious problems with a number of the recom-
mendations and would like to provide alternative solutions to the
problems they attempt to address.
—Finally, we should look at this report in the context of the action
memorandum to the President and ensure that both cover the priority
issues and will reflect fully the views of the participating agencies.
These documents should be reviewed together.
13 Presumable reference to a November 16 White House meeting chaired by Bourne
and attended by representatives from the Departments of State, HEW, and Treasury and
AID. Lowrance summarized the outcome of the meeting in a November 16 memo-
randum to Brizill, Todd Minnies (E), Patrick Kennedy (M), Blaney, Lindsey Grant, An-
drew, Palmer, Joseph Montville (NEA), McNutt, Pat Hughes (EUR), Judy Kaufman
(EUR), Phyllis Oakley, and Kathy Smith (AF). (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Lot 80D72,
Box 1, HEALTH—Peter Bourne)
14 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “is”
and ending with “diffuse.”
