Chapter 6, June–December 1990 899 dropping on-­site inspection. The U.S. side, however, had not matched these steps. Pilot implementation was not such a step. The U.S. side opposed preparation of a JDT of the PM agreement and even an article-­ by-­article discussion of draft texts. Finally, the Soviet side had proposed discussions on ASAT and space-­to-­earth weapons, but the U.S. side again was negative. Soviet-­proposed PM were oriented mainly at ensuring compliance with the ABM treaty, in accord with the spirit and content of the summit agreements. 3. Amb Smith said the U.S. side sought in DST a more stable strategic regime for the future, complementing other arms control agreements. Stability would be enhanced by defenses that threatened no one, and by an orderly cooperative transition. Soviet responses were not visions of a different future, but echoes of the past. They reminded one of a Gregorian chant: the ABM treaty was the cornerstone of stability for all time. The Soviet side had hinted that some changes in the ABM treaty might be acceptable, but never provided its views. The U.S. draft D&S treaty, which Kuznetsov had overlooked in his presentation, remained on the table. The U.S. side had left no stone unturned to advance the talks. It had illustrated the data exchange with a concrete project, tabled a draft free-­standing PM agreement, hosted last December’s successful laboratory visit, offered SDIO director Monahan’s briefing, and proposed pilot implementation and dual pilot implementation. Only the unwillingness of the USSR to lift the veil of secrecy masking its ABM activities could explain the situation. 4. Smith added that he was surprised to hear Kuznetsov mention ASAT and space-­to-­earth arms. In the past the Soviet side had said they would be addressed in the future talks. Gen-Lt Detinov responded that these systems determined strategic stability. A solution would have [to] be found in these talks, sooner or later. 5. Mr. Courtney noted that at the last working group Col Novosadov had said third countries would view U.S. and Soviet deployment of defenses as a conspiracy against them, and this could bring the world to the brink of global war. Could the Soviet side explain how the latter might occur? Detinov replied that neither he nor Kuznetsov had ever said this, although it was true that third countries could view defenses with grave concern. Kuznetsov claimed any action by a great power was always seen by others with apprehension. End summary. 6. Begin subject summary. Visit of Supreme Soviet Deputies; Defenses and Third Countries; Soviet Concerns in DST; End Subject Summary. Visit of Supreme Soviet Deputies 7. Smith asked whether there was any news on the expected visit of Supreme Soviet deputies to Geneva. Detinov replied that currently the deputies were involved in discussing the Soviet military budget. Smith
