Arms Control and Disarmament 1469 Mr. Farley said we could now attempt to work out a draft position on this point on the basis of the discussion. He suggested that we pro­ ceed to the question of how the conditions in the President’s August 22 statement might be dealt with in the treaty. He thought there would be no negotiating problem in writing in the first condition, that is, sat­ isfactory installation and operation of the control system. We would need, however, to discuss tactical variations in dealing with the second condition of progress in disarmament. Mr. Quarles said that an enforceable agreement on testing separate from other disarmament measures in the view of the Department of Defense, would be to our national disadvantage. Defense feels that a minimum condition beyond the test suspension would be satisfactory progress toward limitation of armaments and particularly the produc­ tion of fissionable materials for weapons purposes. We could from a legal standpoint handle this by an annual renewal clause alone; but fail­ ure to renew would carry such an onus from a political standpoint that we would be unlikely to do it. For this reason he would like to see the treaty bear on the face of it a requirement for progress in disarmament, at least as a starting position in negotiations. Mr. Farley said that he agreed this should be done as a starting position. However, to deal with the Soviet position on a permanent ces­ sation it would probably be necessary be define our requirements for progress on disarmament. The question is only one of not having such rigidity in these requirements as to give the Soviets an advantage. Mr. Gray said that a treaty which failed to mention the disarma­ ment condition would be a departure from national policy; and would in effect be a separate test agreement. Mr. McCone said that the more specifics there were in the treaty as to progress required the more defensible our position will be if we find it necessary to walk away from it. Specific conditions would also improve our position with Congress and with many elements of pub­ lic opinion. Moreover, a tie to disarmament stated in the treaty would facilitate progress in disarmament. Mr. Farley raised the question of who would decide when progress toward objectives defined in the treaty was substantial: would it be the Control Commission? If not, we would be back to a unilateral determi­ nation by each party. Mr. McCone said that we should search for language that would define necessary progress as far as possible. Returning to the threshold question, Mr. Brent asked if we should go into the negotiations seeking the lowest possible threshold.
