54
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
bate if you establish that you are a credible and competent potential
world leader, in whom Americans can have confidence. You want to
convey that you understand the issues and have command of the facts,
that you can be trusted by the voters to preserve the peace, to keep
America strong, and to project a sense of direction for a world that still
needs American leadership. Stress your own experience—travels, visits
with foreign leaders, Trilateral Commission, Naval.” (Carter Library,
1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues Office—David Ru-
benstein, Box 45, Briefing Book—9/28/76 [1])
The second Presidential debate took place on October 6 at 6:30
p.m.in the Palace of Fine Arts Theatre in San Francisco and was broad-
cast live on radio and television. National Public Radio (NPR) corre-
spondent Pauline Frederick moderated the debate, while Associate Ed-
itor of The New York Times Max Frankel, Baltimore Sun diplomatic
correspondent Henry Trewhitt, and National Broadcasting Company
(NBC) diplomatic correspondent Richard Valeriani posed questions to
the candidates. Following Frederick’s brief introductory remarks,
Frankel asked Carter to address his criticisms of the foreign policy of
the Richard Nixon and Ford administrations. Carter, drawing upon
several of the themes contained in the briefing book, responded that the
debate offered an opportunity to discuss leadership, character, and vi-
sion. He continued:
“Our country is not strong any more; we’re not respected any
more. We can only be strong overseas if we’re strong at home, and
when I become President, we’ll not only be strong in those areas but
also in defense—a defense capability second to none.
“We’ve lost, in our foreign policy, the character of the American
people. We’ve ignored or excluded the American people and the
Congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy. It’s
been one of secrecy and exclusion.
“In addition to that, we’ve had a chance to become now, contrary
to our long-standing beliefs and principles, the arms merchant of the
whole world. We’ve tried to buy success from our enemies, and at the
same time we’ve excluded from the process the normal friendship of
our allies.
“In addition to that, we’ve become fearful to compete with the So-
viet Union on an equal basis. We talk about de´tente. The Soviet Union
knows what they want in de´tente, and they’ve been getting it. We have
not known what we’ve wanted, and we’ve been out-traded in almost
every instance.
“The other point I want to make is about our defense. We’ve got to
be a nation blessed with the defense capability that’s efficient, tough,
capable, well organized, narrowly focused fighting capability. The
