The Arbitrator is constrained to point out that this request goes beyond the scope of the
authority of the Arbitrator under the Terms of Submission and the findings of the
Award. The Supplementary Act of the Washington Protocol provides that even in the
event that the Arbitrator decides that a plebiscite need not be held, “pending an
agreement as to the disposition of the territory the administrative organization of the
provinces shall not be disturbed.” Therefore, even in the event the Arbitrator had held
Chile’s present possession unlawful, he would have been without power to direct the
evacuation of the provinces “pending an agreement as to the disposition of the
territory.” But the Award on the contrary holds that “the fair construction (of the Treaty
of Ancon) is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of the plebiscite
and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority continued.” (Award, p.
20).
The foregoing observations, however, are without prejudice to the exercise of the
powers of the Plebiscitary Commission as provided in the Award which are ample to
guarantee to every qualified voter full assurance of personal protection as well as the
assurance that his vote may be freely cast and will be fairly counted. The Award
provides “that the Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over
the plebiscite,” and the Arbitrator has named as President of this Commission General
Pershing, a distinguished American, who himself embodies every guarantee in his
character and personality.
“Second: that the installation and operation of the Plebiscite Commission be
hastened, in order that its high, impartial authority may at once begin to
govern the provinces of Tacna and Arica,” etc.
In so far as this request merely asks that “the installation and operation of the Plebiscite
Commission be hastened,” the Arbitrator points out that it asks for something which
depends, first, upon the action of the Government of Peru alone, and, second, upon the
action of the Governments of Chile and Peru. In accordance with the terms of the
Award, “the members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four
months from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall
assemble in the City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the
date of the rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator.” In
other words, the Award merely fixed a maximum time for the appointment of the
members of the Commission. The Arbitrator has already appointed the presiding
member of the Plebiscitary Commission, as well as the third member of the Special
Boundary Commission. Chile has also appointed her member of the Plebiscitary
Commission. It is suggested that nothing stands in the way of the constitution of the
Commission as soon as similar action shall have been taken by Peru. The Commission
once constituted could arrange to hold its first meeting at Arica as soon as the necessary
preliminaries shall have been accomplished by the two Governments.
