802  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
obstructed from leaving he entirely free communicate with Indian 
Embassy.
79. I said anybody who at all familiar with situation in U.S. knows 
that there is such freedom of communication. There are no exceptions.
80. I said I had previously indicated and still would indicate to 
Wang my willingness to take up here, if it not taken up through proper 
channel of Indian Embassy in Washington cases of anybody who in 
fact being obstructed. Almost without exception, cases that Wang had 
brought up here appeared to be simply those of persons who had 
not written home for some time or might have changed minds about 
returning, if they ever had genuine desire return.
81. I said vague statements such as those contained in list Wang 
had given me today, for example “continues desire come back but 
unable do so due U.S. obstruction”, constitute not slightest shred of 
evidence that there any obstruction departure.
82. I said it truly remarkable that if all those whose names Wang 
given me desired come back and were in fact being obstructed, not 
even one of them, or even a friend of any of them, had brought case to 
attention Indian Embassy, or that, if Indian Embassy had thought there 
any merit to their complaints, that it had not brought them to attention 
my government.
83. I said I could only characterize all this as very transparent and 
desperate attempt find some justification for not permitting return of 
Americans still held by Wang’s government.
84. I said there nothing vague about desire these Americans return, 
or about what is preventing them.
85. I said I had very deeply and sincerely hoped agreed announce­
ment would be carried out by his government. If it had been, it could 
have contributed much to our relations. No matter how it regarded, by 
no stretch of imagination could it be said that that agreement has been 
carried out.
86. I said Wang would recall that when we were discussing this 
matter he had said there would be no comparison between time it had 
taken to return Americans let out earlier and time it would take to 
return this group.
87. I said insofar as prisoners concerned, Wang had talked about 
time required to review cases and other such matters. Apparently in 
six weeks from beginning talks until announcement September 10, his 
authorities able complete reviews and release 10 these people. Twenty 
three weeks now passed today since we made that agreement and 
Wang entered into that commitment. In those 23 weeks, six persons 
been enabled to return. I thought facts spoke for selves.
88. I said I was, as I had promised at last meeting, looking into 
availability hospital records on Liu Yung-­ming and would supply them
