Romania
535
cu’s regime, a period of relative foreign policy independence from the
Soviet Union, there has been only one period of substantial internal
relaxation (68–70), although the scene still much more relaxed than in
the 50’s. As to our own relations with Romania or any other East
European state, we see no need to prescribe a set formula either. It is
in our interest to encourage both independence, especially national
independence, and liberalization for their own sakes, but also because
they erode Soviet control. We should not be overly “rewarding” or
ignoring one kind of behavior over another but rather be using our
influence to work toward each, recognizing that in a country like Roma-
nia liberalization will come harder. We need to keep reviewing our
operational definition of “internal liberalization” which has been
focused almost entirely on emigration and only marginally on the right
of dissent, minority rights, religious freedom, and freer exchange of
information. So far we have correctly in our judgment made no sus-
tained effort to modify the other repressive features of Romania’s inter-
nal regime other than through our support of RFE. Given the limited
leverage we are likely to have on this most sensitive of areas a carefully
calculated approach, using CSCE to the maximum, is the most realistic
one. Ceausescu knows well the U.S. concerns in this area but is not
going to give much on his own restrictive approach. If dissidence
increases here and repression too, we may need to speak out about
Romanian practices as we now do about Soviet ones. Frequent and
candid contacts at all levels of the type we have had in the past are
the best guarantee of keeping things in perspective. It is worth thinking
in this context of the leverage the possibility of a meeting with the
President later this year might have on Ceausescu.
U.S. immigration/emigration policy
Because of Jackson/Vanik and CSCE we intercede forcefully in
individual emigration cases and in general for freer movement. On the
other hand, we are forced to work within the bounds of an immigration
law which is both restrictive in spirit and letter. To many Romanians,
the U.S. position on human rights translates into a U.S. endorsement
of their “right” to leave Romania and to live in the United States. Some
of these people are not qualified for an immigrant visa with consequent
embarrassment to us. This contradiction has caused us to establish
such expedients as the Rome TCP program which, although it does
allow us to process many additional (but not all) types of cases, does
not eliminate the basic dilemma which is reconciling our humanistic
traditions with our unemployment situation. There is a comparable
contradiction between our advocacy of unrestricted travel and our
barring of CP members. We applaud the President’s decision to study
these problems, and hope a new consensus, which will obviously
