884 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —We want to caution however that the parties have not yet gotten to the resolution of substantive issues. Many very difficult problems lie ahead and resolving them will be arduous. But this latest session shows that headway can be made. Their purpose in the working groups over the next few weeks will be to get the full range of issues on the table so decisions can be shaped on how to deal with them. 4. In Amman Ambassador Strauss met with King Hussein and in Riyadh with Crown Prince Fahd and heard their views on the negotiations. While neither had significantly new elements to add to past positions, there were very useful meetings. Ambassador Strauss advised King Hussein and Crown Prince Fahd of US confidence that the peace efforts would produce positive results for the Palestinians, of the US commitment to stick with the process over the long term, and of the encouragement that we have received from nations outside the Middle East. Both showed great interest and were pleased when Ambassador Strauss offered to return periodically to keep them informed of progress in the negotiations. Vance 272. Letter From Israeli Prime Minister Begin to President Carter1 Jerusalem, July 16, 1979 Dear Mr. President, My two days2 in Alexandria were good days. Wherever I went the people received me with great warmth. President Sadat and I had two talks in complete privacy.3 During our first meeting we discussed several practical issues as follows: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem Begin, 1/79–2/80. No classification marking. 2 July 10 and 11. 3 During his meeting with Atherton in Alexandria on July 14, Sadat assessed the Alexandria Summit. Atherton reported, “Sadat is clearly pleased with himself and with the talks with Begin and, as he said in the end, that everything is going in the right direction.” Sadat “reassured Begin that it is his intention to ‘fortify’ their bilateral treaty, not linking its implementation to any other developments. At the same time, Sadat said he had stressed to Begin that the time had come for them to make a ‘big catch’ and come to an agreement on final arrangements for Jerusalem. His vision, he said, was to reach agreement by the end of this year on full autonomy plus Jerusalem, then implementation could start with Gaza and Jerusalem. This would win support of the Muslim world and isolate
