Human Rights the text of the Iranian resolution will significantly influence the future mandate of the High Commissioner if that Office is established—and that the vote on the Iranian resolution may influence whether that Office is established. We are requesting USUN to seek further amendments to the resolution, but this memorandum assumes it will not succeed. The Options Option 1—That we call for a vote and vote against or abstain on the Iranian resolution. While we are convinced that the resolution warrants a negative vote, it is recognized that political considerations (particularly unity with allies) might call for the U.S. merely to abstain. Those supporting this option believe that, while the Iranian resolution has been somewhat changed for the better since its introduction, the resolution is still seriously flawed and would result in material harm to U.S. efforts to protect individual human rights and also in substantial damage to U.S. economic interests in the North/South dialogue. The most basic of the problems in the resolution which leads to this conclusion are these: (1) The heart of the resolution is operative paragraph 1(E), which provides that future UN work with respect to human rights should “accord or continue to accord priority” to the search for solutions to “the mass and flagrant violations of human rights” affected by situations such as apartheid, colonialism, aggression and threats against national sovereignty, refusal to recognize the right of every nation to exercise full sovereignty over its wealth and natural resources, etc. The following paragraph (1(F)) states that the realization of “the New International Economic Order” (NIEO) is an essential element for the effective promotion of human rights and should also be accorded priority.3 The resolution thus unmistakably provides that, by its terms, future UN work in the field of human rights would accord priority status to collective, as opposed to individual, human rights and also accord priority to the achievement of “the NIEO.” We do not subscribe to the view that the achievement of any particular economic or political program, such as the NIEO, is essential before persons are accorded the human rights which are inalienably theirs. Nor can we accept that “mass” human rights take priority over the individual human rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the UN Cov- 3 The Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order was adopted on May 1, 1974, at the Sixth Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which was devoted to the problems of raw materials and development. (A/RES/3201/S–6) See also footnote 3, Document 207.
