January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1361
Deane Hinton said that that would probably do it. But this is hard to
judge—this had been a wild and discursive negotiation. Modai sees the
“strong presumption” position as very tough, because of the Egyptian
connection. Modai sees this as a backward step, whereas in fact it is an
advance over the MOA. We could not see what would happen until we
tried such a position.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Israel had adjusted its position in the
negotiations.
Deane Hinton said they had. They had raised the level on the price
criterion, and accepted it in principle, whereas before they had taken
the position that either price or percentage of spot market purchases
should be enough to trigger. That is an advance, since our analysis says
it would be easier for Israel to satisfy the spot market test than the price
criterion.
Les Goldmann said that a logical evolution of our negotiation posi-
tion would be to go to 20/60 while retaining “strong presumption.”
Al Moses said that if we have the 20/60 figures, then Israel would
probably get automatic triggering anyway if it lost Egypt as a supplier.
The President said that wouldn’t be so if it could get cheaper oil
elsewhere. He doesn’t want us to be supplying Israel with oil if it could
get it from Egypt and other countries. Why should we move in to do
so? He had agreed with Begin—and Sadat was involved—that if Israel
lost its supplies, then we would guarantee that it would have oil. Sub-
sequently, Israel put in the price element. He agrees that there is legiti-
macy in this position, if it would mean that Israel were being charged
an exorbitant price—say even $60 a barrel. That would be punitive, and
we would supply oil at a reasonable price. But Israel has moved far be-
yond the original agreement. He favors a reasonable position. With the
20/60 formula, the question of automatic triggering would not be sig-
nificant, from our perspective.
Ambassador Owen asked what we would lose.
Les Goldmann replied that the problem lies in getting independent
criteria. Israel gets 40% now on the spot market. If it lost Egypt, that
could raise the figure to 65%. But what price would that be at? No one
knows for sure. We could get into the position of subsidizing Israeli im-
ports. Israel is looking for an easier trigger.
The President said that he wants to avoid an Israeli self-imposed
triggering, that it might use to get out of having to use the spot market,
or relying upon Egypt and Mexico.
Stu Eizenstat said that with the 20/60 formula, and the 90-day auto-
matic triggering provision, then the Israelis could not have a self-
inflicted shortage.
Under Secretary Cooper underlined that the automatic triggering
would be only for a limited period. (The President said he understood).
