on rates, each of which would be permitted, if it chose to do so, to divide
into subcommittees of Technical Advisers or others and each Delegation
having the right to signify whether it desired to participate in either one of
the subcommittees or both of them. The Committee on Provisional
Measures resolved itself into a subcommittee on Purposes and proceeded to
its business.
Subcommittee on Purposes, First Meeting, November 19, 1925.
Committee II having resolved itself into a sub-committee on Purposes, that
sub-committee began its work at 11:30 a.m., November 19, 1925.
After a brief discussion among the Delegates concerning the division of
work of the sub-committee, Dr. Yen said that the Chinese Delegation had
hoped that an agreement could be reached in regard to customs duties
without going into the financial condition of the Chinese Government. He
distinctly discouraged any plan which contemplated any exploring of this
subject. His view was that the question of debts was outside the scope of the
word “purposes”. While professing to be willing to give all needful
information, he wished the subcommittee to confine itself to defining
principles to be followed under the heading of “purposes.” Sir Ronald
Macleay said that no Delegation, so far as he was aware, desired to impose
anything on the Chinese Government, but unless they should go into the
question of debts it would obviously not be possible to determine how
much money was needed. Admiral Tsai agreed that the question of debts
and likin were matters in which the foreign Powers could properly interest
themselves, but administrative expenses was one which belonged solely to
the Chinese. Colonel Peel remarked that there was no disposition on the
part of the foreign Delegates to interfere in Chinese domestic affairs, but
they did wish to know how China proposed to abolish likin and how the
revenues would be applied to that purpose and how the question of the
consolidation of debts would be solved. He suggested the appointment of
two subcommittees, one to deal with likin and the other one the question of
consolidating the debt, both of which intimately concerned the Foreign
Powers. As for constructive purposes and administrative expenses, the
foreign Powers wished only to know what aggregate amount would be
needed for these purposes. Dr. Yen said that he fully appreciated the spirit in
