772  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
179.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the 
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) 
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Threat Assessment Conference Call on Missile Warning
The NMCC convened a “Threat Assessment Conference Call” last 
night at 2132 hours. Launches from the Kurile Island site were detected, 
not unusual, but the “fan” of one of the missile tracks included Alaska, 
Canada, and the tip of Oregon. At that point, NORAD and the NMCC 
convened the Threat Assessment Conference. It was terminated five 
minutes later when the impact of both missiles were determined to be 
in Kamchatka. (S)
The procedures worked well within the White House. I was in the 
call by one minute after it was convened. The duty officers at NORAD 
and the NMCC sorted out the “anomalies” in the computer displays 
quickly. They might have avoided the Threat Assessment Conference, 
but I heard enough on the line to realize that convening it was prudent. 
(S)
Other procedures went as well. SAC readiness changed at 2130 
hours. The NEACP began rolling at 2132 hours. (S)
Daily Report Item
The National Military Command Center convened a Missile 
Threat Assessment Conference Call at 2132 hours on March 14. Soviet 
launches from the Kurile Island site were detected, not unusual, but the 
“fan” of one of the two missile tracks included Alaska, Canada, and the 
tip of Oregon. At that point, NORAD and NMCC decided that a threat 
assessment was appropriate. The conference terminated five minutes 
later when the impact of both missiles were determined to be in Kam-
chatka. (S)
The procedures within the White House worked well. The duty 
officers at NORAD and the NMCC sorted out the anomalies in the mis-
sile attack displays quickly. Other procedures also proceeded smoothly. 
SAC readiness changed at 2130 hours. The NEACP began to roll at 2132 
hours. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 15, Crisis Management: 11/78–5/80. Secret; Outside the System. A stamped notation 
indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
