422 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 bility with Ghotbzadeh, but Hal Saunders and Cottam report that he has been down on Waldheim for the past several days for some reason.6 6 Jordan added the following handwritten postscript: “I remain willing to go to Iran if that is ever necessary. Also, shouldn’t we inform Waldheim of this?” 160. Telegram From the Embassy in Panama to the Department of State1 Panama City, January 23, 1980, 0510Z 678. Dept Please Pass to White House for Hamilton Jordan. For Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Asst Sec Saunders. Subject: Iranian- Panamanian Contacts. 1. (C–Entire text) 2. Summary: President Royo, with concurrence of General Torrijos, promised Ghotbzadeh this evening2 that early tomorrow morning he would send the GOI a cable agreeing to receive formal extradition request from GOI, stating that the Shah was “under the care of the Government of Panama and that his movements are subject to prior approval by the security forces of the country” (i.e., stopping short of the words “under arrest”). Royo will add a paragraph stating that now it is up to the GOI to comply with international law and to release the hostages. The decision to take these steps was made following indications received through the Panamanian Ambassador in Paris that they would aid in the release of the hostages. Gabriel Lewis and “Rory” Gonzalez, recently back from Paris, concur that the calculated risk was worth taking. The Shah will be briefed tomorrow morning and assured that he will not be handed over. Royo and Torrijos asked that I visit the Shah to indicate that we are aware of the plans. End summary. 3. I was called to General Torrijos’ home at 7:30 p.m., where he, President Royo, V.P. De la Espriella, Gabriel Lewis, “Rory” Gonzalez, and Col. Noriega (Intelligence Chief) were meeting. They explained that at 3 this afternoon Ghotbzadeh telephoned Lewis saying that he wished to speak to Royo to request that Panama take certain measures, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 60, Panama 6/79–1/80. Confidential; Niact Immediate; Nodis. 2 January 22.
