800.51 W 89France/48: Telegram
[Document 81]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, December 31, 1924—1 p.m.
[Received 11:57 p.m.]
618. Clémentel called on me this morning and stated that he greatly regretted and was
at a loss to understand the impression which his inventory has made in the United
States. He said that the principal reason for the publication of the inventory was to
prepare French public opinion for the realization that France must pay the sums she
owes. He stated that far from suggesting any idea of repudiation his report repeatedly
affirmed the responsibility of France for her debts and in support of his statements cited
to me pages 72, 73, 74, 75 and 252 of his report. A translation of excerpts from these
pages reads as follows:
“The possible opening of these negotiations does not permit us today to
elucidate this problem in such a manner as it requires, the preparation of
France’s dossier not being, moreover, finished yet. Nevertheless we must not
fail to show briefly at this time the principal elements of this question in
order to reserve for the interallied debts in the general balance sheet of our
country the real place and importance which should be assigned to them.
And if in the scales in which shall be measured the contribution of each state
to the common victory the blood which was shed cannot be weighed, at least
France can hope that the rank which she occupies on the long list of sorrows
and devastations will give her the right to legitimate consideration in a
domain where the granting of compensations is to be considered.
France does not intend to repudiate any of the contracts which she has agreed
to and her signature will always be sacred to her. But she is convinced that an
appeal to the sentiments of justice which have grouped around her so many
nations during all the war will not remain in vain; she is convinced that her
allies and her friends will respond to the hopes which she places in their lofty
conscience and their sentiments of justice and solidarity.
Upon the extinction of the debts adjusted on a fair basis taking into account
all the elements which affect them according to the very terms of the last
Paris agreement, terms confirmed by the Prime Minister of Great Britain in
his closing speech at the London conference, terms in which can be found the
thought which inspired the proposal of Bonar Law and Lord Curzon, she will
