Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
23
living up to the human rights provisions which form an integral part of
it. This is not the road to peace but the bitter deception of the American
people.
But while de´tente must become more reciprocal, I reject the stri-
dent and bellicose voices of those who would have this country return
to the days of the cold war with the Soviet Union. I believe the Amer-
ican people want to look to the future. They have seen the tragedy of
American involvement in Vietnam and drawn appropriate lessons for
tomorrow. They seek new vistas, not a repetition of old rhetoric and old
mistakes.
It is in our interest to try to make de´tente broader and more recip-
rocal. De´tente can be an instrument for long-term peaceful change
within the Communist system, as well as in the rest of the world. We
should make it clear that de´tente requires that the Soviets, as well as the
United States, refrain from irresponsible intervention in other coun-
tries. The Russians have no more business in Angola than we have.
Favors Hard Bargaining
The core of de´tente is the reduction in arms. We should negotiate
to reduce the present SALT ceilings on offensive weapons before both
sides start a new arms race to reach the current maximums, and before
new missile systems are tested or committed for production.
I am not afraid of hard bargaining with the Soviet Union. Hard
bargaining will strengthen support for the agreements that can be
reached, and will show that we, as well as they, can gain from de´tente.
We can increase the possibility that the fear of war and the burden of
arms may be lifted from the shoulders of humanity by the nations that
have done the most to place it there.
Our vision must be of a more pluralistic world and not of a Com-
munist monolith. We must pay more attention to China and to Eastern
Europe. It is in our interest and in the interest of world peace to pro-
mote a more pluralistic Communist world.
We should remember that Eastern Europe is not an area of stability
and it will not become such until the Eastern European countries regain
their independence and become part of a larger cooperative European
framework. I am concerned over the long-range prospects for Ruma-
nian and Yugoslavian independence, and I deplore the recent infliction
upon Poland of a constitution that ratifies its status as a Soviet satellite.
We must reiterate to the Soviets that an enduring American-Soviet
de´tente cannot ignore the legitimate aspirations of other nations. We
must likewise insist that the Soviet Union and other countries recog-
nize the human rights of all citizens who live within their boundaries,
whether they be blacks in Rhodesia, Asians in Uganda, or Jews in the
Soviet Union.
