Romania Broadly speaking, the new internal political actions introduced by Ceausescu fall into four interrelated categories: —promotion of a “cult of personality” on a scale unparalleled in Eastern Europe since the 1950’s; —frequent shifts of personnel between party and state organs, and between Bucharest and the rest of the country; —gradual dilution of the prestige and authority of key party organs, such as the Central Committee; and —blurring of party and state functions and the creation of new mass organizations with vaguely defined mandates. Ceausescu’s mastery of political maneuver has enabled him to manage these changes so as to concentrate more and more power in his own hands.2 The centralization and personalization of decisionmaking in Romania has reached the point where Ceausescu overshadows not only the other members of the leadership but also the party and state institutions themselves. Most observers agree, however, that the decline of the prestige and effectiveness of these institutions has not been accompanied by a corresponding increase in popular or party support for Ceausescu or his policies. Such support was at its peak following Ceausescu’s courageous defiance of the Soviet Union at the time of the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia and the subsequent dramatic opening to the United States symbolized by President Nixon’s visit to Bucharest in August 1969. The enthusiasm that these gestures evoked in Romania facilitated Ceausescu’s drive to consolidate his personal power, but the gradual stabilization of Romanian relations with the two superpowers since 1970 has reduced the role of nationalism as a means of winning popular allegiance. As patriotic euphoria has declined, increasing public disillusionment with Ceausescu’s economic policies has surfaced. Living standards in Romania rank well below those in the other East European countries. The level of personal consumption is estimated to be 50 percent lower than that in neighboring Bulgaria, and the absence of adequate health care is reflected in an infant mortality rate that is the highest of any Warsaw Pact country. These shortcomings are the result partly of historical factors (Romania at the end of the Second World War faced particularly severe problems of rural over-population and general economic backwardness), but it is the regime’s investment 2 Ceausescu is now President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party, President of the Council of State, Chairman of the Socialist Unity Front, Chairman of the Defense Council and Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, Chairman of the Supreme Council of Economic and Social Development, and Chairman of the Ideological Commission of the Romanian Communist Party. [Footnote is in the original.]
