National Security Policy  889
215.	 Memorandum From Smith (S/P) to Herter1
Washington, November 18, 1959
SUBJECT
Long-­Range Security Policy
INTRODUCTION
I believe that an essential element of an effective foreign policy is a 
respected military force with appropriate strategy for its use.
I am concerned about the damage to our foreign policy to be 
expected from our likely military posture in years to come if current 
trends are not changed.
For several years, the Secretary of Defense has indicated in reports 
to the National Security Council that the US is losing its margin of mili­
tary superiority over the Soviet Union.2 During these same years, how­
ever, forward military programs have given no prospect of a change in 
these trends.
The Department of State for several years has believed that present 
military policy is wrong. During these years it has tried without success 
to modify our almost complete dependence on nuclear weapons.
The latest effort was on April 25, 1959, when you submitted to 
the Secretary of Defense the “Summary Statement of Foreign Policy 
Requirements Bearing Upon US Strategy” [copy attached].3 This state­
ment was later submitted to the NSC as the views of the Department of 
State. It is generally recognized that these requirements were not met 
in the military paragraphs of the basic policy paper, approved by the 
President on August 5, 1959. This basic paper expressly states that mil­
itary policy was not thereby changed.
The purpose of this memorandum is to focus attention on the 
impending loss of American military superiority and to urge that a new 
long-­range effort be made to halt present trends.
1 Source: Long-­range security policy; includes two covering memoranda, December 
9 and 11. Top Secret. 8 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548.
2 In the Department of Defense status report as of June 30, 1958, it was estimated 
that “. . . recent Soviet technological advances and the concurrent quantitative reductions 
in U.S. forces have combined to diminish that margin of U.S. military superiority. If these 
trends continue, it is estimated that this superiority will be lost in the foreseeable future.”
The latest status report [June 30, 1959] is more specific. “By the end of FY 1962, with 
a continuance of present trends and programs on both sides, and with no major techno­
logical breakthroughs on either side in the intervening years, the most probable position 
will be that each side will possess military strength of potentially decisive proportions.” 
[Footnote and brackets are in the original.]
3 All brackets are in the original.
