208
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
thinkable that the corrupt, disorganized deputies ever could be stirred
by unprofitable emotions.
It is unfortunately true that the Iranian Parliament rarely has
shown understanding of its constitutional role as a legislature to pass
laws designed to promote the nation’s welfare. On the contrary, most
deputies spend their terms in petty intrigues to further personal or
local interests.
Mosadeq, veteran of parliamentary politics, saw a way to utilize
this situation. He organized his few colleagues into a unit which had
strength of purpose and of cooperation. Party strategy was planned to
gain maximum advantage from the source of each man’s powers.
Kashani, who never took his Majlis seat, was consulted on how to stir
his bazaar following in support of National Front policies. Saleh, Nar-
iman, Shayegan and Haerizadeh had close touch with Iranian intellec-
tuals and leftist liberals. Mosadeq was a great orator and a national
hero. Maki, Baghai, Azad each appealed in different ways to numbers
of admirers. All these men worked to focus the attention they com-
manded towards the National Front rather than upon themselves
alone.
It was this organization and common purpose which gave the Na-
tional Front minority an importance in the Majlis far beyond its actual
strength. A typical, though minor, example of how they forced their
views upon their colleagues was the planned strategy of National Front
deputies to give their previously requested speaking time for pre-
agenda speeches to one man who could, therefore, hold the rostrum for
two full hours rather than the 15 minutes allowed each speaker. By this
cooperation the best orators of the National Front won publicity, atten-
tion and reputation while obstructing legislative action.
The National Front remained aloof from the petty graft which sat-
isfied most deputies. The Government in power could not woo the Na-
tional Frontists with cash or privilege since they were out for bigger
game. Their steadfast opposition to the Government and reiteration of
emotional appeals gradually placed the National Front in the forefront
of the Majlis and won a growing following among the deputies them-
selves. The National Front offered leadership. Even the most apathetic
deputy gained a sense that Mosadeq and his colleagues represented a
new and vital force which offered a way out of confusion and depres-
sion. By 1951, the National Front minority was the most important
force in the Majlis. Parliamentary debates then became mainly
sounding boards for National Front opinions.
National Front Government’s Suppression of Majlis Opposition When
Mosadeq became Prime Minister, he had the unanimous support of
Parliament. The motives for this unanimity were various, ranging from
National Front extreme views to hopes of Seyid Zia’s partisans that
