Ecuador 553 Minister-Designate Chiriboga responded by saying that Ecuador was very much impressed that the United States—after having benefitted from its earlier mistakes—had concluded that more help must be given to Latin America. He said Ecuador is working hard on specific, clear-cut projects and that a number of these would be ready in early October, some of which would be worked out by U.S. companies. Minister-Designate Chiriboga mentioned a number of missions—World Bank, Exim Bank, housing etc., and emphasized the need for speed, saying he was frankly somewhat afraid for the future. He thought the housing project was especially urgent and mentioned the arrival of the ICA technician Baruch on September 10. He said he had spoken recently to Vance Brand about a $5,000,000 loan for housing3 and that the firm of Klein-Saks is sending a mission on September 15 to make a survey of taxation problems and to reorganize the Banco de Fomento. The Under Secretary referred back to the growth of Ecuador’s Gross National Product and said he hoped Ecuador could avoid the two extremes of stagnation and inflation. He said there had been an evolution in U.S. thinking the past two or three years with regard to the problem of commodities. We now realize that it is not simply a problem of buying in the cheapest market available. Some success has been achieved in the case of coffee and now it is not only the U.S. Government which supports the international coffee agreement but also U.S. ­importers. There are difficult problems in other fields—­cotton, lead and zinc—but despite limitations the U.S. is interested in and working on these problems on a case-by case basis. Minister-Designate Nebot brought up briefly the problem of price discrimination against Ecuadorean bananas, with Central American bananas receiving higher prices. This is a matter of life and death. He said he hoped some control over price discrimination might be possible. The conversation was broken off at this point because of other engagements and no response in substance was made to Nebot’s statement. 3 The Development Loan Fund entered into a loan agreement for $5 million with the Ecuadoran Housing Bank on October 31, 1961; for further information, see Agency for International Development, Office of the Controller, Status of Loan Agreements as of December 31, 1964, p. 15.
