620 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX The Middle East The President suggested that the Middle East be discussed first since Israeli Foreign Minister Dayan had just visited Bucharest and both countries follow complementary policies on this issue. He mentioned that Romania played an important role in bringing about the Sadat visit to Jerusalem,2 but since that visit the process has stalled and there is a need to restore momentum. The President said that there has been some progress in influencing the views of Prime Minister Begin, but he is still not willing to accept that Resolution 242 applies to the West Bank and Gaza. It is our view that any Israeli settlements in these areas are contrary to international law. Begin was asked to permit no settlements, but he was not willing to accept this view. There is still a possibility for progress, but it will be difficult. We will appreciate any help President Ceausescu can offer in the weeks ahead. We have benefitted from the information and assessments he has given and we welcome the Romanian views on how we should proceed. President Ceausescu also emphasized the importance of the Middle East situation, approved the US role in the Sadat initiative, and agreed that Israel has not fully responded. Begin’s interpretation of Resolution 242 is not accepted even by some political figures in Israel, a number of whom Ceausescu has recently met. At present, the first step must be to secure the speedy withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon in order to prevent further hostilities and create conditions for direct Israeli-Egyptian talks to resume. Ceausescu told this to Dayan, but the US should do more to encourage proper Israeli action. Although he is personally opposed to the use of pressure, in this case it is not detrimental and should be used. The next step is for Israel and Egypt to work out a declaration of principles. The Egyptian proposals are generally acceptable to Israel, but agreement on formulations must be worked out. The US should encourage both sides in this regard. The Palestinian issue is perhaps the major obstacle to a settlement, and progress must be made before the talks can be widened to include 2 See Document 183. On February 4, 1978, while describing his meeting with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat, Carter wrote in his diary: “Sadat described the sequence of events since our last April meeting. He said he asked [President Nicolae] Ceausescu of Romania if Begin was for a genuine peace, and if he was strong enough to implement one. Ceausescu thought the answer to both questions was yes.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 169. Brackets are in the original.) William Quandt, the National Security Council Staff member directly involved in the Middle East peace process, also recounted in his memoirs Ceausescu’s role in assuring Sadat that Begin would “negotiate in good faith with Egypt.” (Quandt, Camp David, p. 144)
