440  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
2. We also abandon a major thesis of the current concept—­i.e. any 
substantial overt engagement of US and USSR armed forces or any 
substantial Soviet aggression against the NATO area would automati­
cally trigger massive nuclear retaliation against the USSR. As you have 
pointed out, this thesis is becoming less and less credible. Although not 
specifically stated in our paper, we assume the probability of lesser US 
response to Soviet aggression which does not clearly threaten a perma­
nent alteration of the world balance of power against us.
3. We question the current counter-­force strategy which provides 
that the primary mission of our strategic nuclear striking force is to 
destroy military targets, especially nuclear strike capabilities, in the 
Communist empire. We believe that this strategy will become increas­
ingly infeasible in the dawning era of quick-­reacting and elusive missile 
weapons systems. Moreover, the destruction of many military targets 
would require ground bursts of very large yield weapons with resul­
tant heavy fall-­out, the effects of which, in addition to causing millions 
of unnecessary casualties in the Communist empire, would extend 
around the world. Finally, the cost of matching the Communists missile 
for missile, an inherent necessity of the counter-­force strategy, would 
in a very few years require defense budgets substantially larger than 
the much debated FY 1960 budget. You will recall that the President 
has on a number of occasions expressed concern that we seem to be 
“over-­insuring” by accumulating too many strategic weapons systems. 
Our paper, therefore, inclines toward an alternative strategy, which has 
many adherents in the Pentagon, of striking a finite number of control 
centers and power bases of the Communist empire. Although the prime 
targets of this strategy are population centers, the fall-­out effects and 
the number of casualties would be far less than under a counter-­force 
strategy as we believe that air bursts of many fewer weapons of much 
lower yield would suffice to accomplish the mission.
4. Because we incline to a smaller strategic striking force, we place 
much greater emphasis than the present concept on the invulnerability 
of the force.
5. We question a major assumption of the current concept—­i.e. 
nuclear weapons will be used in most limited war situations. The fact is 
that whenever the issue has arisen in the past decade, we have consis­
tently drawn back from using nuclear weapons in limited war situations. 
We believe that we would rarely find it politically practicable or militarily 
desirable to use nuclear weapons and accordingly propose that our lim­
ited war force be able to fight effectively without these weapons.
Since the question of cost is now very much to the fore, it is perti­
nent to mention my belief that it is reasonable to assume that the sav­
ings resulting from a shift to a smaller strategic nuclear striking force 
would offset the increased costs of an effective limited war force.
