Sources
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The Carter Library is the best source of high-level decision making
documentation for U.S. foreign economic policy from 1977 to 1980. A
number of collections within the National Security Affairs files are par-
ticularly relevant in this regard. Within the Brzezinski Material, the
Brzezinski Office File (particularly the Germany, Japan, economics, ex-
port controls, and finance files), Country File (for France, Germany,
and especially Japan), Trip File, and Subject File (which contains not
only a run of high-level memoranda of conversation, but Vance’s Eve-
ning Reports to Carter) all contained crucial documentation; the
Agency File, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File,
and VIP Visit File also proved fruitful. Within the Staff Material, the
Henry Owen section of the Special Projects File yielded a great deal of
useful material, particularly on the G–7 summits; also of help were the
International Economics File, North/South File, and Office File.
Beyond the National Security Affairs materials, two collections proved
to be particularly rich sources: the Anthony Solomon Collection, with
good documents on, among other topics, international monetary
policy, and the Charles L. Schultze Subject Files in the Records of the
Council of Economic Advisers, which contained valuable documents
on trade policy, including steel. Stuart Eizenstat’s Files in the Staff
Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, also included much useful material
on the steel issue. Important documents not readily found elsewhere
turned up in both the Brzezinski Donated Material and the Papers of
Walter F. Mondale. Jimmy Carter’s handwriting files in the Records of
the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, provided critical ma-
terial on an array of issues. Finally, for documenting the Presidential
Review Memorandum policy process and Policy Review Committee
meetings on issues related to foreign economic policy, the National Se-
curity Council Institutional Files were absolutely essential.
The National Archives and Records Administration facility in Col-
lege Park, Maryland, is home to a wealth of material on the Carter ad-
ministration’s foreign economic policy. Within the Department of the
Treasury’s record group, RG 56, the Records of Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten provided good
material on both international monetary policy and trade policy; Under
Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs Anthony Solomon’s
Subject Files also had some useful material, although not as much as
the Anthony Solomon Collection at the Carter Library. Within the De-
XV
