560  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Baker: I do think on the announcement that tomorrow morning is 
probably better because that will guarantee there isn’t a leak. We could 
do it at 9:00 in the morning here, 5:00 in Moscow. Is that okay?
Shevardnadze: That’s quite okay.
Baker: One other item that the President wanted me to make very 
clear to you—­and he just reiterated that on the phone—­is that we are 
very concerned about the events in Lithuania. I know you are aware of 
this and I want to let you go through your agenda before I offer some 
comments on Lithuania. But it is important especially given what the 
President has just noted, that while we do not want to have anything 
get in the way of the Summit and the ministerial, we are making the 
assumption that Lithuania is going to be managed in the way that is 
consistent with the principles of perestroika and glasnost and that it 
will be settled peacefully.
Shevardnadze: Should we discuss the program of the Summit 
tomorrow or should we talk about it now?
Baker: Well, we could do it now. The way we see it is that the arrival 
would be in Washington on Wednesday afternoon, May 30. The formal 
arrival ceremony would be on Thursday morning, May 31st; there might 
be a state dinner that night. Friday, June 1st the two Presidents would 
go to Kennebunkport. You might have discussions here in advance of 
going up to Kennebunkport on June 1 and then you could continue dis-
cussions up there. There would be further meetings in Kennebunkport 
on Saturday, June 2nd and you might return to Washington either 
Saturday evening or Sunday morning. There would, of course, be the 
possibility of additional meetings down here in Washington, if needed. 
Perhaps there might also be a reciprocal dinner if that is what you want 
on Sunday and maybe also a concluding press event. What I am say-
ing in a sense is that the June 1-3 timeframe can have a lot of built-­in 
flexibility.
Shevardnadze: After our meeting, I will convey this to President 
Gorbachev. We will want to have a reciprocal dinner and probably also 
a press event. It is possible that President Gorbachev will also want to 
make a public statement during his visit here, but that is not definite at 
this point.
Baker: President Bush would hope that this timeframe will be com-
mitted entirely to meetings with the President. If President Gorbachev 
wants other events in the country, outside of Washington, we would 
hope that those would take place either before or after the May 30th-June 
3rd dates. That doesn’t mean that he might not have time to visit the 
Congress while he is here in Washington, that would be understand-
able. I’m really only talking about his possible travel to other parts of 
the United States.
