Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III well as to us, the progress made by Japan toward playing a full role in the world economy and world markets. On the current account, we are gratified by the progress that has been made. But we note: 1) that the progress has been assisted by emergency imports. We look for a further reduction of the current account without this kind of short-term measure; 2) the rapid decline in the value of the yen relative to the dollar. The progress we have made to improve the international financial situation might be threatened by too rapid a depreciation of the yen. And the progress made on the current account might be put at risk. While we, of course, do not wish to peg or manage the yen/dollar rate, we do collaborate with the Japanese authorities and we do hope that with your encouragement, the current situation will not place us in a difficult posture next year. The other remaining issues are: a) the Summit, and in that context, energy matters. Mr. Owen will comment on this. b) providing assistance to the developing countries. Mr. Cooper will elaborate. In this area, I was interested to listen to your remarks to the President yesterday that Japan is assuming a heightened role in the world.3 We hope that you will take an increasing share of the World Bank effort, and of other programs such as IDA. We hope that Japan will be able to take at least 15% of the IDA VI replenishment. These matters are the bridges to the longer term; if we succeed here, we can better assume longer term success. The opportunity to review progress for structural changes in your country and longer run changes in the U.S. at the Sub-Cabinet level, as well as in the “Wise Men’s Group”,4 is a welcome one. We think that the longer term problems include: 1) providing for continued stability in the current account situation; 2) the longer term restructuring of the Japanese economy; 3) playing a greater role in the providing of assistance to the developing countries. 3 Apparently a reference to Ohira’s remarks to Carter during their meeting on the morning of May 2. See footnote 2 above. 4 In the May 2 joint communique´, Carter and Ohira announced their decision to establish a Wise Men’s Group, composed of “distinguished persons drawn from private life” who would offer their “recommendations concerning actions that the group considers would help to maintain a healthy bilateral economic relationship between the United States and Japan.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 766.
