would thereby retain their freedom of action. For that reason and no other, Belgium, Poland and Czechoslovakia were asked to sign and readily did so. Senator Molinari suggested that the notes indicated that the Treaty was not inconsistent with the various treaties of neutrality and other secret treaties in Europe. I know of no secret treaties on this subject at all. All of the League Powers agree to file their treaties with the League and I believe we have all treaties bearing on this subject. The European Powers abandoned any idea that there was any inconsistency between their treaties guaranteeing neutrality and the Multilateral Treaty. Of course, all these Powers having signed the present Treaty, there could be no inconsistency because it is perfectly true that if any one violates the Locarno Treaties or any treaty guaranteeing neutrality, they would violate this Treaty also and the nations would be free to exercise their own volition as to the belligerent Power. Certainly this Treaty does not guarantee any other treaty in the world. It supplements the efforts made by other countries to maintain peace by a pledge of the nations of the world to this effect. There are those who will undoubtedly claim that the best way to maintain peace is by military alliances, agreements between countries to punish a violator of the treaty, to apply sanctions or to use military force to put down any conflict between nations. That is not my opinion. I do not think military alliances have conduced to the peace of Europe. I do not believe independent nations will delegate to any authority the power to call for military forces or to require a nation to go to war for any purpose. [Paraphrase.] I realize that this is an important step which should be carefully considered by the Argentine Government, and I do not wish to press Argentina in the matter. I would be very much pleased if all Central and South American countries adhered to the treaty. It would, I think, add greatly to its influence in the world, although I know the present world opinion is that South America is, as a whole, inclined to peace and not so likely to engage in war as other parts of the world. There is no objection to your conveying to Señor Molinari the substance of this message should you consider it wise, but I should not care to have it left as a memorandum. [End paraphrase.] KELLOGG
