“There is no greater detriment to the economic development of China than the likin system, since it constitutes a great obstacle to the wide distribution of goods and the expansion of commerce, and results in diminishing the productive power of the country and impoverishing the people. The sources of revenue and the purchasing power of a nation are both dependent upon the productiveness of its people. In China, this productiveness is now so seriously affected by this obnoxious likin tax that her sources of revenue are exhausted, her revenue decreased, her purchasing power weakened, and her international trade crippled. In the history of economics, development began with the family and passed on to the community; then it extended to the nation and thence to the entire world. Today this development has reached the national stage and it is gradually approaching the international phase. Unfortunately in China, owing to the existence of this obnoxious tax, the output of raw materials and manufactured articles is insufficient to meet the demands of the nation and of the world—a state of things which is much to be deplored. The Chinese people have for years been clamouring for the abolition of this tax, and the Central Government has created a Financial Rehabilitation Commission composed of representatives of the military and civil authorities of the whole country. It is fully recognized that no half-way measures would meet the situation and that, if the problem is not thoroughly dealt with, there would be no possibility of improving the welfare of the nation. After mature consideration it has been decided to abolish the likin system, so that the economic welfare of the people as well as foreign commerce may alike be benefited, the foundations of national finance firmly established, and the international relations of the country likewise strengthened. The Chinese Government hereby declares that the abolition of likin will be completely carried out not later than the first day of the first month of the 18th year of the Republic (1929).” The committee then adjourned subject to the call of the chairman. The committee on provincial [provisional] measures will meet on Friday, November 6. MACMURRAY 79 This telegram was received badly garbled. The quotations as here printed have been corrected, without indicating changes, on the basis of the minutes of the committee as published in The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, pp. 87 ff. 80 Telegram in four sections.
