306 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 64. Editorial Note On January 19, 1978, at 9 p.m., President Jimmy Carter delivered his State of the Union address before both Houses of Congress. His remarks were broadcast live on radio and television. After an introduction by Speaker of the House of Representatives Thomas “Tip” O’Neill, the President devoted the first portion of his address to domestic items, including the establishment of a Department of Education and civil service reform, before emphasizing the main themes of his administration’s foreign policy: “In our foreign policy, the separation of people from government has been in the past a source of weakness and error. In a democratic system like ours, foreign policy decisions must be able to stand the test of public examination and public debate. If we make a mistake in this administration, it will be on the side of frankness and openness with the American people. “In our modern world, when the deaths of literally millions of people can result from a few terrifying seconds of destruction, the path of national strength and security is identical to the path of peace. “Tonight, I am happy to report that because we are strong, our Nation is at peace with the world. “We are a confident nation. We’ve restored a moral basis for our foreign policy. The very heart of our identity as a nation is our firm commitment to human rights. “We stand for human rights because we believe that government has as a purpose to promote the well-being of its citizens. This is true in our domestic policy; it’s also true in our foreign policy. The world must know that in support of human rights, the United States will stand firm. “We expect no quick or easy results, but there has been significant movement toward greater freedom and humanity in several parts of the world. “Thousands of political prisoners have been freed. The leaders of the world—even our ideological adversaries—now see that their attitude toward fundamental human rights affects their standing in the international community, and it affects their relations with the United States. “To serve the interests of every American, our foreign policy has three major goals. “The first and prime concern is and will remain the security of our country. “Security is based on our national will, and security is based on the strength of our Armed Forces. We have the will, and militarily we are very strong.
