758 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Islamabad on May 17, the same date as the anticipated imposition of sanctions by the allies. If the two events coincide, the Conference can be expected to denounce the sanctions. State acknowledged the point and said this would be taken into account.7 (C) 6. Rescue Mission Debrief. General Jones gave a brief summary of the rescue operation for the SCC, responding to the many rumors that are flying around. Secretary Brown said they are preparing to put something out in organized form which would assist in responding to the many queries and rumors. (U) (At this point the meeting was reduced to those involved in the rescue operation.) 7. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski noted that CIA had prepared a paper. Since Mr. Christopher could not be here, we could not discuss it in detail. It was agreed that a copy of the paper would be delivered to Christopher for his personal information, and the subject would be taken up by the SCC early next week.8 (S) Admiral Turner noted that the State Department had been maintaining contact with several individuals who are in contact with Admiral Madani. They are interested in returning to Iran. The SCC agreed that there was no objection to their returning to Iran at this point since we wanted to keep the contacts open. (S) 8. Testimony on the Rescue Operation. Secretary Brown said that he had previously believed it would be impossible to avoid testifying on details of the rescue operation beyond the termination point. He now believed that it would be difficult, but perhaps not impossible to hold the line with the SFRC and the SASC. It was obviously going to be far more difficult for the DCI to hold the line with the Intelligence Oversight Committees. Admiral Turner agreed, noting that the Committees are building up to a major confrontation on their right to be informed of the CIA role in detail. The SCC agreed that there were certain aspects of the operational plan which we would not wish to reveal, since they might be valuable in a future effort. It was difficult to determine exactly which points we would wish to hold back. Admiral Turner agreed reluctantly to provide a copy of his testimony for next week for review, noting the problems of submitting CIA testimony for White House clearance. He was concerned that a major confrontation with the Committees could result in undesirable new legislation. The Committee was already very angry and had threatened to cut off CIA Reserve funding. (S) 7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “No change in date.” 8 See Document 277.
