408 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Maintenance and support of industrial capability to replenish stocks for use in local war exists. SELECTED PROBLEMS I come now to the planning problem areas which I cited last Spring: namely, the M to M-/6 months build up, individual Service interpreta­ tions of Post D-Day planning and the question of reflecting attack dam­ age assumptions in our planning for general war. In my May briefing, I listed as a major problem area in planning guidance, the assumption that “six months of full scale mobilization and deployment might precede the outbreak of general war” and stated that a reevaluation of this assumption would be undertaken. A revalu­ ation of these assumptions has been undertaken, but as yet we have not come to a satisfactory conclusion. As noted earlier, we have not attempted to reflect the effects of attack damage in planning force levels for general war. The JCS have felt it infea­ sible to base planning on the results of any single war-­game analysis, because of the many possible variations in the design of enemy attacks and in the effectiveness of our active defenses against attack. Further, it would not be necessary to reflect attack damage in force levels in order to insure balanced support, if we could reasonably assume that the effects of attack damage on forces would be proportional to the effects on support. Studies have now made clear that we can not reasonably assume that attack damage to forces will be even roughly proportional to dam­ age to support, but may be either much higher or much lower, depend­ ing on the type of forces, and on the policies for the geographical distribution of logistic support. Thus it is clearly essential to consider in some detail the probable effect of attack on both forces and supporting resources, if we are to have any prospect of providing effective post-­ attack support for surviving forces. A study of hazard probabilities consistent with forecast Soviet capabili­ ties in 1962 is now nearing completion. This new study, being made in col­ laboration with OCDM, considers: (a) A range of possible attack designs; (b) chance variations in aborts, attrition, and aiming error; (c) random variations in the direction and speed of the winds carrying fall-­out. The results of this analysis will provide a basis for calculating the chance of loss of personnel or materiel at particular locations; for finding the places where the hazard is least; and for appraising the effectiveness of alternative kinds of protective measures in relation to their cost. Preliminary results of this study show that about one-­third of the depot warehouse space in the U.S., would likely survive a pre-­ meditated surprise attack in 1962. Despite the substantial amounts of materiel surviving attack, war-­game studies have shown that under present distribution patterns very little continuing military capability would survive. This is because most of our depots are specialized in a
