Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
489
As I mentioned to you, George Ball will spend the next two weeks
as an NSC consultant working on the Iranian problem.10 He is very pes-
simistic and concerned about the situation. His pessimism is shared by
Clark Clifford, who has sent me a long memo bearing on Iran, Pakistan
and the Persian Gulf.11 Both feel that we will increasingly have to
search for alternative arrangements.
There is no question in my mind that we are confronting the begin-
ning of a major crisis, in some ways similar to the one in Europe in the
late 40’s. Fragile social and political structures in a region of vital im-
portance to us are threatened with fragmentation.
The resulting political vacuum might well be filled by elements
more sympathetic to the Soviet Union. This is especially likely since
there is a pervasive feeling in the area that the U.S. is no longer in a po-
sition to offer effective political and military protection.
If the above analysis is correct, the West as a whole may be faced
with a challenge of historic proportions. A shift in Iranian/Saudi orien-
tation would have a direct impact on trilateral cohesion, and it would
induce in time more “neutralist” attitudes on the part of some of our
key allies. In a sentence, it would mean a fundamental shift in the
global structure of power.
President Truman confronted a similar crisis in the late 40’s in
Western Europe. At that time, internal weaknesses also interacted with
an external challenge. It took a very major and collective effort to re-
spond effectively. That response involved a long-term solution for po-
litical initiatives as well as more direct security commitments.
I have asked an interagency group to review this problem on an
urgent basis. Though Ball will work primarily on Iran, I might have
him give some thought to this subject as well.
Before too long, we may have to consult also with our primary
allies regarding the need for a collective response, lest the kind of insta-
bility that we are seeing in Pakistan and Iran becomes also manifest in
the Persian Gulf. This subject will doubtless come up in the January
meeting, and before then we will have some recommendations for you
regarding what needs to be done by the U.S. alone, by the U.S. and its
principal allies, and by the countries directly concerned.
In the meantime, it might be appropriate for you to mention this
emerging problem in some of your discussions with Congressional
leaders and also to bear it in mind when you are making some of your
10 Documentation on Ball’s mission is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. X, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.
11 Not further identified.
