December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
665
Secretary Vance: We want to build on the talk we had at lunch on
Friday.3 You made a helpful suggestion, Mr. Prime Minister, con-
cerning Article 6, paragraph 5. Let me hand out suggested language on
Article 6 for you to consider. We suggest a short, simple statement. We
have not reviewed this with anyone else. At lunch you said that you
did not insist that Article 6 meant that the treaty prevailed over other
treaties. I said that this was a major step, and we should build on this.
We want to try to couple this with the principles that are already in
paragraph 5 as now drafted. The proposals would say that there is no
assertion that this treaty prevails over other treaties, but this does not
derogate from the language in paragraph 5.
Prime Minister Begin: Is the first paragraph of your draft connected
to the second part of Article 6?
Secretary Vance: Yes. Let me explain. You objected to the words
“comprehensive peace” and “in the context of the Camp David frame-
works”. We have come up with the language which is very simple and
which says that the provisions of Article 6 are not in contradiction to
the Camp David agreements.
Prime Minister Begin: I shall have to study this and consult with my
Cabinet. You see I have less power than Mr. Khalil.
President Carter: You had more power at Camp David. You didn’t
have to refer to the Cabinet then. You signed the agreements without
referring to your Cabinet.
Prime Minister Begin: (Speaks for some time with his colleagues in
Hebrew). The first remark deals with the second part of your proposal
that there is “no assertion that this treaty prevails over”. It should also
say “and vice versa”.
Secretary Vance: I see no problem.
Prime Minister Begin: With that addition, and if the letter from Mr.
Hansell is withdrawn, then I personally favor this proposal to deal with
Article 6, paragraph 5. I need Cabinet agreement, and I need a majority.
I cannot promise such a majority. Without “vice versa”, it would be
wrong.
President Carter: We will present this to the Egyptians. They have
not received a copy of it yet.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll cable it to my Cabinet. We won’t wait until
I return. I will have a Cabinet session called for tomorrow. I’ll be able to
tell you from New York their decision. If they reject it, I will go back
and argue it with them. But please do not tell the Egyptians of the pro-
posal yet. If we accept, you’ll know tomorrow. If they reject, I’ll try to
3 March 2.
