International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 July. The wording in your report will be adjusted to reflect the status of this issue at the time the report is actually sent to Congress. The underlying problem, however, is assuring an adequate and reliable amount of Eximbank financing. There are several aspects to consider. Eximbank lending has not kept pace with export growth. Some of your advisors believe that fact is testimony to the strength of U.S. exports and that additional Eximbank lending would not have significantly increased exports. Others believe that U.S. exports would have been significantly higher if there had been more Eximbank financing and that our problems will be exacerbated if the export credit interest rate negotiations are not completed in a wholly satisfactory way. Expanding Eximbank funding to meet foreign competition could, however, have significant budget consequences. Additionally, Eximbank assistance tends to be most needed precisely at those times when interest rates are highest and the government is most concerned with reducing the Federal Budget. Finally, the application of the Congressional budget process has recently created uncertainty as to the level of Eximbank funding as well as other international programs in the foreign aid appropriation bill well into the fiscal year. By contrast, exporters abroad can avail themselves, by deliberate governmental policy, of ample and competitively-priced credit for exports almost irrespective of domestic fiscal policies in force. We recommend that you state you have decided on the basis of this review that assuring adequate and predictable Exim financing in coming years has become a significant problem which must be solved. You would state that you will be working with members of the Administration and Congressional leaders this fall to determine how best to resolve this problem, taking into account progress in the international negotiations. If you approve this recommendation, a working group would be formed which would be chaired jointly by the Treasury Department and OMB and would include appropriate agencies. This working group would develop recommended approaches for assuring adequate and reliable Eximbank financing for the FY82 and subsequent budgets and report to you this fall.10 10 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. In his September 9 message to Congress (see footnote 8, above), Carter announced that he would “be working with Congressional leaders and members of my Administration this fall to determine how best to ensure adequate and reliable Eximbank financing in the years ahead, taking into account progress in international negotiations.” (Public Papers of
