National Security Policy  733
The Secretary of State inquired concerning the effect upon our 
NATO forces of withdrawals for limited military operations in other 
areas. Secretary McElroy indicated that this was manageable.
There was discussion of certain aspects of the Quemoy situation 
of last year and of the nature of hostilities in the event of an attack by 
Communist China. (Reference was made in this connection to the sta­
tus of the advance authorization for the use of nuclear weapons.)
At one point Mr. Irwin said that the two Departments should agree 
for the present that we want no charge in philosophy and, having done so, 
agree that paragraph 10A be amended to delete the reference to nuclear 
weapons as conventional weapons. Mr. Smith pointed out that this lan­
guage change would constitute a fundamental philosophical change.
The group concluded that they would not try to reach any quick 
decision on revising the military paragraphs of NSC 5810/1.
163.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, June 8, 1959
OTHERS PRESENT
Dr. Killian
Mr. Gordon Gray
General Goodpaster
Dr. Killian said he had asked for the opportunity to place before the 
President a few of the issues that will arise when the President consid­
ers the Defense Department presentation relating to NIKE–­HERCULES 
and BOMARC tomorrow.
He said that as he understands the Defense thinking, it is to continue 
the NIKE–­HERCULES as now programmed, concentrating its use on the 
defense of cities in the northeastern region of the United States and SAC 
bases. The prime consideration is that it is a proven weapon now avail­
able and already in an operational condition. The BOMARC will not be 
available until later, particularly the BOMARC B which is the version 
we are interested in. (It has a low altitude capability and 250-­mile range; 
the BOMARC A does not appear to be worth further consideration.) The 
1 Source: Continental air and missile defense. Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower Library, 
White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Bomarc. Drafted 
on June 9.
