1256  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Caracas was a reasonable compromise as a location for the bank and he 
hopes very much that this will be the final decision.
President Betancourt referred briefly to the Dominican Republic 
and Venezuela’s problems with Trujillo, stating very definitely that 
Venezuela will present the problem of the Dominican Republic for con-
sideration in the OAS within the next few weeks.
With reference to Puerto Rico and his friend, Mufioz-Marin, 
President Betancourt said that the Governor will be coming to Caracas 
for a visit in about six weeks. Betancourt said that he intends to meet 
the Governor on his arrival in Maiquetia and that Muñioz-Marin will 
be his personal guest in his home during his visit to Caracas.9
9 At the request of Assistant Secretary Rubottom, the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affairs, William P. Snow, excerpted some of the state-
ments recorded in this memorandum and sent them to the Acting Secretary of State. 
(Memorandum from Snow to Herter, March 18, 1959, ARA Files, Lot 61 D 319, Oil Imports 
Program.”)
VE–23.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State 
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting 
Secretary of State1
 	
Washington, March 27, 1958.
SUBJECT
Expulsion from U.S. of Pérez Jiménez and Family
The action of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in 
ordering Venezuelan ex-President Pérez Jiménez and family to leave 
the United States by April 15 already having been taken and pub-
licly announced, this Department should acquiesce in that decision. 
In my opinion, however, it is unfortunate that we were not consulted 
in advance in order to bring into the purview of discussion certain 
political and other considerations which I will briefly allude to below. 
We should recognize that much pressure has been exerted on the 
Department of Justice to expel Pérez Jiménez by (1) liberal organiza-
tions and the press, (2) members of Congress, and (3) in all likelihood 
Vice President Nixon.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/3–2759. Confidential.
