North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1061 The US supports the proposal in principle, provided the Fund’s functions are defined in ways that do not duplicate ISTC programs. A US contribution of up to $25 million annually, or 20% of a two-year fund of up to $250 million, will be considered in US budget planning this fall for FY 1981 and 1982, but before making a firm commitment we must know more about the size of the whole US aid budget, other donors’ plans, and Congressional sentiment. (C) OMB opposes both the Vance and the Press–Owen–Ehrlich proposals. OMB recommends that the US delegation be instructed to avoid creating expectations of US contributions to such a fund because there is a strong probability that it will be found this fall to be a marginal claimant on a tight aid budget for FY 1981. A modest UNDP fund, OMB believes, is unlikely to satisfy the developing countries, whose demands include mandatory technology transfer, control of transnational corporations, and a vastly larger S&T fund. Several other OECD countries have taken a hard line in preparatory meetings against significant new aid commitments at this conference, and we have higher priority aid issues on which we must press them. OMB also fears that agreement to a special fund at this conference will encourage similar proposals at subsequent special purpose meetings. (C) OMB recommends that the US delegation be instructed to give no encouragement of US support of the proposed UNDP fund but, instead, stress our contributions in the formation of the ISTC, our present spending of $200 million annually in AID S&T activities, and your commitment to double our development aid budget by 1983. (C) Father Hesburgh urges approval of the Vance proposal or at least the Press-Owen-Ehrlich statement. Otherwise, he says he and his delegation (including 21 Congressmen) will have an inadequate US position. Zablocki shares this view, but he would stop short of a flat commitment without assurance of support by the appropriations committees. Such assurance is difficult to obtain through consultations during the Congressional recess, which is one reason that OMB, Press, Owen, and Ehrlich do not favor a firm commitment to a specific US contribution now. (C) Alternative A: Specific commitment (Vance) Alternative B: No commitment (OMB) Alternative C: Conditional support (Press, Owen, Ehrlich) (NSC, CL)3 3 Carter did not indicate approval of any of the three alternatives. In the margin next to the alternatives, he wrote: “Get Approp. Committee sentiment. My own first preference is to emphasize ISTC, but if Cong commits, I’ll go with Alt (C).” The UNCSTD was held in Vienna August 20–31. For the opening and closing remarks by Hesburgh, head of the U.S. delegation, and Carter’s message to the conference, see the Department of State
