1980  885
211.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 26, 1980
SUBJECT
The Carter Transformation of Our Strategic Doctrine
I want to summarize for you the fundamental change occuring in 
U.S. strategic doctrine over the last three years. You may or may not 
want to take public credit for it, but you should have a clear view in 
your own mind of its historic significance. That is being obscured and 
confused in the public fuss over PD–59,2 the last of a series of related 
directives you have signed. (C)
The Requirement for Change
There have been two previous transformations in our strategic doc-
trine. The first, “massive retaliation,” occurred in the 1950s under Pres-
ident Eisenhower.3 It was designed to deter the Soviets by our large 
lead in nuclear weapons and strategic bombers. The second, “assured 
destruction,” was sponsored in the 1960s by Presidents Kennedy and 
Johnson as they watched Soviet forces grow and the U.S. lead shrink.4 
Secretary McNamara designed the concept primarily as a budgetary 
instrument to decide “how much was enough?” in strategic forces. 
The doctrinal notion was added by others. They, however, believed the 
Soviets would stop their buildup at near our force levels. When they did 
not and when they introduced new qualitative capabilities, the doctrine 
lost much of its relevance. To revise our doctrine then became a criti-
cal although unpopular task in face of the continuing Soviet buildup 
through the 1970s. You have accomplished this through a number of 
directives which put much more emphasis on objective capabilities to 
reinforce the subjective and psychological aspects of deterrence. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 35, PD 
59: (5/80–1/81). Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information. Carter wrote in the 
upper right corner of the memorandum: “Zbig—Good. Share w/VP, Ed, Harold. J.” In 
an August 22 memorandum to Brzezinski, Odom discussed “The Differences Between 
PD–59 and NSDM–242.” In a marginal notation on Odom’s memorandum, Brzezinski 
instructed him to use it as a base for an expanded memorandum that Brzezinski would 
send to Carter. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 210.
3 Carter underlined “‘massive retaliation’” and “1950s” in this sentence.
4 Carter underlined “‘assured destruction’” and “1960s” in this sentence.
