Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 5, 1979 SUBJECT Saudi Arabian and Pakistani Views on the Afghan Insurgency On 30 October you directed me to take soundings with Pakistani and Saudi intelligence agencies on their intentions for covert action in Afghanistan. I understood that you wanted to know what the degree of their commitment would be were we to join with them in such endeavors. We have taken such soundings. The results are summarized below: Pakistan: There is no question that Pakistan—without waiting for us—is already supporting the Afghan tribesmen. The head of Pakistani military intelligence has made it clear that President Zia holds the continuation of the tribal insurgency to be vital to his country’s security and that support in the way of weapons, ammunition and explosives is essential to sustain the insurgency. (The Pakistanis have been pressing us for weapons and ammunition since early August.) Our relations with Pakistan are not warm enough for us to elicit details on what type and how much support they are providing or would provide in a joint effort. Clearly they do not have large financial resources for such an undertaking. Opinion: Pakistan will cooperate in covert action against Afghanistan. It will be anxious that U.S. involvement not invite strong Soviet responses. It will be nervous that U.S. cooperation might be terminated abruptly if U.S.-Pakistan relations should deteriorate over other issues. Overall, Pakistan can be counted on for operational support for joint efforts, but cannot be looked upon to take the lead or to supply resources. Saudi Arabia: The Saudi chief of intelligence states that his government is committed to assisting the Afghan insurgents and that some monies have been disbursed to refugees resident in Pakistan. The Saudis, however, are 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
