1979 673 Turner reportedly has residual concerns about verifying a Soviet version. He fears they might try to slip a small highly mobile missile into the system as an evasion or breakout approach. This is possible, but would have to be in large numbers to matter. Moreover, this is a risk no matter what we do with M–X. Only a complete and tightly policed ban on all mobile missiles of strategic size could eliminate this problem . . . and that might not be enough. (S) People in the Area and Security You raised a question this morning about “campers along the dash road.” Under normal peacetime conditions, the missile TEL would move but once every six months or so. This would leave plenty of time to clear intruders from any specific confinement where a missile is being moved. Even a “rapid shuffle” (complete relocation over some 12 hours) would allow enough time to clear roads. In a crisis, deployment areas could easily be cleared. Only in the case of a large-­scale dash on tactical warning might there be some chance of running a camper off the road. Incidentally, the average camper, jeep, etc., could outrun the M–X TEL at its maximum 20–30 mph speed. Each unit would have 5–8 people with it for operation, security and other functions. (S) Costs for SALT There is some concern that we are buying a horizontal basing mode ($26.9B acquisition costs) that is more expansive than vertical MPS ($21.1B) largely for SALT verification reasons. Some may be unwilling to pay $6B to solve a verification problem the Soviets don’t really have. In actuality, the extra $6B buys a mixture of increased verifiability and increased survivability through rapid shuffle and dash capability. At most, $1–2B less would be spent if we wanted horizontal shelters but didn’t care about verification. Registering the principle that systems can and should be designed for verifiability is worth it if the Soviets follow suit. (S) Acceleration Option At Tab C5 is a US AF point paper that argues we could possibly have IOC as early as early 1985 and also save $1.2B in total system costs. The burden would be some $6B in added FY 81–84 funding. This option should be discussed at the PRC, further examined, but not immediately decided. It has political and strategic attractions. But it would further warp the budget in favor of strategic spending when, with M–X now moving, general purpose programs may be more deserving. This should be resolved in the context of new defense budget levels. (S) 5 Not found attached.
