612 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 6. Labor. Communist-­dominated CUTS with 3,000 members is one prime movers current anti-­government drive. Non-[illegible in the original]CGS with 20,000 controls large majority organized labor. CGS is considered relatively free from Castro influences. To date it has rejected the oppositionists’ appeal for general strike and we believe it will continue to do so. CGS leadership not close to Lemus, however, and complains of inability to [illegible in the original] him to discuss programs. Perhaps significant that CGS has not during present crisis publicly proclaimed support of government. Moreover current government efforts unseat Secretary-General Saravia will probably result in CGS schism, leaving majority under Saravia even less disposed work in Lemus’ behalf. Despite this conflict, CGS leadership, including Saravia, privately proclaim support for constitutional government. Saravia known to be in close touch with Osorio group, however, and should situation deteriorate further, possibility open swing to Osorio should not be discounted. 7. Congress. Handpicked and representing hard-­core what remains PRUD party, Congress can be expected to do Lemus’ bidding. Method of election and mediocrity of membership have, however, left it without much respect throughout country. Its deliberations for most part go unheralded and its power as a political force considered minimal. Assembly President Esquivel is friend both Lemus and Osorio; private conversations lead me to believe he has preference for latter. 8. University. This institution has long been one of principal targets of Communist infiltration and results achieved true cause for alarm. All major student organizations are in hands Communist or pro-Communist elements and faculty itself includes several extreme leftist types. Success in part, due practice keeping professional agitators and organizers matriculated as students for up to ten years. While this element represents small minority total student body, its influence greatly disproportionate to size. We are reliably informed that control over students who had no desire take part current political activities gained largely through intimidation and coercion. Only small minority student body took part in disturbances at outset current crisis, with large majority strongly opposed to involvement. Police action and clever handling by student agitators were effective in turning majority against Lemus and our information indicates that majority still considers him public enemy number one. Past week has provided a cooling off period, however, and signs beginning to appear that student body in general tiring of being used and started to think of personal loss ensuing from closed University. Number private groups also forming with aim providing anti-Castro/Communist students with rallying points and with physical protection against coercive efforts if needed. Students here as elsewhere have no positive program—­they are only against the existing order and in their search for a cause or philosophy they are prey to
