806 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV for future ABM deployment. In terms of size and power, they have the inherent potential for ABM battle management. 66. [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified] 67. There is a divergent view in the Intelligence Community that the available evidence is subject to alternative interpretation as to the capabilities and intended use of the new radars, and is insufficient to conclude that they are only for BMEW and space surveillance. According to this view, the fact remains that these long-­leadtime items possess a significant potential for future ABM battle management and could provide data accurate enough for such employment.13 Antisubmarine Warfare 68. Soviet forces with ASW capabilities are not now an effective counter to US SSBNs. The critical problems confronting the USSR are limitations in sensors and signal data processing. Major R&D programs are under way to develop improved sensors for submarine detection. The number of nuclear-­powered attack submarines (SSNs) with improved but still limited ASW capabilities will probably increase from about 25 at present to about 85 in the late 1980s, or to as many as 100 if a number of Y-­class SSBNs are converted to SSNs. We believe new classes of Soviet SSNs will incorporate more effective noise reduction methods than those in existing submarine classes. New types of surface ships and long-­range patrol aircraft with somewhat improved capabilities for ASW are likely. As a result: —During the period of the Estimate, the USSR is likely to acquire somewhat better capabilities to detect, track, and attack SSBNs that are operating near the USSR or in confined waters, are leaving ports, or are transiting choke points. —Despite increasing numbers of ASW-­capable forces and improved ASW sensors, we believe the Soviets have little prospect over the next 10 years of being able to detect and track US submarines in broad ocean areas. —Moreover, longer range US SLBMs are significantly increasing the ocean area within which US SSBNs will be able to operate and remain within missile range of targets in the USSR. —We therefore believe that, throughout the period of this Estimate, the Soviets would be unable to prevent US SSBNs on patrol in broad ocean areas from launching their missiles. Directed-Energy Weapons 69. As part of a long-­term development effort in technologies applicable to air, missile, and space defense, the Soviets are conducting extensive research in the advanced technologies of lasers, particle 13 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force. [Footnote is in the original.]
