Hungary 443 to return the Crown. Vanik, who has a substantial Hungarian constituency, has suggested the idea of a joint resolution favoring return. Opponents of return include Horton and Oakar, sponsor of a recent bill requiring that the Crown not be returned without Congressional authorization. We have not yet conducted a survey of the leadership in Congress, but we believe the domestic political problem is manageable: that there would be a brief, limited flurry of protest but no sustained opposition. Some Hungarian-American groups oppose return of the Crown, charging it would bestow “legitimacy” on the Kadar regime. For most Americans, return of the Crown would not be an issue, and return would probably be supported as a moral act. As Congressman Frenzel said, “It’s theirs’ it’s right to return it to them.” We believe that the presence of the Crown in Budapest would serve as a continued national inspiration to the Hungarian people and that this would soon be recognized here, even by opponents of its return. Furthermore, such steps as consultations with Congress (and a possible joint resolution supporting return), Congressional participation in the transfer of the Crown in a public ceremony in Budapest, and a Hungarian commitment to place the Crown on permanent public display would mitigate initial adverse reaction. CONCLUSION I strongly support the early return of the Crown to the Hungarian people because: —U.S.-Hungarian relations have improved substantially, meeting our stated condition for considering the Crown’s return. —Morally and legally it is indefensible to continue to withhold from the Hungarian people their most important symbol of nationhood. —Return of this symbol of Hungary’s independence and Western, Christian tradition will concretely support our long-range goal of encouraging greater autonomy, national identity and Western orientation in Eastern Europe. —Support for return is emerging in Congress and domestic opposition is limited. —It would be in our interest to return the Crown in a generous gesture by a new Administration, rather than in the context of Hungarian demands. —The prospect of the Crown’s return would facilitate a favorable resolution of the complex property problem in Budapest. —There is no countervailing reason for holding on to it—we cannot expect the emergence of a non-Communist government in the foreseeable future, and it would be inappropriate to seek to “trade” the Crown for something we want.
