763.72113/2344
[Document 347]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
The memorandum communicated to His Majesty’s Embassy by the State
Department of the United States on the 16th June last respecting the test
suits instituted in the United States Courts with a view to determining the
proper disposal of certain ex-enemy securities now held by the Alien
Property Custodian was duly submitted to His Majesty’s Government, who
have now furnished their observations thereon.
That document appears to disclose a mistaken conception of the character
of the negotiations which took place between Mr. P. F. Swain, of the Public
Trustee’s Department, the Alien Property Custodian and the Department of
Justice in October 1921. It is suggested in the memorandum that these
negotiations resulted in something in the nature of an agreement between
the two governments which involved mutual concessions, and it is further
suggested that, in bringing the present suit against the Alien Property
Custodian, the Public Trustee is endeavouring to repudiate an arrangement
entered into in good faith and scrupulously observed by the Alien Property
Custodian. His Majesty’s Government regret that they are unable to concur
in the construction placed by the Government of the United States upon the
discussions between Mr. Swain and the Alien Property Custodian and they
must repudiate the suggestion that there has been any breach of faith on the
part of the Public Trustee. The issue, indeed, does not appear to be one
involving legal or theoretical interpretation but appears rather to have been
defined by a clear and unambiguous declaration made by the Secretary of
State of the United States at the time when the negotiations took place. In
his note of May 5th, 1922 to His Majesty’s Embassy Mr. Secretary Hughes
was at pains to leave it beyond doubt that the negotiations were not to be
considered as in any respect an endeavour to reach an agreement between
the two Governments, but were to be regarded solely as “efforts … to
explain the law”. The Secretary of State proceeded:—
