January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1155 356. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 9, 1980, 10:10–11:43 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Third Meeting with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Vice President Walter F. Mondale Secretary of State Cyrus Vance Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President Ambassador Roy Atherton, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker) His Excellency Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production Dr. Butros Butros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States Mr. Osama el-Baz, First Under Secretary and Director of the Office of the Vice President (From 10:10 a.m., the two Presidents met separately in the Oval Office.2 The others—except for the Vice President and Dr. Brzezinski— met together in the Cabinet Room from 10:46 to 10:54, when the two Presidents joined them. The Vice President joined them at 10:57; and Dr. Brzezinski at 11:05). Ambassador Linowitz began the meeting in the Cabinet Room by referring to the draft Egyptian paper on points of agreement (see attachment).3 First, he wanted to note that we hope that Israel can also agree to whatever is worked out here; therefore we should look at these issues with that factor in mind. Point one4 is ok. Point two5 is ok, but the 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial Xs—(2/1/80–4/15/80). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. 2 See Document 355. 3 The draft Egyptian paper is attached but not printed. 4 The text of point one in the Egyptian paper reads: “The objective will be to give new momentum to the peace process through the completion of a Heads of Agreement document by May 26, as another step towards a comprehensive peace settlement.” 5 The text of point two in the Egyptian paper reads: “The Heads of Agreement document will, to the maximum extent, incorporate basic understanding on issues. Details will be tackled subsequently with a sense of urgency.”
