Chapter 2, January–June 1989 191 — Option 2—Retain the existing position for PPM, but do not seek to engage the Soviets on the issue. If the Soviets press, inform them that the issue is under review in Washington. — Option 3—Inform the Soviets that we are withdrawing our PPM proposal pending a review of our position. SSI. The existing proposal would permit mandatory short-­notice SSI at facilities on an agreed list, for the purpose of resolving compliance concerns regarding ballistic missile-­related activities. [1 line not declassified] However, no specific proposal has been made to the Soviets, or agreed to in the USG. SSI at all other locations would be subject to a right of refusal, although the refusing party is required to make a “good faith” effort to resolve the concern by other means. The first issue concerns the scope of facilities on the mandatory SSI list. Many believe the list should comprise only solid rocket motor production plants where PPM is not in place. They note that the issue of how to balance the U.S. interest in a comprehensive SSI regime to deter Soviet cheating, with our need to protect sensitive U.S. facilities was the subject of extensive study in the Reagan Administration. Although the existing proposal is not ideal in serving any one of our objectives, it strikes a good balance between our verification and security requirements. It also is consistent with the U.S. constitutional protection against unreasonable search. Others believe that the list should be expanded to include almost all solid rocket motor production plants that are not subject to PPM, major military storage locations (about 11 U.S. facilities, depending on the definition), and civilian railyards and open areas in which mobile launchers could be, and in the case of Soviet SS–24 and SS–25 systems, have probably have been routinely located. Options—Mandatory SSI. Three options exist: — Option 1—Retain the existing position on Mandatory SSI. — Option 2—Retain the existing position on Mandatory SSI, but do not seek to engage the Soviets in Geneva. If the Soviets press, inform them that the issue is under review in Washington. — Option 3—Inform the Soviets that we are withdrawing our Mandatory SSI proposal pending a review of our position. A second issue is whether to modify the right-­of-­refusal portion of our proposal. As noted above, the issue of how best to deter Soviet cheating and protect sensitive U.S. facilities was the subject of extensive study in the Reagan Administration. While no decisions were made on the details of a U.S. proposal, many believe that the existing U.S. approach strikes a good balance between our verification and security requirements and should be retained. They believe that continued study is unlikely to uncover a better approach. Nevertheless, all agree that the costs associated with right-­of-­refusal are not yet well defined.
