1470 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Farley raised the question whether military interests suggest a desirable threshold or whether the threshold should be determined solely on the basis of inspection capabilities of the agreed system. Mr. McCone said that we could not approach the problem on the basis of what level was to our advantage, since we could not have our cake and eat it on the threshold problem. We would not, however, want to approach it in a way which would give an important advantage to our adversary. If a system could be implemented on a 1 kt level, we should accept it. The area between 1 and 5 kt is of considerable military importance but we should not make an effort in the negotiations to reserve that area, since inspection capabilities can be brought below it. Mr. Irwin said that he agreed. General Starbird said that from a technical standpoint there would be a tremendous advantage in having a 1 kt exception, that there would be some additional advantage in an exception up to 5, but it was not a situation in which a 5 kt exception would be twice as good as 2 kt. The exception was progressively of less advantage as you move up the scale. Mr. Irwin said the threshold should be as low as practicable in order to introduce as much inspection as possible in the Soviet Union. Dr. Killian agreed, and said this was true also because we have at present a military advantage in the lower ranges. Mr. Gray asked whether the improvement in the inspection to which Mr. McCone had referred would result in opening up the Soviet Union more. Mr. Keeny said that improvement in the system would, on the one hand, detect more events which might then be inspected but on the other hand, it would identify more events on the basis of instru­ ments alone and thus reduce the need for on-­site inspection. Mr. Gray asked whether the threshold question applied to tests in outer space or at high altitudes. Mr. Farley said that a special study group was at work on this problem. Mr. Keeny said that preliminary studies indicated that these would be good down to 1 kt at several hundred thousand kilometers and that a detailed report on this subject was scheduled for completion next week. Mr. Gray emphasized the need for early decisions and it was agreed that the group should reconvene at the earliest possible time.
