308 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI on heavy ICBMs which is already recorded in the joint draft text. In short, if the Soviet Union insists on MIRVed mobiles as part of a survivable second-­strike force, it may have them in limited numbers, but only in exchange for reductions in its principal first-­strike force on a one-­for-­one basis.3 To further enhance stability, the United States would be prepared, if the Soviet Union desired, to make room for further de-MIRVing by agreeing to an overall SNDV limit a bit higher than the currently agreed 1600, perhaps 1700, or even the 1800 number once proposed by the USSR. The President could present this package to the Soviet Union as appropriate without committing to permit mobile ICBMs. The package would always be accompanied by “if permitted” language. (S/NF) The Soviet Union has stated that it wishes to have 1600 warheads on 800 mobile ICBMs; that is, the Soviet Union wants a large number of both single warhead and MIRVed mobile ICBMs. The current US position is to ban both types. This proposal would permit the Soviet Union not only single-RV mobile ICBMs but also a limited number of MIRVed mobile ICBMs. Some Soviet sources have indicated that the Soviet Union might be prepared to reduce their heavy SS-18 ICBMs below 1540; this proposal tests their seriousness. On the other hand, if the Soviet Union would prefer to keep the full 1540 heavy ICBMs as thus far agreed in START, they could do so, but only at the price of not being able to deploy MIRVed mobile ICBMs. They have the freedom to choose whether to trade or not—­their MIRVed mobiles are banned in essence only if they refuse to make further reductions in their heavy ICBMs. I believe that a proposal or a “probe” to get the Soviets to agree simply to direct further cuts in heavies or to ban heavies will invite a “March 1977” backlash or undesired counter proposals. The heavies-­for-MIRVed-­mobile-ICBMs tradeoff reduces that danger, which would be high also if we push for tight ceilings or a ban on all MIRVed ICBMs. (S/NF) I believe that the President should propose a range of numbers to enhance our negotiating leverage and disarm criticism from the Soviet Union and the Congress. The low number, for example 400, will appeal to those who are concerned about verification, are convinced that Congress will never fund a large mobile ICBM program, or desire us to propose levels that would require cuts in our total planned buy of 500 mobile MX RVs. The higher number, say 800, would appeal to those who believe that this is more consistent with negotiability, stability, and a true two-­missile program. The range gives us greater flexibility in negotiating verification measures and constraints with the Soviets. (S/NF) 3 Davis drew a vertical line in the right-­hand margin beside this sentence.
