Yugoslavia On the Middle East, President Carter is trying to set an environment by having talks leading to a reconvened Geneva Conference. He has met with the Arab leaders, and this week he will meet with Crown Prince Fahd. When the Israelis have organized their new government, he hopes to meet with the new Israeli Prime Minister.4 President Carter has had good talks with President Sadat, King Hussein, and President Asad, and I am sure the talks with Fahd will go well.5 But, of course, the issues are very difficult. Tito: Unfortunately, I am a pessimist after the Israeli elections. I am afraid it will be more difficult. The one who has come up in Israel is the one for war. Only the U.S. can put a brake on it, no one else. We must insist on a peaceful solution. We think the Geneva Conference shouldn’t be convened because of the coming to power of the new leaders in Israel. This will only lead to a worsening of relations with the Arabs. As the Israelis are militarily superior, they might try to take advantage of their military superiority. It would create a difficult situation for the U.S. President Sadat, who has succeeded thus far in appeasing Israel, might find himself in a difficult political situation in Egypt if there is confrontation. V.P.: You are right. Tito: Much depends on the Israelis. V.P.: There is a hope that the parties can get together. We have been pressing for such a result. President Carter is reluctant to reconvene the Geneva Conference until we have essential pieces in place; otherwise, it would fall apart. Secretary Vance will be going back to the Middle East shortly to discuss the situation with each leader, and the President will be meeting next week with Fahd. Our theory is that we have to have action this year if we are going to have positive action at all. Tito: You are right in saying that it is necessary to put some of the pieces in place before reconvening the Geneva Conference. On the other side, what is bad is that we are not witnessing the coming together of the opposing sides. There is an opposite process; they are going further apart. V.P.: President Carter’s impression, based on his talks with the Arab leaders was that the situation was developing nicely. With the 4 Menachem Begin’s party, the Likud, won the May 17 elections in Israel. Begin was confirmed as Prime Minister on June 21, 1977.
