Eastern Europe Region he has refused to undertake the investigation the Workers Defense League hopes will provide a focus for more fundamental criticism. —The problem in East Germany is somewhat analogous to that in Poland in that it also involves popular unrest. It is different in that disquiet has not manifested itself in violence or overt acts of hostility to the regime. The temper in East Germany seems to be less churlish than in Poland and far less volatile. There is no evidence that any of the dissident groups are united. The Honecker regime is greatly concerned about the attraction of the West, particularly West Germany, for the East German population. Three out of every four East German homes receive, and presumably watch, West German television. Millions of travelers from the West enter East Germany every year. Against this kind of “subversion,” Honecker’s attempts to create an East German nationalism have faltered, and the regime’s classical means of control seem almost irrelevant. The Helsinki accords have made life ever more difficult for the East German regime. Acting under its provisions, large numbers— perhaps tens of thousands—of East Germans have applied for exit visas to emigrate to the West. The regime is taking steps to discourage such applications, and it is doubtful that it will allow many East Germans to emigrate no matter what the pressures from the West. No one knows the degree of skepticism or cynicism with which such applications are made, but disillusionment and resentment toward the regime could prove to be a problem. We have seen some signs of increased restiveness among workers manifest in complaints about working conditions, wages, and hours. It is hard to tell how serious this is. So far, we see little evidence that the regime feels itself under great pressure from the workers. A worsening of the economic situation could lead to unification of the various groups dissatisfied with the regime’s policies. Last fall, the regime had some trouble with clergy in the Lutheran church and with a few outspoken dissident intellectuals. The latter have not been overtly sympathetic with the Czechoslovak Chartists, nor have they brought organized sustained pressure on Honecker. The regime’s carrot-and-stick tactics have been relatively successful in keeping things quiet within the intellectual community. —The Czechoslovaks have taken center stage among East European dissident intellectuals by their direct challenge to regime practices regarding civil rights, as outlined in “Charter 77,” a manifesto which was prepared early last fall but not propounded until January. The Chartists—a mix of well-known oppositionists who were active in the political arena during the “Prague Spring” and a surprisingly large number (more than 600) of other intellectuals and technocrats—clearly
