Romania 677 A Post-Ceausescu Romania 10. In any political system heavily centralized around a single strong leader, question inevitably arises as to effect of the leader’s disappearance. This is particularly acute for Communist systems in which there is no agreed mechanism for transferring power from one leader to the next. In Romania, we believe that such a transition would be less difficult and destabilizing than in most other similar systems. While admittedly Ceausescu has made no provision for his own succession and there are no heir apparents, there is a group of a dozen or so third-string leaders (there is no second string) of approximately same age (around 54), outlook and experience whom we would expect to form a genuine, albeit temporary, collective leadership, using RCP Political Executive Committee (POLEXCO) as a framework and pledged to carrying out the policies of the fallen leader and to honor his memory. Mrs. Ceausescu would be a member of this group but, in spite of her undeniably immense influence today and probably ambitions for tomorrow, we would not expect her to inherit her husband’s mantle since we consider her power derivative rather than autonomous. She is also loathed by nearly all other major power actors. Eventually a new strong leader would emerge from this group and would probably become something like the new despot. We believe that this person is today a full or candidate member of POLEXCO and that anyone who is not stands no real chance of winning succession sweepstakes. We have pointed out earlier (Bucharest 1224)4 the remarkable homogeneity, relative youth, and excellent health of present 41 members of POLEXCO (with a couple of exceptions), and we conclude that, barring political accident, most of these persons will hold significant positions for the next fifteen years. This is striking stability at the top leadership level. Who, specifically? With due regard for hazards of prediction, we suggest, Ilie Verdet, Virgil Trofin, Paul Niculescu, and Cornel Burtica as most likely with Ion Iliescu and Gheorghe Pana as our favorite dark horses. Opposition Forces 11.Therearenooppositionforcestocurrentregime,eitherincountry or expatriate, of any importance. There are probably some individuals, including some in relatively high party/state positions, who may not be totally enchanted with each and every policy of Ceausescu and who 4 In telegram 1224 from Bucharest, February 26, the Embassy reported on the prospects of the Romanian Communist Party leadership. The Embassy suggested that outside of accidents or unexpected illness, the top echelon of the party leadership was likely to remain in power for the foreseeable future. “If they are removed,” the Embassy concluded, “it will be because of political reasons, most likely associated with the relative favor they enjoy with Ceausescu, rather than because of death or sickness.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790088–0028)
