488
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
The President replied that it certainly seemed to him about time for
the British to allow us to try our hand.
Mr. Jackson then said he had another point which he felt would
contribute to an improvement of our position in the Middle East and
about which he felt it was possible to do something. This was American
action to remove the festering sore in the Middle East represented by
the 800,000 Arab displaced persons in Israel.
Secretary Dulles agreed that this was indeed a festering sore, but
pointed out that the Arab countries themselves were unwilling to ab-
sorb these 800,000 unfortunate people, since to do so would deprive
them of a bargaining point in their dealings with the Israelis. Accord-
ingly, said Secretary Dulles, he did not see what could be done about
them.
Mr. Jackson replied that it would certainly be possible to resettle
200,000 of these refugees, and that all 800,000 could at least be fed.
The President added that it was not enough to feed them, but that
he would be awfully glad if we could get some one of the Arab coun-
tries to take these people if we would pay a subsidy for each head.
After General Vandenberg had informed the Council that there
was one point relevant to the military aspects of the Iranian problem,
namely, the existence of a fair-sized British force in Iraq, Mr. Stassen in-
quired whether it was indeed the President’s view that some funds
should be expended at once in Iran if the Secretary of State agreed.
The President replied that of course this was a gamble, but if upon
examination it seemed a good gamble, he was prepared to take it.
The National Security Council:5
a. Discussed the subject in the light of an oral briefing by the Di-
rector of Central Intelligence.
b. Agreed that the following possible courses of action should be
explored in anticipation of further Council action at the next regular or
special meeting:
(1) Persuading the British to permit the United States to put the Ira-
nian oil industry in operation, without prejudice to an ultimate settle-
ment of the Anglo-Iranian controversy.
(2) The military feasibility of holding a line through the Zagros
Mountain range.
(3) Replacement of Ambassador Henderson.
(4) Provision of limited economic aid to strengthen Mossadegh’s
position.
5 Paragraphs a and b constitute NSC Action No. 729. (Ibid., RG 273, Records of the
National Security Council, Records of Actions, Box 95, NSC Actions 697–1001)
