1058 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement As you know, our estimate here of Wang’s tactics is that he has been trying so determinedly to elicit our specific objections to his May 11 draft precisely in order that he may proceed to “meet” them in a new proposal. A possibility that occurs to me is that Wang may seize upon the Department’s press release—faute de mieux—as providing the specific objections he has been seeking. If I were Wang, I think I could work up a prepared statement for next meeting or the one after making the following points: 1. US statement charged PRC side had rejected own draft of ­December 1. This not so. PRC side still willing agree on that draft. 2. US can either accept December 1 draft as is, or it can insist on amendments. If it insists on amendments, they must not be one-­sided. If US insists on ICSD, PRC will be entitled to insist on “mutual respect”. If US insists on Taiwan reference, FMC entitled insist on FMC, prefera­ bly with time limit agreeable both sides, if necessary without time limit. 3. How there can be any objection to words which PRC proposes to add is not understandable unless US is determined either to violate principle of “mutual respect” by freezing up status quo while postpon­ ing indefinitely the practical step of a FMC, which necessary to resolve Taiwan area dispute. Of course, an alternative to Wang’s making this pitch in a meeting would be for Peiping to make them in a public statement, but for tacti­ cal reasons it would be more likely for them to be made in the meetings, before taking the position to the public. This is, of course, entirely speculative, and we’ll see what actually happens. I’m enclosing Wang’s latest list. Did not feel these lists now war­ rant telegraphic handling. If I’m wrong, please tell me. Regards to all. Sincerely, David L Osborn Enclosure List Presented by Wang2 Geneva, June 8, 1956 Mr. [text not declassified] Mr. [text not declassified] went to the United States in 1948 and studied medicine at the Pennsylvania University, Philadelphia. He 2 No classification marking. The Chinese text of the list is also enclosed but not printed.
