328 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the treaty is signed in President Carter’s presence, here or at Jabal Musa, he is prepared to accede to a request from President Carter that ambassadors be exchanged as soon as diplomatic relations are established. Mubarak made a point of saying that this concession is for President Carter and should not rpt not be mentioned to the Israelis, the Egyptian delegation or be included in the treaty. Moreover, Mubarak said, Sadat’s willingness to do this is contingent on a specific inclusion of Gaza in the treaty. (D) On Gaza, Mubarak said Sadat considers it essential to include a reference to moving ahead on Gaza in the Sinai treaty lest failure to do so isolate Egypt in the Arab world. Sadat wants the self-governing body to be set up in Gaza without delay. The Israelis should withdraw their military forces to security points that are agreed upon without delay. Sadat would like these points included in the Sinai treaty, but Mubarak indicated that the President has an open mind on this subject—so long as progress on Gaza is synchronized with the progress on implementing the Sinai treaty. Specifically, if as President Carter has suggested, the Israelis have completed their interim withdrawal in Sinai in six months time, a self-governing body should by that time have been negotiated and established (perhaps on the last day or the day before Sinai withdrawal) so that “self-rule” is in effect in Gaza at approximately the same time as Phase I of Sinai withdrawal is completed. Sadat wants President Carter to know that if new leaders cannot be found in Gaza, the present ones would be acceptable for this purpose. Sadat is prepared, in accordance with his letter to President Carter, to begin negotiations on a Gaza settlement immediately and without waiting for Hussein’s or West Bank agreement, so that there can be synchronization between Sinai and Gaza. In making these points, Mubarak stressed that Sadat believes that he cannot go it alone in Sinai. There must be some parallelism between Sinai and a Gaza settlement. Sadat was confident that President Carter understands this from their talks at Camp David. 3. I told Mubarak that I would, of course, convey President Sadat’s views. I reminded him, however, that Sadat had agreed that there be no formal linkage between the two framework documents. President Carter has spoken of the need for an inter-relationship between the two sets of negotiations, but I doubted that the Israelis would agree to including Gaza in the Sinai treaty. A Gaza settlement, I pointed out to Mubarak, would be based not upon the Egyptian/Israeli framework document, but upon the comprehensive framework. Hence, while we also appreciate the need for an inter-relationship between the two processes, they are not part and parcel of the document under which negotiations are now taking place. Mubarak insisted that Sadat needs a specific relationship between the Sinai agreement and the establishment of
