Through the arrangements brought about by these committees the two
governments by exchange of notes dated February 4 and March 17, 1925,19
gave instructions to a Joint Board of Engineers designated by them to
review and extend the engineering plans as recommended by the
International Joint Commission in 1921.
This Joint Engineering Board made an elaborate resurvey of the lake and
river systems both as to navigation and power, and filed with each
government an exhaustive report upon all its engineering aspects. The
representatives of the two countries differed as to a few details but from the
report it clearly appears that the improvement of the waterway for
navigation and power purposes is both feasible and advisable.
The St. Lawrence River Commission appointed by the President to advise
this Government on the subject recently undertook an examination of all of
the economic as well as engineering facts bearing upon the proposed
development and has made a complete report covering all aspects. It
concluded that the construction of the ship-way at proper depths would
relieve the interior of the continent, especially agriculture, from the
economic handicaps of adverse transportation costs which now operate to
the disadvantage of many states and a large part of Canada, would serve the
industrial well being of both countries in the development of their power
resources, and would tend largely to the increase of prosperity and the
stimulation of industry. The Commission recommended that negotiations
should be entered into with your Government in an endeavor to arrive at an
agreement as to the speedy development of this waterway.
The Government of the United States adopts the recommendations of the
St. Lawrence Commission. It appreciates the advantages which will accrue
equally to both countries by the opening of the waterway to ocean shipping.
It feels that the necessary increase in railway rates due to the war, and the
modern practices respecting the generation and transmission of
hydroelectric power have increased the importance and practicability of
early development, and believes that the factors which influence its
conclusions must have equal application to, and influence upon, the
Dominion of Canada.
