480
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
199.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, May 17, 1978, 1923Z
7606. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations:
Warnke-Petrosyants Meeting, May 16.
CTB Message No. 211
1. Summary. On May 16 Warnke met for first time with Petro-
syants, new head of Soviet CTB Delegation. Warnke relayed to Petro-
syants President Carter’s personal view of importance of CTB and his
desire to expedite negotiations. Tone of discussion was encouraging.
Without seeking to diminish the difficulty of resolving remaining
issues, Petrosyants conveyed very positive outlook on prospects for the
negotiations. He laid the groundwork for one important step forward
by indicating willingness to begin detailed discussion of agreed under-
standing on OSIs. End summary.
2. Warnke, accompanied by Johnson, Neidle and Finch, met at So-
viet mission on May 16 with Petrosyants, accompanied by Timerbaev
and Tarasov. Petrosyants opened substantive discussion with brief re-
view of session to date, observing that US has submitted “quite a few
interesting proposals.” The Soviets are studying these and asking ques-
tions about them. They have received replies to some questions but not
others, but this is “only natural” in view of the amount of material in-
volved and its seriousness. Petrosyants observed that, in the process of
negotiation, each side thinks it is the other which must change its
positions.
3. Warnke began by reporting that President Carter had asked him
to state to Petrosyants personally that the President wants to expedite
the negotiations in whatever way he can, that he sees this as a most im-
portant matter, and is concerned that we can implement our nonpro-
liferation policy only if we can show the world that the US and USSR
can stop nuclear weapons testing.
4. Warnke then reviewed the highlights of the negotiations from
their beginning, characterizing the Soviet move last year on PNEs as
very constructive. He thought the Soviets would agree that US had
made some very constructive steps also, in accepting the Soviet posi-
tion that seismic stations on the territory of a country should be con-
trolled by that country, and in connection with initiation of on-site in-
spections. On latter point, Warnke recalled that longstanding US
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780208–0615. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow.
