Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII a development of great seriousness for South Asia and the entire free world. Those of us who share this view must cooperate closely over the coming weeks and months. We are under no illusions about the difficulties that may arise. We must be careful to avoid actions which could seemingly provide justification for those who seek to worsen the situation and limit the government’s chances of maintaining independence. When faced by changes that may indeed be of a historic scope, it is important that we all act with forethought and determination. The new Afghan government has declared its intention to remain non-aligned. Your decision to maintain contact in order to test its willingness to continue constructive foreign policies is a wise one. I, too, intend to pursue this course as a first step, and hope we can work together in trying to hold the Kabul leadership to its promise. Given these similarities in our approach, I will value continued close contact so that we can most carefully assess what the next steps should be. There are a number of other matters on which I feel we can both profit from a further exchange of views. I know that you too have been troubled by issues which have arisen between our two countries. Secretary Vance has explained to Mr. Agha Shahi the real legal and political hurdles placed in our way by Pakistan’s plans to acquire a reprocessing plant.4 While recognizing these difficulties, I urge that we both keep clear in our minds the long-range interests and concerns which underlie our relationship. For my part, I share the conviction both of my predecessors and yours that our relationship is important to each of our nations. With this lasting perspective in mind, we will be better able to solve the immediate problems that stand between us, and build upon the fundamental consensus that binds us. I am determined to do everything within my power to continue developing our historic relationship of cooperation and friendship. I believe, as you do, that a personal meeting would be helpful.5 It would be especially fruitful after we assess the exchange of ideas between Secretary Vance and Mr. Agha Shahi, and after we have some clearer knowledge of the attitude of the new government in Afghanistan. In the meantime, I suggest that we keep in touch through Ambassador Hummel and, as needed, through direct correspondence. Once 4 Documentation on U.S. objections to Pakistan’s plans to build a reprocessing plant is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
