Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1047
airspace with vessels containing nuclear weapons, and to call at ports
there; such transitory presence of nuclear weapons would not infringe
our undertaking to keep the territories free of nuclear weapons. The
purpose of the third statement is to make known our understanding
that our obligations under the Protocol do not affect our operations on
the high seas, or our rights of innocent passage through territorial
waters (or of passage of straits, or of archipelagic passage, if either of
these is adopted as international law).
I will forward to you shortly a set of formal submittal and trans-
mittal documents incorporating these interpretive statements.
The Department of State has also consulted with the Puerto Rican
Secretary of State on the question of attaching a statement to our ratifi-
cation that would allow reconsideration of our adherence as to Puerto
Rico if Puerto Rico became a state. The effect of ratifying without such a
reservation would be that Puerto Rico could not legally be removed
from coverage of the Protocol if it became a state; and Puerto Rico
would be the only state in which by international obligation we could
not place nuclear weapons. The Puerto Rican authorities understood
this consequence when they stated during our consultations with them
that they had no objection to our ratifying without such a reservation.
The Departments of State and Defense have agreed to recommend
that such a provision should not be included in the statements recom-
mended for attachment to our ratification. To do so would dilute the ef-
fect of our ratification. Moreover, we believe that application of the Pro-
tocol to Puerto Rico as a state would not create an objectionable
distinction among states of the Union. In this connection, we note that a
number of other treaties have had a similarly limited geographic effect
within the United States (e.g., Rush-Bagot Agreement limiting naval
forces on the Great Lakes). However, we have noted the matter because
the absence of such a reservation could have domestic political conse-
quences in the event of Congressional consideration of statehood for
Puerto Rico.
Finally, we believe no mention of the recommended interpretive
statements need be made when the President signs the Protocol, since
all the proposed statements are technical in character and none reserves
obligations of the United States under the Protocol. However, we in-
tend to give a copy of the statements privately to Mexican officials in
connection with the signing, indicating to them that we anticipate that
these statements will be submitted to the Senate for its consideration.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
