Message of the President of the United States to Congress,
December 8, 1925
MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS: In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress
upon the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the general
condition is one of progress and prosperity. Here and there are comparatively small and
apparently temporary difficulties needing adjustment and improved administrative
methods, such as are always to be expected, but in the fundamentals of government and
business the results demonstrate that we are going in the right direction. The country
does not appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so much
as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement of details. The age
of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future, but it is more in danger of being
retarded by mistaken Government activity than it is from lack of legislation. We are by
far the most likely to accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation.
In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept the resulting
responsibilities. It is their duty to support themselves and support the Government.
That is the business of the Nation, whatever the charity of the Nation may require. The
functions which the Congress are to discharge are not those of local government but of
National Government. The greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any
encroachment upon the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions. Local
self-government is one of our most precious possessions. It is the greatest contributing
factor to the stability, strength, liberty, and progress of the Nation. It ought not to be
infringed by assault or undermined by purchase. It ought not to abdicate its power
through weakness or resign its authority through favor. It does not at all follow that
because abuses exist it is the concern of the Federal Government to attempt their
reform.
Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government beyond
its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from leaving the local
communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their own evils. Our local habit and
custom is so strong, our variety of race and creed is so great, the Federal authority is so
tenuous, that the area within which it can function successfully is very limited. The
wiser policy is to leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources
of revenue and charged with their own obligations.
GOVERNMENT ECONOMY
It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign. While they
recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have established as its instrument a
Government of limited powers. They hold inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction
