698 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 154. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1 Washington, September 4, 1979 SUBJECT MX Costs In connection with your upcoming decision on MX, I want to inform you of our latest efforts to understand the cost implications of the program now recommended by Harold Brown. Harold estimates that this system will cost $33 billion to acquire (constant 1980 dollars), about $8 billion more than the vertical multiple protective silo system originally proposed by the Air Force. The currently proposed system is more costly because of features that provide increased security against attack (rapid shuffle, dash) and increased verifiability (openable horizontal shelters). OMB staff has been working closely with DOD and the Air Force for some weeks, including a cost analysis session with the project office in California. In our judgment the DOD $33 billion estimate is probably understated by about $8 billion for the following reasons: —Based on historical data, we believe the baseline system cost is overly optimistic, and should be increased by about $5 billion. Our judgment here derives in great part from the massive road and shelter construction involved. Given the unprecedented magnitude of this major construction, these added costs are likely to happen even if the program is tightly managed. The cost growth could be much worse otherwise. —Modifications to the baseline system that are now under active consideration would add another $3–4 billion. These modifications include deployment of mass simulators to preserve location uncertainty, development of a larger reentry vehicle to fully exploit the throw-­weight capacity of the MX missile, command and control improvements, and improved road surfacing needed for rapid dash. In my opinion, some if not all of the modifications will be recommended to you eventually. Over and above our OMB estimate of $41 billion for the presently configured system, it is also likely that a larger system will be needed to counter an expanded threat. If the Soviets build to the MIRV limit allowed by SALT II, the currently planned MX system would become very vulnerable (almost all the MX missiles could be destroyed). To 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 43, Missiles: 8–9/79. Secret.
