Negotiating Channels
413
157.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State and the White House1
London, January 20, 1980, 0028Z
1314. Eyes Only for the President, Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski
From Jordan and Saunders. Subject: Meeting With Panamanians.2
1. Secret–Entire text.
2. Summary. We met all morning with our Panamanian contacts
and one of the French lawyers with whom the Panamanians have been
dealing and all afternoon also with the second who had just arrived
mid-day from Tehran.3 The morning conversation focused on the
dynamics of the present situation in Iran. The afternoon talk concen-
trated on efforts to find a resolution. Both seemed straightforward in
stating the authority for their talk—the concurrence of Ghotbzadeh
and three other members of the Revolutionary Council but not of the
Council as a body. We explained clearly why it is necessary to have a
scenario that begins with release of the hostages. They explained why
the political situation in Iran makes it possible only to proceed in stages
so as to prepare public opinion. Privately we concluded that some
scenario combining some elements of both approaches—including
early release of the hostages—might be necessary, but we told them
we had no authority to go beyond our present position. They had no
authority to present any new position from Tehran. On the basis of
our conversation, they called Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh from the
residence. He clearly regarded our coming here as a significant signal
and recognized the need to demonstrate Iran’s own seriousness. Our
two French contacts decided to return to Tehran and, at our urging,
to tell Ghotbzadeh that the most serious signal he could send would
be to designate someone to negotiate directly with us. End summary.
3. Following are the most interesting points that came out in the
conversation.
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Jan
1980. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee. A handwritten note at the top of the
page reads: “DDN [Newsom]—URGENT.”
2 The meeting took place the morning of Saturday, January 19, in London at the
home of Deputy Chief of Mission Edward Streator. According to Jordan, he and Saunders
reported the meeting to Carter and Vance on their return to Washington late Sunday
evening, January 20. (Jordan, Crisis, pp. 114–118)
3 Rory Gonzales, Gabriel Lewis, Hector Villalon, and Christian Bourguet. Bourguet
arrived mid-meeting. Bourguet and Villalon are referred to as the “two lawyers” or
“French contacts.”
