1957  1463
therefore “nature” of talks. I replied along lines para 4 Deptel 546 and 
Wang said would have to consult government. When, in reply my state­
ment answer should be addressed Martin, he insisted reply only to me, 
I emphasized that as of close meeting today Martin was U.S. represent­
ative. He rejected my suggestion announcement be made concerning 
date next meeting and we finally agreed on announcement, that we had 
held 73rd meeting today and Ambassadors “stated an announcement 
would subsequently be made concerning the next meeting”.
He made proposal for agreed announcement on judicial assist­
ance on basis “equality and reciprocity” and therefore “governments of 
two countries decided to appoint experts to start negotiations on sub­
stance and concrete arrangements of an agreement on judicial assist­
ance between the two countries”. In original presentation and give and 
take laid heavy emphasis on fact U.S. District Court an instrumentality 
of U.S. Government had made request to PRC Ministry of Justice.
I, of course, rejected along lines paragraph 5 Deptel 557. He 
­indicated they will issue public statement on this.
Full text draft agreed announcement on judicial assistance by 
­separate telegram.
Full report of meeting being pouched Friday.
Gowen
854.	 Despatch unnumbered from Geneva1
Geneva, December 12, 1957
SUBJECT
China Talks—73rd Meeting
1. I opened 73rd meeting with prepared statement:
(a) Mr. Ambassador, when we first met here in August, 1955 again 
to discuss, among other things, the question of Americans in your coun­
try desiring to return to the United States but prevented from doing so, 
I pointed out to you the fundamental importance of this question to 
the future relations between our two peoples. I also pointed out to you 
that the question could have been settled even on the first day of our 
talks if your authorities had taken the simple and straightforward step 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–1257. Confidential; Limit 
Distribution. Received on December 19.
