Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
725
In the judgment of the Delegation, however, the Soviets were se-
rious and, for the most part, practical in their approach to this round.
Most importantly, they are now committed to the process of discussing
restraint. When our joint communique´ stating this is released on
Thursday,2 we will have some basis to ask for more cooperation from
other suppliers and recipients.
It is our strategy to use this process itself as a means of generating
pressures on suppliers to slow down the pace of transfers and to think
twice about how much and what kinds of weapon systems are to be
transferred.
1. Objectives
The US side was charged with (a) assessing the “seriousness” of
Soviet interest in the talks, and (b) securing Soviet agreement to fu-
ture rounds of meetings. The latter proved to be of only minor conse-
quence as the Soviet side clearly was prepared to agree to continue the
discussions, even before the sessions began. With regard to Soviet
“seriousness”:
• They certainly were serious at this round. They came prepared to
present their own approach to conventional arms restraint—one based
on “political and legal principles.” They asked fairly sophisticated
questions about the US functional guidelines which revealed serious
study of the details of US policy.
• The tone throughout was constructive. The Soviets avoided po-
lemics as a rule. Nor did they shrink from discussions of topics on
which they are vulnerable—such as arms transfers to the Horn of
Africa.
• The joint communique´ issued at the conclusion of the round (at-
tached)3 contains significant evidence of “seriousness.” In it, the Soviets
agreed: (a) that the subject was “urgent”; (b) that transfers could affect
US-Soviet relations adversely, as well as international peace; (c) that the
talks are in accord with the 1972 Declaration of Basic Principles of US-
2 May 11. In a joint communique´, the two sides “agreed that the problem of limiting
international transfers of conventional arms is urgent” and called for “solution on a con-
structive basis so as to promote international peace and security and strengthen de´tente.”
Both sides also “stated their belief that effective solution of the problem requires full con-
sideration of the legitimate defense needs of the recipients in accordance with the pur-
poses and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.” (“Joint Communique´ by the
United States and the Soviet Union: Consultation on Limiting International Transfers of
Conventional Weapons,” May 11, 1978, Documents on Disarmament, 1978, p. 286)
3 The joint communique´ was not attached.
