586 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I But, as with energy, we must and will do more. Last September the President established a Commission on World Hunger.14 The commission will report this summer on concrete proposals for additional efforts in dealing with the world food problem.15 In the meantime, we are moving ahead in several areas. We continue to believe that an effective International Wheat Agreement, with an expanded Food Aid Convention, would help stabilize world wheat prices and strengthen world food security.16 We are disappointed that after more than 2 years of effort, a workable international arrangement could not be achieved at last month’s negotiations.17 If prospects improve for reaching an accord, we are prepared to resume these negotiations. Under the existing Food Aid Convention, we are committed to providing a minimum of 1.9 million tons of food assistance annually. We will more than double that minimum commitment, regardless of whether a new Food Aid Convention is successfully negotiated. And we are strongly encouraging other current and potential donors to do the same. To assure that our food aid commitments can be met even during periods of tight supply, we are seeking to establish a special government-held wheat reserve which would add to food security for food-deficit countries.18 The agricultural research breakthroughs of the past decade and a half have been of enormous benefit to the developing world—with improved plant strains, better animal breeds, and more efficient farming techniques. Much of this research has concentrated on cereal crops and cattle. While continuing research in these areas, we must now devote greater attention to some of the traditional crops and animals raised by poor farmers on marginal lands and to less widely grown crops that 14 See footnote 6, Document 102. 15 The Presidential Commission on World Hunger prepared a paper on the hunger problem, which Linowitz sent to Vance and the President in June. The paper is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 257. 16 The International Grains Arrangement or Agreement (IGA), promulgated in 1967 during the Kennedy Round of the GATT and entered into force on July 1, 1968, consisted of two legal instruments: the Wheat Trade Convention (WTC) and the Food Aid Convention (FAC). The FAC committed signatories to providing a fixed amount of commodities (4.5 tons) to developing nations each year. In 1971 signatories negotiated a new umbrella agreement for the WTC and FAC—the International Wheat Agreement—and renewed it in 1974, 1975, and 1976. 17 See Victor Lusinchi, “Talks to Stabilize World Wheat Price Breaks Down,” The New York Times, February 15, 1979, p. D–5. Signatories eventually approved a new Food Aid Convention in London on March 6, 1980. 18 Documentation on the administration’s efforts to establish a wheat reserve is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
