390 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement He then said he thought he would call Secretary McElroy. I sug­ gested that Mr. McElroy would probably still be with Mr. Anderson and the President did indeed reach him in Mr. Anderson’s office. The main points in the conversation between the President and Mr. McElroy were: 1. The President indicated that he had been “dragooned” into approving the Defense programs as presented. He made it clear to Mr. McElroy that his approval was reluctant but was given only because he felt he had no choice. He continued to have, however, reservations about the numbers of ATLAS and TITAN missiles, wondering if it was necessary to program as many of both. He then said that he wanted Mr. McElroy to get together with Mr. Stans right away and subject to fur­ ther discussion the non-­programmed items which he had mentioned to me earlier. When he concluded the conversation the President instructed me to communicate the substance of it to General Persons with the request that General Persons reach Mr. Stans immediately and instruct him to get together with the Secretary of Defense. 4. I then presented for the President’s signature a letter to the Chairman of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee thanking him for the work of the Committee and staff. The President signed this letter. 5. I then reported briefly to the President with respect to the questions which had arisen in connection with the detection of underground testing as a result of the evaluation of HARDTACK II. I pointed out to the President that the findings were not now consid­ ered to be authoritative or conclusive but they seemed to indicate a need for a vastly greater number of inspections than had been con­ templated in the agreement of the experts at Geneva last summer. I reminded the President that this had important implications for the Gore proposal and that I expected in a few days, in any event, to have a coordinated government view with respect to the Gore proposal. I also reported to the President that Dr. Killian, with the approval and assistance of Mr. McCone, had established a high-­level committee of scientists to review and report on the matter of detection of under­ ground testing. ------------------- Immediately upon leaving the President’s office at 11:40, I got General Persons out of a meeting in his office and informed him as requested by the President. He immediately got Mr. Stans on the tele­ phone, with me on an extension, and I, at General Persons’ direction, reported to Mr. Stans the substance of the President’s conversation with Mr. McElroy. General Persons directed Mr. Stans to get in touch with Secretary Anderson to be brought up-­to-­date on his conversation
