National Security Policy  275
counterblows would be substantially greater. The USSR would be 
faced with the difficult decision either of permitting its major ally to 
suffer a humiliating defeat, or of taking the risks involved in the neces­
sary steps to prevent such a defeat. We estimate that the Communists 
would launch reciprocal nuclear strikes against selected US bases and 
naval forces. If ballistic missiles capable of reaching these targets had 
been deployed in China prior to the aggression, they would also be 
used.
B. Free World Reactions
42. Even though most Free World countries would recognize that 
Communist aggression had clearly occurred, this factor would be out­
weighed by concern throughout the Free World lest World War III 
result from the postulated US use of nuclear weapons. Most of our 
allies, including those in NATO, would probably think that protec­
tion of Taiwan was not of sufficient importance to warrant actions 
which they would consider to promote serious risk of general war, 
or even of major war in the Far East. Some of them would express 
some support of the US, but they would exert strong pressure for a 
ceasefire. Popular pressures on Allied governments for ending the 
fighting would increase, as would sentiment for restricting US ability 
to launch nuclear strikes from bases elsewhere in the world. The US 
would almost certainly be denied the use of its bases in Japan for the 
campaign.
43. The adverse reaction would tend to be modified to the degree 
that the US action brought the hostilities to an early successful end 
without heavy civilian casualties. Under these conditions, even some 
Asian countries would probably come to have greater confidence in the 
ability of the United States to defend them against Communist aggres­
sion. But the reaction in most countries would remain adverse.
VI.  THE CASE OF NORTH VIETNAMESE INVASION OF SOUTH 
VIETNAM AND LAOS
44. Assumptions. The Vietnamese Communists infiltrate the equiv­
alent of two regular divisions and as many irregulars into all the 
Indochinese states, and concentrate a dozen divisions of regular forces 
in North Vietnam. Sporadic clashes occur and there is a spate of assassi­
nations in Vietnam. President Diem proclaims a state of national emer­
gency and siege, invokes the SEATO treaty, and calls for aid from all 
members. There is no clear cut beginning of the invasion. US military 
action would include the selective use of nuclear weapons as appro­
priate, against the invading forces, targets in North Vietnam, and in 
adjacent areas of Communist China. The US, before moving, advises 
Communist China and the USSR of its intention to assist Vietnam mili­
tarily unless the invaders withdraw.
