Human Rights 439 ations overseas independent of the Secretary of State. It seems to me that the overseas functions envisaged in the Fascell-Fraser bill are best assigned to the International Communication Agency, which is already heavily involved in supporting our human rights policy through seminars, international visitor grants and informational programs. I also question the probity of the provisions of Section 7 (b) of the Bill, which would seem to authorize the Institute to establish branch offices in foreign countries. Such authorization, coupled with other provisions of the bill cited above, would appear to me to run counter to a long series of Presidential Directives vesting Chiefs of Mission with responsibility and authority to oversee the operations of all U.S. civilian agencies represented in the country to which they are accredited. 134. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake), the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), the Legal Adviser (Hansell), and the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Bennet) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, April 6, 1978 SUBJECT The Human Rights Institute Our suggested modifications to the Fascell-Fraser bill should aim at enhancing the proposed Institute’s independence of the Administration (and so limiting our responsibility for its choices of which human rights causes to take up) and at somewhat insulating the Institute itself from controversial political issues. We believe such changes would be in the interest of the Institute; the NGOs it supports; and the Administration. This could be accomplished by the following specific changes in the Fascell-Fraser draft: 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780087–0678. Unclassified. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the memorandum. Drafted by Jennone Walker. Kreisberg initialed the memorandum for Derian; Marks initialed for Hansell. Not found attached is a copy of the draft Fascell-Fraser bill.
