516
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
182.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, January 28, 1980, 2305Z
COUNTRY
Pakistan/Afghanistan
SUBJECT
Discussion among senior Pakistani military officers on how Pakistan military
should respond to question of hot pursuit [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
1. During a series of meetings at GHQ from 21 to 26 January 1980,
President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq and a group of senior Pakistani
military officers discussed how the Pakistani military should respond
if Soviet and Afghan forces cross into Pakistan in “hot pursuit” of
Afghan insurgent forces.
2. Martial Law Administration Chief of Staff and General Zia’s
personal staff officer, Major General K.M. Arif, led off the discussion
by suggesting that a meeting should be arranged between President
Zia and the Soviet Ambassador in Islamabad to assure the Soviets that
Pakistan will not aid the Afghan insurgents. If this assurance is not
made, the question of “hot pursuit” will soon arise and the Soviet and
Afghan forces will assuredly pursue the insurgent forces into Pakistan.
In such a situation, Pakistan will be the “loser”, according to Gen-
eral Arif.
3. Lt. General Mohammad Iqbal Khan basically agreed with Gen-
eral Arif’s assessment, adding that only if Pakistan receives adequate
military aid and assistance from outside sources should the Pak military
respond strongly to an incursion into Pak territory.2 In the absence of
strong support from the outside as well as adequate preparation by
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Box 6, Afghanistan: 1/27–28/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Printed from
a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 An intelligence information cable prepared in the CIA, January 29, reported infor-
mation [text and 1 line not declassified] regarding a special report on Pakistan’s defense
needs, prepared for Zia by the Pakistani Ambassador in Moscow. The report concluded
that Pakistan would be unable to “meet a sustained military attack from the Soviets in
the present state of readiness.” This shortcoming, according to the report, could only
be reversed by U.S. aid, and the “best possible” way to assure U.S. commitment to
Pakistani security would be the establishment of U.S. military bases in Pakistan. (Wash-
ington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–84–0056, Box 7, Pakistan)
