Uruguay  1181
The smaller of the two main segments of the Colorado party (List 
14) is more moderate in its economic and social views and has been con-
sistently friendly toward the United States for years, as exemplified by 
the utterances of its newspaper EL DIA. Even the List 15 segment of the 
Colorado party has been at least as cooperative in its attitude toward 
the United States since it left office on March 1, 1959 as it was during 
its own Administration. Evidently, the main body of List 15—­except for 
the extremist fringe—­appears as convinced as are the Blanco groups 
that cooperation with the United States and the Western World is the 
only natural and consistent line for Uruguay. And even the extremist 
fringe of List 15 is inclined to admire many aspects of the United States 
and its policies while likewise taking an interest in other methods of 
bettering the lot of the masses.
Therefore, the majority of Uruguayan citizens clearly support the 
attitude of the Uruguayan Administration toward the United States. 
(Perhaps the most important effect of the visit to Uruguay of President 
Eisenhower was to precipitate a display of attitudes which showed 
all Uruguayans vividly that the great majority of themselves approve 
of the United States and its policies. This, and the converse discovery 
that militant critics were a small minority, has tended to give many 
Uruguayans more courage and more conviction and more inclination 
to align themselves openly with the democratic ideology as symbolized 
by the United States.)
Successful United States efforts to clear away points of irritation 
in Uruguayan-U.S. relations, and to develop cooperative programs 
between the two countries have undoubtedly been a substantial factor 
in the improvement of relations, although the advent of the Blanco 
Administration on March 1, 1959 was undoubtedly the most import-
ant factor.
Importance to the United States of Good Relations with Uruguay
Although Uruguay does not stand out among other nations as 
conspicuously as three or four decades ago, it is still especially use-
ful to have Uruguayan support for United States policies and actions. 
Uruguay’s international reputation as a country of democratic, edu-
cated, and liberty-­loving people has given Uruguayan attitudes and 
views more weight at international meetings or in international public 
discussions than the attitudes and views of any other small country of 
the Western Hemisphere. Uruguay continues to be the most outstand-
ing small country in the Western Hemisphere in many respects: It has 
the most firmly-­entrenched democratic traditions and institutions, 
including a permanent Electoral Court to supervise all national elec-
tions. It has the most democratic form of Government in the American 
Republics in that there is the least opportunity for any one man to 
attain conspicuous authority. It has a practically completely graft-­free
