832
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
that it was about to expel 150 employees who have been convicted of
working with the Tudeh Party and that an equal number of question-
able Ministry employees outside of Tehran would be placed on indefi-
nite leave. The Iranian Army G–2, according to a reliable source,
claimed on October 22 to have arrested a total of 60 officers and 250
non-commissioned officers to date. The non-commissioned officers
have been summarily separated from the service, but the Army is in a
quandary over the disposition of the more important commissioned
detainees. G–2 is worried because the documentary proof of the com-
plicity of these officers in the Tudeh Party is now mysteriously missing
from the G–2 files, but the Army is very reluctant to release these men
to civilian life where they would be able to carry on Party activities
with perhaps greater facility. The Iranian G–2 stated recently that only
a small proportion of Party members and sympathizers in the Army are
known or have been apprehended.
There has been little change in the situation in the Provinces as re-
gards Tudeh activities. Newspaper reports from Abadan note that 300
persons were arrested there recently on the charge of writing anti-
Government slogans on walls in the city. Two hundred forty of these
have since been freed, but 30 soldiers and sailors and 18 civilians were
arrested and sent from Abadan to the prison at Falak-ol-Aflak. In this
connection, the Government in Tehran issued a circular in late October
to all provincial governors to notify them that any worker arrested by
provincial authorities and later dismissed as innocent must be rein-
stated in his job.
In Tabriz the Consulate has noted little Tudeh activity during the
past month. A few leaflets have been distributed, but on the whole it
appears that the Party there is preoccupied as elsewhere in the country
with its reorganization on a clandestine scale. The Consulate believes
that the Government’s security campaign has not been as extensive or
thorough in Azerbaijan as elsewhere in the country and thinks it prob-
able that important and sizeable Tudeh elements still exist in the
Province.
Anti-Tudeh Organizations
There are indications that within recent weeks the Shah and the
Government have been encouraging the growth of quasi-military
rightist parties to be used against the Tudeh in the event of further
street demonstrations. Among these are the Sumka, the Arya, and the
28 Mordad Society. These organizations, particularly the Sumka which
has been established longer than the other two, have all the trappings
of a falange or fascist type of group, even to their black-shirted uni-
forms. The Sumka demonstrated its strength and discipline on the oc-
casion of the recent Sports Festival, when approximately 500 of its
members impressed the crowds at the Stadium with a show of
