1412  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
under the Armistice Agreement; and (7) it makes no difference whether 
the men are released under the Agreed Announcement or under the 
Armistice Agreement, but until they are released the Communists will 
be in flagrant violation of both agreements.
Defense has sent out to the UNC instructions for a new meeting 
of the MAC on the subject of the missing personnel. We have already 
forwarded you a copy of the draft statement sent out for the use of the 
UNC. We do not know yet when the meeting will be held, but presum­
ably it will be in the near future. We will let you know as soon as the 
results of the meeting are received, so that you will be able to plan your 
next presentation to Wang on this issue. Of course, if the occasion arises 
in the meeting on the 12th, you should restate our position on the miss­
ing personnel item, but it will probably be wise to defer an extensive, 
detailed presentation until after the MAC meeting.
I would appreciate your comments on the approach to 
Hammarskjold, particularly with regard to the tie-­in with the Korean 
Armistice Agreement. We are of course consulting with the other peo­
ple involved here in Washington, both in NA and Defense, and the 
points outlined above are entirely tentative at this point.
Mr. Robertson has been away for nearly three weeks on leave and 
I have just returned to the office from two weeks off. Mr. Robertson 
will be back in time to participate in the preparation of the instructions 
for your next meeting. We do not anticipate any new departures. It is 
interesting to note the importance placed by the British on continuation 
of the talks as indicated by Ed’s letter of August 20.
With best regards,
Sincerely,
Ralph N. Clough
Enclosures:
1. Court Order
2. Copy of letter to Congressman Alger
3. FBIS re “Offer to U.S. Newsman Termed ‘Deception’.”
4. Press Release No. 460 dated August 13, 1957, “Personal Message 
from Acting Secretary to American Citizens Contemplating Travel to 
Communist China.”
5. Press Release No. 480 dated August 27, 1957—“Secretary Dulles’ 
News Conference of August 27, 1957”.
6. Two tickers dated Sept. 6 from Reuters
P. S. The News Division has just informed us that there is a ticker 
in advising that the Chinese Communists are allowing the students vis­
iting Peiping to see the American prisoners held in Communist China. 
I am enclosing a copy and we will let you know by telegram of any 
further significant developments in this regard.
