3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
443
The Shcharanskiy case was also a particular problem about which
something concrete needed to be done. Shcharanskiy was now among
the many “Prisoners of Zion” in the USSR. Gold commended the Secre-
tary for his and the President’s statements in the wake of Shcharan-
skiy’s trial. But, frankly, there was concern among the US Jewish com-
munity that these statements were meant to be the “fundamental
response” on this unfortunate case. The President’s decision to reject
the license application for sale of a computer to TASS (the Soviet News
Agency) was fine but Gold questioned whether enough spade work
had been done before the Dresser (drill bit) plant decision had been
taken.2 First the President had said the entire license was under review,
then “bang” it was approved. Gold understood that there was still
some controversy within the Government about the Dresser decision
and wondered whether it could still be held up.
The Secretary told Gold that the letter authorizing Dresser to sell
the equipment in question to the Soviets had already been transmitted.
Gold asked the Secretary what he could say about the present situ-
ation in the USSR. He was specifically interested in the “replists” (Note:
These are lists containing names of Soviet Jews and others who have
been trying unsuccessfully to emigrate from the USSR over long pe-
riods of time. The representation lists are compiled by the State Depart-
ment and presented periodically to the Soviets by high level US
officials.)
The Secretary asked about the ground rules for the meeting. He
said that he could be much more open and frank off-the-record and
would prefer it that way. Gold and his colleagues agreed and the con-
versation went off the record.
The Secretary said that he shared his visitors’ concern about where
Soviet Jewry was headed. He said that there was certainly enough hap-
pening to justify their fears. He was not sure, however, that these fears
would necessarily materialize in the manner or with the speed that
Gold had indicated.
As regarded Shcharanskiy, the Secretary said that in addition to
both his and the President’s speaking out on the matter, there had also
been a large number of times when the case had been raised with the
Soviets in other ways. The point was that Shcharanskiy had not been
forgotten. The Secretary did not want—even off the record—to say
2 In June 1978, Soviet trade organizations awarded Dresser Industries, Inc., two
major contracts totaling $180 million. One of these supplied the Soviets with equipment
and technology to be used in manufacturing bits for the drilling of oil and gas wells.
(“Company Roundup: Soviet Awards Dresser $180 Million Contracts,” The New York
Times, June 2, 1978, p. D5) In August, the Carter administration approved the export li-
cense for that sale. (Telegram 203480 to Moscow, August 11; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780329–0069)
