296 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 93. Letter From President Carter to West German Chancellor Schmidt1 Washington, December 30, 1977 Dear Helmut: I am grateful for your letter of December 22 and your expressions of support.2 I wholly share your view about the importance of a strong dollar. Like you, I was concerned in recent weeks about the possibility that disorder in the foreign exchange markets affecting the dollar, the deutschmark, and the yen might reach proportions that would adversely affect the world economy. These concerns led to my statement of December 21.3 It was designed to assure the world that the United States is deeply concerned about the value of the dollar, and is prepared to counter disorderly conditions that may appear in exchange markets. I hope that my statement has eliminated any misconception about U.S. policy. Minister Apel’s supporting comments were most welcome.4 The success of our diplomatic effort to dissuade OPEC from increasing the price of oil has also been helpful. But the primary tasks for the United States are still ahead. We must obtain legislation that will reduce our excessive dependence on imported oil. I will do all I can to persuade the Congress to take necessary action as soon as possible; I am confident the Congress will respond. The United States will meet the growth targets for 1977 that I stated at our meeting in London. The tax reductions and other economic policies that I will propose in my messages to the Congress in 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, Germany, Federal Republic of: Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, 5–12/77. No classification marking. Owen sent Carter a draft letter to Schmidt for his signature under cover of a December 28 memorandum in which he noted that the letter had been cleared with the Departments of State and Treasury. Owen commented: “This is a long reply, but the subject is important and complicated, and it is one in which the Chancellor has a deep interest. This reply is about the same length as the Chancellor’s incoming letter.” (Ibid.) The letter was sent for delivery in telegram Secto 13016 to Bonn, December 30. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840072–1258) 2 See Document 88. 3 See footnote 2, Document 86. 4 An article in the December 23 edition of The New York Times noted that Apel, “who has warned that the dollar’s recent slump could damage Europe’s economic recovery from the recession welcomed Mr. Carter’s new assurances about the dollar.” (Paul Lewis, “Dollar Up Sharply on Carter’s Stand,” The New York Times, December 23, 1977, p. D1)
