746  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
5. In view of these considerations and the additional reasons 
noted in the Annex hereto, it is recommended that you concur with the 
changes to paragraphs 10, 12, and 16 of NSC 5906 which have been sug­
gested by the Department of State. It is further recommended that you 
continue to support the majority proposal for revision of paragraph 3, 
NSC 5906, and support the version of paragraph 15, NSC 5906 pro­
posed in subparagraph d of the Annex hereto.
Annex to Appendix A
It is recommended that with respect to the following portions of 
NSC 5906, the Department of Defense adopt the position indicated 
below:
a. Page 3, Paragraph 3—Continue support of the majority proposal.
REASON: The majority proposal is a clear and complete descrip­
tion of the basic threat. Further, it emphasizes flexibility of the threat 
posed by the hostile Soviet and Chinese Communist regimes, and the 
dangers of gradual erosion of the Western position.
b. Page 10, Paragraph 10—Support the State-­AEC proposal.
REASON: There is currently no definition of general war in the 
policy. The definition the Department of State proposes to incorporate 
in paragraph 10 is realistic in a time of relative nuclear parity and will 
provide the necessary flexibility.
c. Page 11, Paragraph 12—Support State OCDM proposal.
REASON: It is essential that U.S. policy in an era of relative nuclear 
sufficiency be flexible and provide for the application in each situation 
of whatever forces and weapons or mix of weapons best serve U.S. inter­
ests. The United States must not be programmed into a one weapon 
military posture which will allow it to respond to limited aggression—
be that aggression large or small—only by initiating or threatening 
to initiate large scale nuclear warfare. The majority proposal with its 
“main” reliance upon nuclear weapons, regardless of the types of con­
flict, is inconsistent with the majority proposal on paragraph 3, which 
recognizes the possibility of serious differences in outlook and policy 
among Free World nations on the use of nuclear weapons. The present 
degree of U.S. reliance on nuclear weapons, particularly for meeting 
or deterring limited aggression, disturbs large segments of the Free 
World and impedes the fulfillment of our national policy objective of 
maintaining the cohesion of the Free World. This condition further sub­
stantiates the need for a more flexible national policy concerning the 
employment of nuclear weapons.
d. Page 12, Paragraph 15—Delete and substitute:
“15. So long as the Soviet leaders are uncertain of their ability 
to neutralize the U.S. nuclear retaliatory power, there is little reason
