3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
117
limitation this time, the negotiations were doomed to failure altogether.
There was still time to reconsider, and once again to talk. Brezhnev
would like to hope that in time, in particular by the time of the Secre-
tary’s forthcoming meeting with Gromyko in May, reflection might
produce a wiser course.
At the same time, Brezhnev noted with satisfaction that on some of
the specific issues discussed during the talks, as he saw it, some favor-
able prospects for further constructive discussions had emerged, and
he wanted to express the hope that such discussions would lead to
good results. He felt that objective possibilities were present, notably to
reach an understanding on joint action on the Middle East problem
where, as he understood it, both our countries were interested in seeing
a lasting settlement achieved. As he understood it, Secretary Vance,
too, had expressed the view that without inter-action (vzaimodeyst-
viye) between the US and the USSR there could not be an effective set-
tlement in the Middle East.
On the whole, Brezhnev thought that the talks had been useful in
terms of enabling the two sides to understand each other’s views, but
that was not enough. If we wanted to move further in developing our
relations and strengthening peace it was necessary to bring these views
closer together, and that required new efforts by politicians and dip-
lomats, as well as an appropriate psychological climate in the relations
between our two states. Brezhnev wanted to call upon the leadership of
the United States to promote such efforts and create an appropriate
climate.
Brezhnev wanted briefly to address two more questions to which
the Soviet side attached great importance, and which had already been
touched upon in the course of the current talks. The first question con-
cerned the transfer of strategic arms to third countries and non-
circumvention of agreements through third states or in any other
manner. This was not a new question. From the very outset the Soviet
side had assumed, and had said so to the US, that without including ap-
propriate provisions on non-transfer and non-circumvention in an
arms limitation agreement, that agreement would lose its meaning to a
significant degree. In the Soviet draft of the new agreement specific
wording had been proposed to deal with these matters. He wanted to
emphasize once again that the Soviet Union could not contemplate any
agreement not containing such provisions. The other question con-
cerned nuclear forward-based systems. Before Vladivostok and after
Vladivostok the Soviet side had stated clearly that it did not regard the
forward-based nuclear weapons issue as having been removed from
the agenda. Moreover, as he had already stated, the Soviet side had
proceeded from the premise that the US side would, at the time of sig-
nature of the new agreement, state that during the term of the new
