164  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
changing strategic balance appeared to erode US allies’ confidence in 
the strength and credibility of the US nuclear deterrent. The diminished 
credibility of the assured destruction doctrine to deter attacks against 
Europe led Secretary McNamara to press for a flexible response strat-
egy in NATO, eventually realized in MC 14/313 in 1967.
(S) Escalation Control. Pursuant to the widely expressed doubts 
concerning the continued effectiveness of the US nuclear deterrent, 
Secretary Laird initiated a study in 1970. The study initially included 
participants from the Department of Defense under the chairmanship 
of Dr. John Foster. Later, in 1973, it became the NSSM–169 study, and 
representatives from the Department of State, the Central Intelligence 
Agency, and the staff of the National Security Council were added 
(though they had been consulted informally earlier). The NSSM–169 
study group concluded: (1) the threat of a massive retaliatory response 
is credible as a deterrent only at the upper levels of potential strategic 
nuclear conflict, and (2) if deterrence fails by accident or miscalcula-
tion, counterforce attacks against Soviet nuclear threats offer little con-
fidence of holding damage to the US to a low level.
(U) The study group recommended that the US introduce limited 
nuclear employment options into its nuclear planning to enhance deter-
rence and to limit damage by controlling escalation. The National Com-
mand Authorities (NCA) would have greater flexibility in responding 
to a wider range of threats against the US and its allies and thereby 
increase the overall credibility of our deterrent and the possibility of 
limiting damage, if deterrence failed.
(U) The study group noted that under the previous nuclear employ-
ment policy (NSTAP), the means of limiting damage was viewed in 
military terms—­counterforce attacks against nuclear threats. The group 
concluded that in a major nuclear conflict with the Soviet Union, coun-
terforce strikes would not significantly reduce urban damage to the US 
and its allies. The US did not have the capabilities to effectively target 
the increasingly survivable Soviet nuclear forces, either preemptively 
or in retaliation. In addition, US strategic defense capabilities were lim-
ited. Air defense forces had been steadily declining and ballistic missile 
defense—­not feasible for area defense in any event—­was constrained 
by the ABM Treaty. Consequently, the group introduced the concept of 
limiting damage through the control of escalation. If deterrence failed, 
the objective would be to confine the conflict to the lowest level possi-
ble while attempting to coerce the enemy to terminate the war on terms 
acceptable to the US. Efforts to control escalation through the employ-
ment of limited nuclear options would show restraint. They would 
provide opportunities for the enemy to reconsider and to negotiate for 
13 See footnote 4, Document 29.
