Colombia  329
It stands to reason, however, that as a tiny beleaguered minority they 
tend to restrain themselves.
The America articles mentioned above have undoubtedly acer-
bated a feeling which is latent among Colombian Catholics that the 
real purpose behind our representations is to cram Protestantism down 
their throats. This is obviously not a rational reaction, as they would 
quickly realize if they considered that Protestant missionaries, churches 
and schools operate with far greater freedom in all of the other 20 Latin 
American republics than here and yet that the peoples of those coun-
tries are no less Catholic than are the Colombians. Moreover, the greater 
part of the food we give the Colombian people is distributed through 
the Catholic clergy. Nevertheless, the emotion does exist, and it would 
be foolish to disregard it. I believe that this is a valid reason why we 
should be more specific as to our objectives. If Protestant organizations 
claim that by doing this we are cutting the ground out from under their 
feet, it would seem to me the best evidence that we had been interven-
ing in this matter to an undue degree, thereby laying ourselves open to 
the very serious charge so often made by Colombian Catholics that we 
are disregarding Colombian sovereignty.
The Department should note that any further representations 
made by this Embassy which come to public knowledge and any favor-
able results which come from such representations will inevitably be 
considered by fervent Colombian Catholics as proving our desire to 
Protestantize Colombia. Given the emotional atmosphere in which this 
matter must inevitably be considered and the Latin temperament of 
Colombians, I believe that, confronted with such pressure, they will 
simply dig their toes in and not yield even at the expense of grave harm 
to Colombia. Any such situation would not only be directly prejudi-
cial to American interests in Colombia, it would also be very harmful 
to our basic objectives of promoting peace, stability and progress in 
Colombia. If, therefore, we are to pursue our representations on behalf 
of Protestants, it seems to me essential to clear the air somehow of this 
emotional Colombian belief. Moreover, we cannot get this message to 
the Colombian Catholic campesino—­and it is he whom Catholic priests 
have stirred up against Protestants—­without running the risk of some 
controversy. I do not mean by this that we should engage in polemics 
or make controversial statements. I do mean that we must ourselves 
adopt a moderate course and explain in moderate terms what it is and 
what facts lie behind it. We may not get anywhere by such a course; 
we may indeed do harm by it, but we are, in my opinion, less likely 
to do harm by this course than by pursuing our present one which, I 
believe, will simply amount to butting our heads against a stone wall. 
I doubt this will accomplish anything, and I fear it will prove seriously 
prejudicial to our relations with Colombia. We should not think that
