3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
897
transmit to Gromyko. If there were additional subjects which Gromyko
would like to bring to the Secretary’s attention in a similar manner he
would be glad to consider them.
4. The Secretary then summarized each of the issues orally and at
the end of his presentation handed Dobrynin the following non-paper:
Begin text:
Follow-up to September 25 meeting
Poland: We wish to reiterate the commitment of the U.S. Govern-
ment to exercise the greatest restraint in dealing with events in that
country. This continues to be our position, and we expect others to ex-
ercise similar restraint. We continue to believe that the Polish people
and Government must be left free to work out their problems without
outside interference. Outside military intervention from any quarter
would have incalculable consequences and would inevitably place in
jeopardy the entire framework of detente in Europe.
On arms control matters, we wish to reaffirm the U.S. commitment
to SALT II ratification and to the achievement of progress in CTB,
MBFR, CW, and ASAT. We would also like to raise two matters which
could have far reaching implications for the future of arms control ne-
gotiations in general and, in the near term, for SALT II ratification.
First, the inability to find a suitable means of resolving the concerns ex-
pressed by the United States regarding the April 1979 outbreak of an-
thrax in Sverdlovsk raises serious questions concerning Soviet compli-
ance with the Biological Weapons Convention. This is a problem that
will not simply go away with the passage of time. We continue to be-
lieve that the best way to resolve our legitimate concerns in this matter
would be to arrange for technical discussions among experts. Although
we prefer to resolve this matter on a bilateral basis, the U.S. Govern-
ment will also consider other ways to resolve our concerns in accord-
ance with the terms of the Biological Weapons Convention—including
possible multilateral action. Soviet cooperation in resolving this matter
would be a very positive step.
Second, our seismic data concerning the Soviet nuclear test of Sep-
tember 14 strongly suggest that the yield may have exceeded 150
kilotons. The President is concerned about this matter and has directed
that this be conveyed to the Soviet side. The U.S. attaches even higher
priority now to its proposal of last December for the establishment of
an ad hoc bilateral working group to exchange geophysical and geolog-
ical data for regions of active test sites on both sides. This would help to
reduce the uncertainties involved in estimating the yields of our respec-
tive nuclear tests. The U.S. attaches great importance to the statement
we made in 1976 concerning limiting our tests to 150 kilotons and
below. However, if the Soviet side is not responsive to our legitimate
security concerns in this area, it will be increasingly difficult to con-
