Eastern Europe Region
79
26.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
RP 78–10293
Washington, September 1978
Dissidence in Eastern Europe
Key Points
• The new wave of dissidence in Eastern Europe last year, although
now considerably diminished, shows no signs of vanishing. It has
been most intense in Poland and Czechoslovakia, somewhat less so in
Romania and East Germany. (U)
• The dissidents, few in number, are generally outspoken, noncon-
formist intellectuals. They have developed and sustained their causes
and have attracted some popular support, particularly in Poland, where
those who protest are relatively well organized and well led. (U)
• The East European regimes, however, have kept the domestic
impact of dissident activity within bounds. They have made it clear
that a price must be paid for active dissidence—loss of job, harassment,
physical abuse, police detention, or a jail sentence. There is no evidence
that the dissidents’ causes have been taken up by influential party or
government officials. (C)
• The formulation of regime policy toward dissent could, however,
become a serious source of discord within local leaderships, particularly
as a new generation of leaders displaces the old. The toleration of any
measure of dissent will remain a risky course, both for the national
leaders and for their relations with the USSR. (U)
[Omitted here is the Table of Contents.]
Dissidence in Eastern Europe
The Roots of Dissidence
The authoritarian systems in Eastern Europe invite dissent by con-
tinuing to place a wide range of human endeavor within a political
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job
80T00634A, Production Case Files (1978), Box 9, Folder 11, Dissidence in Eastern Europe
(A Research Paper), Secret/NF, Copies 23,51. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
The paper was prepared in the Eastern European Division, Office of Regional and Political
Analysis. Paragraph classification and handling restriction marks are handwritten. The
paper included country studies for Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Romania.
A note on the paper indicates: “Hungary and Bulgaria are omitted, since neither has
exhibited significant dissent. Hungary remains virtually untouched by dissidence” while
dissidence in Bulgaria “came to light only in March 1978 with the appearance of a
‘Declaration 1978’ which claimed to speak for dissent group, ABD. Whether such a group
exists or what ABD means is not known.”
