National Security Policy 1087 influence over the development of these papers if they are CIN Joint Staff, but they cannot do this if they are [illegible in the original] or any other agency. The third point is that I do not believe that all the details or routing, timing, subsidiary targets, ECM and those things should be included in a fixed rigid plan made by one commander for the forces of another commander. I felt that the Unified Commanders should have some leeway. 12. At one point General Twining said that the Navy would not let this thing work, that we would wreck it. Apparently the President has been told this a good many times by somebody. I remonstrated and said I thought that was an unfair accusation, but nobody picked it up much but me, although I think the President did perhaps not like it very much. The President talked on all sides of the problem at various times but obviously wanted to agree with Tom Gates as much as he possibly could. He said as far as who did it was concerned it didn’t seem to make any difference to him, the Joint Chiefs would be able to check it. 13. I reexplained the difficulties that the Joint Chiefs would have in checking it and emphasized that if the Joint Chiefs organization could not make the plan out in the first place they would have great difficulty in checking it, particularly if it had to be done in a hurry by the Chiefs themselves. 14. The President was not very much impressed with the NATO difficulties I pointed out because they did not have any capability now. He said of course they would want to get into the planning later on, but that can be done somehow no matter what system we adopted. I didn’t bear down on this point. 15. I emphasized many times that I felt that Mr. Gates thought there would be a short target list and an operational plan which would be easily followed, but I suspected something considerably different from this and I thought it was very important that we see what came out of it before we buy it. We went [illegible in the original] this ground over and over and over again. Most of my stuff was in the original paper I wrote, repeating it. 16. Tom got awfully close to accusing me of disloyalty. He didn’t quite say it. I don’t think he mentioned it. Although I’m not so sure now because this happens too often. Not quite disloyalty, it isn’t that, it’s just that I’m not a member of the team. The Navy is always the shouter. Nate made no bones about it. He said: Mr. President, unless we make a decision to do this now, an irrevocable decision, the Navy will wreck it. He said if you delay this I am sure Tommy White will come over here and not like it at all. Now the President took him apart on that a little
