In calling to order the fifth meeting of the Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, the chairman announced that they were practically agreed on the preamble and the first part of the body of the resolution but that there was still a reservation on his part regarding the length of time as to notification and that the Japanese proviso submitted at the last meeting did not have the approval of the Chinese Delegation. After reading the Japanese proviso in an amended form, proposed by the Chinese Delegation (page 1 of Minutes of March 18, 1926), the chairman reviewed the course of the discussion at the last meeting and at some of the other meetings of the subcommittee. In concluding his review the chairman expressed the earnest hope that they could come to some sort of conclusion on that day. Mr. Hioki said that he saw no reason why the Japanese proviso should be amended as he understood that it had been agreed upon by all of the members of the subcommittee except the Chinese at the last meeting. He said also that he must frankly confess that he then saw greater need of adopting the proviso than prevailed at the last meeting. He saw difficulties in fixing the percentage of the allocation of the sum and, if this question should be settled, it would then follow that the question of the custodian banks would have to be brought up again. For these reasons he thought it would be better to drop the amendment and agree to the original proviso which was almost approved by the sub-committee at its last meeting. Mr. Hioki and Count de Martel referred to certain loan negotiations which had created suspicion and which had made it more necessary than ever to guard against the dissipation of the funds. In the course of the discussion Colonel Peel said that he rather preferred the original American draft on this subject but Mr. Hioki said that he was not prepared to accept that draft, whereupon Mr. Strawn said that at the last meeting he had, on behalf of the American Delegation, agreed to accept the Japanese draft, and that he did not consider it prejudicial in any way to the rights of the Chinese Government. The chairman again expressed the willingness of the Chinese Delegation to accept the American draft with perhaps the change of a word or two but they could not accept the Japanese proviso. Count de Martel reiterated his support of the Japanese draft but the chairman was unwilling to give his assent and he suggested that the Chinese, Japanese and American drafts should be submitted to the full committee. Mr. Strawn, Colonel Peel and Count de Martel considered that this would not be a procedure which would expedite matters and Mr.
