German Democratic Republic
401
which protects our interest with regard to Berlin. That language reads
as follows: “This agreement applies to all areas for which the Govern-
ments of the U.S. and GDR exercise postal responsibilities.”
4. On May 4 GDR Embassy gave us a note agreeing to our proposal
of April 16 for the reciprocal exemption of taxes on diplomatic proper-
ties.3 In this regard Nier was told by Goodby that we would expect
favorable treatment of requests that will be forthcoming through our
Embassy for the conversion of our leases in East Berlin from short-
term to long-term. FYI: GDR note misquoted U.S. note April 16 replac-
ing “U.S. Embassy to the GDR” with “U.S. Embassy in the GDR.” Note
was returned to GDR Embassy May 5 by Department officer who
pointed out “grammatical” error and asked that note be resubmitted
by May 7 with proper quotation of U.S. note. We have every expectation
that this will be done. End FYI.
5. Goodby told Nier that USG is now prepared to discuss a scien-
tific-cultural agreement with the GDR and gave him a copy of our
agreement with Bulgaria as our preferred model. Nier explained that
GDR prefers separate agreements but agreed to examine US model
which consists of an umbrella agreement and a detailed biennial imple-
mentation agreement. Nier was told that we would be prepared for
detailed discussion in the early fall.
6. Nier was also told that we are now prepared to approve the
GDR pending request for new trade offices in New York upon the
signature of the Consular Convention Agreement. It was proposed
that, if Consular Convention can be signed between now and May 17,
that announcement of this step could be made at the time of Beil’s visit.
The offices consist of two foreign trade enterprise offices (Unitechna,
Jenoptik) and a branch of the GDR Embassy Commercial Section. With
regard to the latter, Nier was told that, in accordance with the agreed
minute of 1974, we would expect that we would be given the option
to open an office of our own at a time and place of our choosing. Nier
did not object.
7. Nier was presented with our Double Taxation and Agricultural
Agreement with Hungary as models for such agreements with the
GDR. Nier undertook to provide us with models of the types of ship-
ping, health, legal assistance and customs agreements the GDR would
like to sign with the U.S. He was told that we would be unable to reply
definitively on a shipping agreement until such time as an overall
maritime policy study being conducted by a White House Task Force
is completed but was assured that the GDR’s views should be factored
into that study when received. Nier said that the GDR had proposed
3 See footnote 3, Document 127.
