3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1980 905 lemics for the sake of polemics. But we, understandably, cannot silently pass over statements and actions of the US side with which we cannot agree. —We would like in this connection to point out the inappropriateness of the US side’s raising questions regarding the situation in Poland. Such questions in general cannot be subject of discussion between the USSR and the USA. However, since the Secretary of State did touch upon this question, we cannot help noting that all sorts of statements, including those made at the official level, as well as certain actions by the US side, cannot be regarded in any other way but as being directed at interference in the affairs of a sovereign state, the Polish People’s Republic. We, together with the Polish leadership, resolutely condemn such a line of conduct. —Recently, on many occasions including the meeting of A.A. Gromyko with the Secretary of State in New York we have assessed the present unconstructive policy of the USA on questions of arms limitation. Unfortunately, the considerations put forward by the Secretary of State introduce nothing new in this respect. The position held by the USA is, in fact, impeding progress toward the solution of these questions; Washington at the same time continues in practice to increase the arms race. —We expressed in an explicit and clear-cut manner our sharply negative attitude toward the so called “new nuclear strategy” of the USA. This attitude remains as it was stated by L.I. Brezhnev in his recent speech in Alma-Ata.3 It was also set forth during the conversation with the Secretary of State in New York. We will follow carefully the activities of the United States in this regard. —Neither is any useful purpose served by attempts to put doubt, without any grounds whatsoever, [to?] the conscientious implementation by the Soviet Union of its obligations under the agreements and understandings in force in the field of arms limitation and disarmament. We are convinced that such a course, which is in fact aimed at disrupting what we succeeded in achieving in this area, does not correspond to the interests of the United States itself. —We reaffirm our position on the question regarding an outbreak of anthrax in the area of Sverdlovsk and on the observance of the agreed yield threshold of 150 kilotons during the conduct of underground nuclear explosions. 3 For the text of Brezhnev’s August 30 speech in Alma-Ata, see The Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXXII, no. 35, October 1, 1980, pp. 1–5.
