3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
905
lemics for the sake of polemics. But we, understandably, cannot silently
pass over statements and actions of the US side with which we cannot
agree.
—We would like in this connection to point out the inappropri-
ateness of the US side’s raising questions regarding the situation in Po-
land. Such questions in general cannot be subject of discussion between
the USSR and the USA.
However, since the Secretary of State did touch upon this question,
we cannot help noting that all sorts of statements, including those
made at the official level, as well as certain actions by the US side,
cannot be regarded in any other way but as being directed at interfer-
ence in the affairs of a sovereign state, the Polish People’s Republic. We,
together with the Polish leadership, resolutely condemn such a line of
conduct.
—Recently, on many occasions including the meeting of A.A. Gro-
myko with the Secretary of State in New York we have assessed the
present unconstructive policy of the USA on questions of arms limita-
tion. Unfortunately, the considerations put forward by the Secretary of
State introduce nothing new in this respect. The position held by the
USA is, in fact, impeding progress toward the solution of these ques-
tions; Washington at the same time continues in practice to increase the
arms race.
—We expressed in an explicit and clear-cut manner our sharply
negative attitude toward the so called “new nuclear strategy” of the
USA. This attitude remains as it was stated by L.I. Brezhnev in his re-
cent speech in Alma-Ata.3 It was also set forth during the conversation
with the Secretary of State in New York. We will follow carefully the ac-
tivities of the United States in this regard.
—Neither is any useful purpose served by attempts to put doubt,
without any grounds whatsoever, [to?] the conscientious implementa-
tion by the Soviet Union of its obligations under the agreements and
understandings in force in the field of arms limitation and disarma-
ment. We are convinced that such a course, which is in fact aimed at
disrupting what we succeeded in achieving in this area, does not corre-
spond to the interests of the United States itself.
—We reaffirm our position on the question regarding an outbreak
of anthrax in the area of Sverdlovsk and on the observance of the
agreed yield threshold of 150 kilotons during the conduct of under-
ground nuclear explosions.
3 For the text of Brezhnev’s August 30 speech in Alma-Ata, see The Current Digest of
the Soviet Press, vol. XXXII, no. 35, October 1, 1980, pp. 1–5.
