940 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 8. Paragraph 18. Recommend paragraph be amended (changes indicated in usual manner): “18. If legislation is proposed which would, through Legislation for purchase loan guarantees, which would encourage and facilitate the acquisition by U.S. certificated air carriers of uncompromised cargo air­ craft produced by U.S. manufacturers, it should contain provisions to ensure the immediate availability of these cargo aircraft to meet mili­ tary and mobilization requirements.” REASON: The changed wording will provide a positive statement and support paragraph 10–­b as written. 228. Briefing Note for the January 7 NSC Meeting1 Washington, January 7, 1960 CARGO AIR LIFT (NSC 5919) Our first item this morning, Mr. President, is a draft policy paper on the development of cargo air lift. Last August I was asked to put this subject, which was then at issue between various agencies (notably Defense and FAA), through the NSC machinery and in that way bring it to you for resolution. The paper before you is the product of a number of Planning Board meet­ ings in which Justice, Commerce and FAA participated. Today we have with us for this item the Secretary of Commerce, General Quesada and Chairman Durfee of the CAB. However, before we go into this paper, the Defense Department has recently submitted to the President a study entitled “The Role of MATS in Peace and War” containing, among other things, a series of recommen­ dations, which, I understand, are not inconsistent with the Defense posi­ tion in the paper before us, with one possible exception which has to do with whether the Department of Defense will be restricted to the use of certificated air carriers for cargo air lift purposes. The Defense Department report, which has been given no distribution up to this time, is not up for consideration by the Council or decision by the President today. However, I believe it will be useful for the Council to know the report’s recommendations before it considers the draft policy paper. Therefore, I 1 Source: Cargo air lift (NSC 5919). Confidential. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whit­ man File, NSC Records.
