830 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII begun a few weeks earlier. Since December, assassinations have become commonplace, some estimate 10 to 15 every day, and there have been a number of significant civil disturbances. The most serious was a sixday general strike in late February which involved serious rioting and forced the Soviets to move troops into the city. Student demonstrations in May and June were less serious, and the Soviets left most of the responsibility for putting them down to Afghan police and soldiers. Adding to the unsettled conditions in the city is the fighting between the two factions of the ruling party, and a fair proportion of the incidents are probably attributable to their feuding, rather than to the insurgents. Vardak Except for a few main towns and the Kabul-Qandahar road, almost all of Vardak province is under control of the insurgents. Soviet operations there seem to be increasing, probably both to ensure control of the road and to weaken the threat to Kabul. Insurgents from the province almost certainly were involved in the fighting around Kabul in June. In February, the US Embassy acquired far more detailed information about the insurgency in Vardak than has been available for any other province. Insurgent leaders—calling themselves governors— were in complete control there; the population supported the fight against the Soviets as a holy war. The Soviet invasion had ended the longstanding rivalry between the Hazaras in the west and the Pathans in the east. There was, however, apparently little thought of cooperation with insurgents elsewhere in the country, despite a belief that all Afghans would rise and drive out the invaders. Arms and ammunition were obtained from Pakistan by Vardakis dispatched to the tribal gun markets. Afghan exile organizations evidently did little more than act as middlemen in the sales. Lowgar Insurgents in Lowgar province have been able to block roads there, and have probably contributed to forces operating in Kabul province. Aside from some road clearing operations—designed to keep open communications with Gardez in Paktia province—there has been little significant fighting there. Nangarhar Prior to the Soviet invasion, insurgency in Nangarhar was limited primarily to the northern and southern fringes of the province, where fighting in Konar, Laghman, and Paktia provinces spilled over. The situation was growing more critical late last year, however, with insurgents for the first time able to block traffic on the road from Kabul to the Khyber Pass for extended periods. (The main insurgent activity
