Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 369 Burt asked whether this would be sufficient to remove SLCMs from START. Karpov said no. Burt noted that he had previously explained the benefits of non-­ binding declarations. Could the Soviet side see circumstances, perhaps as part of a broader package, in which it could consider such non-­ binding declarations? Karpov asked whether declarations, if non-­binding, would restrict activities in any way. If not, what was their sense? Ambassador Rowny asked whether they had to be binding. Karpov replied “naturally.” He didn’t see non-­binding declarations as part of any parcel. Rowny asked whether there must be verification. Karpov said yes. Burt asked what in the Soviet approach was new. Karpov replied that in December 1987 both sides agreed to solve the SLCM problem, but as part of the treaty. Now a solution was possible outside the text of the treaty. Burt, turning to ALCMs, noted that the Secretary had recognized the Soviet move on conventional bombers. Karpov interrupted to say that the Secretary had put it immediately into his pocket. Burt continued that the two principal ALCM issues were counting and range. He wondered how the Soviet side expected to solve the ALCM issue when it was asking the U.S. to accept its position on both. Karpov claimed that at Reykjavik it had been agreed that 600 kilometers was the dividing line between short and long-­range air-­ to-­surface missiles. Only on that condition had there been agreement on the rule for counting gravity bombs and SRAMs. If the range were changed, this would reopen the bomber counting rule. Ambassador Nazarkin asked for a formal reaction to the new Soviet idea of counting ALCM bombers “as actually equipped.”4 Ambassador Robinson said that OSI was designed to ensure that the energy of the explosion was properly coupled to the ground and that there was no decoupling that would provide artificially low seismic readings. Karpov said that, if OSI above 35 kt was meant to guard against decoupling, weren’t seismic methods also needed to check this? Robinson explained that there would be three regimes. Below 35 kt, the sides would rely on NTM, primarily seismic. Above 35, there 4 One page is missing from the copy on file.
