3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
663
tance to world peace. As he had said in his speech at the United Na-
tions, this was a matter of great fundamental importance. Therefore, it
would be wrong, and indeed unthinkable, to say that we had dreamed
up something when it could only damage relations between us and
damage the prospects of the SALT treaty.
Now the Secretary wanted to turn to how we had come upon this
problem. Information we had received recently, during early July and
in August, tending to indicate that there was in fact a combat unit lo-
cated in Cuba, namely a Soviet combat brigade. When the information
we had received had led us to this conclusion, we had said that we
must check that conclusion, and it had led us to search further. This
was an extremely serious matter and, therefore, we had to be sure that
we were right in our conclusion before raising it with the Soviet Union.
For this reason, we took additional steps to ascertain the actual state of
affairs, and on August 20 and August 23 our conclusion had been
reached on the basis of the evidence we had, that this was indeed a
combat brigade. Further information had indicated that this unit was
not now involved in the training of Cuban forces. Consequently, we
were faced with a very serious situation. The fact that there was a
combat unit and that, from all the information we had, there was no ev-
idence that this unit was being used as a training unit with Cubans, pre-
sented us with an obvious and very difficult problem which we could
not keep secret and which then became a matter of public knowledge. It
was the characteristics of the unit stationed in Santiago de las Vegas,
which we have recently identified, that led us to conclude that it was a
combat unit.
In trying to resolve this situation, and so as to prevent a serious de-
terioration in the relations between our two countries and prevent im-
periling the SALT treaty, we had tried to see if there was a practical
way to resolve this matter that would be acceptable to both sides. We
concluded that a practical way would be to ask that the Soviet Union
take certain unilateral steps consistent with its statement that this was a
training unit to remove the elements that had led us to our conclusion.
We had spelled out the following steps:
1. Eliminate brigade headquarters organization.
2. Remove from the Soviet brigade equipment and armament
which gives a combat capability.
3. Discontinue Soviet unit field exercises, including combined
arms exercises.
The Secretary wanted to point out further that a positive Soviet re-
sponse to these suggestions would not need to be embodied in a formal
agreement between us. We would not challenge any portrayal of such
steps as unilateral actions. As long as these steps are taken and remain
in effect, we would state that these steps met our concerns and that this
