Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
769
freedom requires not only a strong military fist but also an extended
hand.
Human Rights
Finally, let me emphasize a fourth element of a foreign policy of
freedom: support for human rights.
Throughout a long history of struggle and success, the trade union
movement in general, and the steelworkers in particular, have sup-
ported that cause.
Today, as hundreds of thousands of refugees flee from assaults on
human rights around the world, the steelworkers once again are
showing their concern. Your effort on behalf of the AFL–CIO Cam-
bodia Crisis Campaign, which Lloyd McBride unveiled this week, is a
dramatic testament to the power of this great union for good. And it is
an eloquent expression of your support for human rights.
Human rights has been a special concern of this Administration.
We stand for the right of people to be free of torture and repres-
sion, to choose their leaders, to participate in the decisions that affect
their daily lives, to speak and write and travel freely.
There are limits on our capacity to influence affairs in other coun-
tries. And we must seek a practical approach that builds the long-term
strength of our friends. But the fact that there are obstacles and risks
should not keep us from holding up the banner of human rights—and
it will not.
Ultimately, our firm support for human rights, for human free-
dom, will help build a more stable world. It will help remove the causes
of violent and convulsive change.
There is, in various places in the world, a strong tide for human
rights. We see the evidence for this in Spain, in Greece, in Portugal, in
Ghana, in Nigeria, in Ecuador and in Peru, in other nations which have
recently embraced and strengthened democracy. America cannot claim
sole credit for these developments. But we can take pride that we have
encouraged abroad the freedoms we enjoy at home, for they run hand
in hand.
I have sketched the outlines of the foreign policy of freedom: a
strong emphasis on security, a vigorous quest for peace, concrete de-
velopment for nations and peoples, and practical support for human
rights. This has been our policy for the past 4 years. And despite the dif-
ficulties, despite limits to our influence, it is working.
We must not succumb to the voices which say we should now turn
back. These voices are pessimistic about the possibilities of freedom in
the world. They see change abroad, for the most part, as dangerous for
America. They are hostile to it. We see in change not only threats to be
met but opportunities to be seized.
