424
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and has Brzezinski’s support (see attachment).3 It is being referred to
on the Hill as being a “motherhood” Bill.) Hearings tentatively are
scheduled in the House for April 5 and 6.4 The Bill is also receiving sub-
stantial support from the NGO community including church groups,
the International Commission of Jurists, Freedom House, and the Inter-
national League for Human Rights.
The authors of the legislation have emphasized the autonomy and
independence of the Institute. It will be governed by a seven-member
board of directors appointed by the President with the advice and con-
sent of the Senate. It would have a staff of no more than twenty-five
members. The board members are to be chosen from among “indi-
viduals in private life with a demonstrated concern for, and experience
in matters pertaining to, human rights and fundamental freedoms.” No
more than four directors may be in the same political party. The term
would be for six years with appointments staggered every two years.
An executive director selected by the board would be the day-to-day
manager.
The funding of the Institute would be through annual appropria-
tions with a $5 million authorization for FY ’79. It would be a non-profit
corporation able to accept private bequests as well.
The Bill attempts to ensure that the Institute would be aware of
U.S. foreign policy concerns while avoiding the suspicion that it is an
instrument of U.S. policy.
The Bill states “the Secretary of State shall keep the Institute in-
formed on U.S. foreign policy as it relates to activities of the Institute.
The Institute shall give consideration to the foreign policy of the U.S. in
carrying out this act but shall not be subject to the direction of the Secre-
tary of State in carrying out its responsibilities under this Act.”
Possible amendments to this section could range from having the
Secretary’s designee sitting as an ex-officio member of the board, or, as
in the case of the Inter-American Foundation, with voting powers.
More acceptable to the authors might be a provision which stated that
the board should maintain liaison with the Department and invite the
Secretary’s designee to participate in its deliberations.
The Institute’s functions according to the legislation are to provide
assistance to human rights NGO’s “by means consistent with the UN
3 Attached but not printed. In the March 13 letter to Fraser, Brzezinski wrote: “I
have learned of your sponsorship along with others of H.R. 11326 which would create an
Institute for Human Rights. I heartily support you and the other sponsors in that effort. I
believe that such an institute will significantly contribute on a global basis to the im-
provement of respect for human rights.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P780066–1963)
4 The hearings began on April 13. See Document 135.
