United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 67 development corporation at this time. The question of whether it may later be decided by the Central Americans to set up a separate development institution to borrow money and make loans on its own account is not foreclosed at this time. The only issue is whether we should make a commitment to finance through the DLF, sound projects totaling $15 million per country or whether we should say orally something like this: “The DLF does not ear-mark its funds and the availability of its funds is dependent on annual appropriations by the Congress. So official commitment can therefore be made. However the Department will recommend to the DLF Board that sound projects facilitating transition and economic development in a new trading community based upon GATT principles will be approved up to a level of $15 million per country. This figure should not be considered as a calling if sound projects are presented in excess of that amount. The speaker therefore suggests it would be prudent for Central American planning to take into account this attitude of the Department of State.” If it is possible for the DLF to make a commitment of the kind which Mr. Rubottom suggests, this would be frosting on the cake. If not, I believe I could sell the alternative approach to Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala which currently appear to be the possibilities. Attachment Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State2 Washington, August 4, 1959. SUBJECT Central American Common Market Discussions In recent months, the United States Government has left the impression throughout Central America that it would like to see the countries in this area form a real common market and that the United 2 Confidential. Drafted by Turkel and John L. Gawf, Officer in Charge of El Salvadoran and Honduran Affairs, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs.
