Human Rights jective of securing a reexamination by the Special Rapporteur of his omission of para. 30.3 7. Political climate: A mood of political confrontation took root early in the session as the Arab group ran rough-shod over the procedures during the first day of debate on the question of the occupied territories by pushing to a vote a telegram directed against the Government of Israel. This was in spite of objections by Western and even some Latin delegates that they had not had time to consider the text. In the third week of the session as the confidential meetings on the particular countries got under way, political hostilities greatly increased. The Latin group felt suddenly betrayed and became temporarily traumatized at what they considered the failure of other groups, particularly the African group, to implement the same standards of objectivity and universality which certain Latin delegations were trying to employ. The Ambassador of Colombia openly expressed his disgust with the African delegation and the socialist bloc countries for protecting their own region and their own political self-interests, thereby preventing strong action in the case of Ethiopia, all the while pretending to take an objective stand and support firm action against Paraguay and Uruguay. In response to what he considered the double-standard, the Colombian Ambassador announced that he would no longer serve as a member of working group on communications. At the same time, the Cubans were tabling drafts for public debate on the case of Nicaragua and Guatemala, further convincing the Latins that they were the only vulnerable group for attack. Some Latins complained to us that the African group lines up with the socialist bloc for self protection against Western demands for investigation of cases such as Ethiopia while the Latins are left with no protector. However, the Latins, led by Panama, Colombia and Peru, eventually became more active and achieved what they considered more balanced results on Latin country cases. The case of Argentina is somewhat different as they continue to succeed in preventing action on violations, by seeking the help of the most hardline, non-aligned countries. The Argentine counter-amendments on disappeared persons included Algeria, Iraq, Syria and Yugoslavia as co-sponsors. 8. The highly politicized atmosphere of this session resulted in the Commission moving away from exclusive consideration of Chile,
