Human Rights
579
jective of securing a reexamination by the Special Rapporteur of his
omission of para. 30.3
7. Political climate: A mood of political confrontation took root
early in the session as the Arab group ran rough-shod over the proce-
dures during the first day of debate on the question of the occupied ter-
ritories by pushing to a vote a telegram directed against the Govern-
ment of Israel. This was in spite of objections by Western and even
some Latin delegates that they had not had time to consider the text. In
the third week of the session as the confidential meetings on the partic-
ular countries got under way, political hostilities greatly increased. The
Latin group felt suddenly betrayed and became temporarily trauma-
tized at what they considered the failure of other groups, particularly
the African group, to implement the same standards of objectivity and
universality which certain Latin delegations were trying to employ.
The Ambassador of Colombia openly expressed his disgust with the
African delegation and the socialist bloc countries for protecting their
own region and their own political self-interests, thereby preventing
strong action in the case of Ethiopia, all the while pretending to take an
objective stand and support firm action against Paraguay and Uru-
guay. In response to what he considered the double-standard, the Co-
lombian Ambassador announced that he would no longer serve as a
member of working group on communications. At the same time, the
Cubans were tabling drafts for public debate on the case of Nicaragua
and Guatemala, further convincing the Latins that they were the only
vulnerable group for attack. Some Latins complained to us that the Af-
rican group lines up with the socialist bloc for self protection against
Western demands for investigation of cases such as Ethiopia while the
Latins are left with no protector. However, the Latins, led by Panama,
Colombia and Peru, eventually became more active and achieved what
they considered more balanced results on Latin country cases. The case
of Argentina is somewhat different as they continue to succeed in pre-
venting action on violations, by seeking the help of the most hardline,
non-aligned countries. The Argentine counter-amendments on disap-
peared persons included Algeria, Iraq, Syria and Yugoslavia as
co-sponsors.
8. The highly politicized atmosphere of this session resulted in the
Commission moving away from exclusive consideration of Chile,
3 In telegram 5694 from Geneva, April 3, the Mission reported that Van Boven had
sent a letter to the Special Rapporteur, asking him to reinsert the text of paragraph 30.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790153–0262) Telegram 9134
from Geneva, May 30, noted that Van Boven had yet to receive any response from the
Special Rapporteur, despite the fact that Van Boven had sent two additional letters re-
questing that the Rapporteur review the Genocide Report. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790247–1117)
