September 18–December 16, 1978 447 132. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, November 12, 1978 SUBJECT Telephone Conversation between President Carter and President Sadat, November 12, 1978 President Carter: I am going to send you a personal message2 later on today which will have the most recent documents on the Israeli- Egyptian peace treaty and will be delivered to you by Ambassador Eilts. I think the negotiations have gone as far as we can go. As you know, I have put in literally hundreds of hours into this matter. Secretary Vance has almost abandoned his other duties. We have worked out an agreement which is fair and which is balanced. I don’t think it’s possible to get any substantial changes made in it by the Israelis or by you. I would like your assurance in backing me in my final decisions. I am going to call Prime Minister Begin3 after I talk to you. Tonight Secretary Vance will be going to New York to meet with Begin4 and to deliver to him the same draft treaty and the same documents. My belief is that the outcome of the entire negotiations for peace will depend upon your willingness and Prime Minister Begin’s willingness to accept the present draft. President Sadat: When will I receive the documents from Ambassador Eilts? President Carter: We will get the documents to Ambassador Eilts this afternoon, Washington time. President Sadat: I will study it very carefully. President Carter: I understand that. If there are a few things that you still do not like, I would like for you to accept the document as it is rather than to demand additional changes. [Missing text?] President Carter: Yes, of course, I have. 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 14, Middle East—Negotiations: (9/77–12/78). Secret. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Sadat from 12:07 p.m. to 12:42 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) Carter’s handwritten notes related to the conversation are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, Egypt, 11/77–11/81. 2 See Document 136. 3 See Document 133. 4 See Document 134.
