Comprehensive Test Ban
621
252.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, July 2, 1980, 10:00–11:30 a.m.
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on CTB
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Deputy Secretary Warren
Director Ralph Earle
Christopher
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Reginald Bartholomew, Director
Energy
Bureau of Politico-Military
Under Secretary Worth Bateman
Affairs
Julio Torres, Special Assistant
Defense
OSTP
Walter Slocombe, Deputy Under
Director Frank Press
Secretary for Policy Planning
John Marcum, Senior Policy
JCS
Analyst
General David Jones
White House
Lt. General John Pustay
Zbigniew Brzezinski
DCI
David Aaron
[name not declassified] Deputy
NSC
Director for Scientific
General Jasper Welch
Weapons Research
Benjamin Huberman
At the SCC Meeting on CTB today, a consensus was reached on
four issues which do not involve significant changes in your current in-
structions but taken together will move us into a more defensible posi-
tion for the upcoming CD and NPT Review Conferences. They will also
enable us to seek some limited progress on verification consistent with
your post-Afghanistan decision that CTB should continue at a slow
pace. (C)
The first issue involved a long-standing dispute with JCS over
whether the US should table a draft preamble text as have the UK and
Soviets referring to the objective of halting testing “for all time” as well
as other objectives from preambles of treaties to which we are party.
The Chiefs were concerned that this could be inconsistent with the
limited-duration treaty we are pursuing. We pointed out that our
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 114, SCC
325, CTB, 7/2/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
Brzezinski forwarded the Summary to Carter under cover of a July 3 memorandum.
(Ibid.) The Department of Defense’s version of the meeting is in Memorandum For the
Record, July 3; Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
CTB: Negotiation Issues 1979.
