Second. As I advanced to you in previous telegrams, precisely
with the purpose of avoiding misunderstandings at the outset of
the good offices, our sacrifices could not go beyond the cession of
the Department of Tacna, Chile to keep the Department of Arica
with the entire route of the Railroad. To abandon it to Peru, or to
Bolivia, as a whole or in part, is beyond any possible concession
from our part, because the Department of Arica is Chilean in its
population and in its interests of every type, and its transfer to a
different sovereignty would be an unjustice to our nationals and a
source of difficulties for the acquirer, and a sure and permanent
cause of conflicts between these countries. It does not seem
judicious to give origin to such a state of affairs when what we
are really looking for is the strengthening of peace and good
relations.
Third. You must insist in the disadvantages of having Bolivia
made a Party to this transaction, as we have been pointing out
with entire sincerity and in a desire to avoid the complications
which will surely arise. This is a question between Chile and Peru
and its solution, by means of a compromise, would be simple on
the proposed basis of the division of the territory. I think it is
possible for me to anticipate the impression that the definitive
ratification of the agreement would find no obstacle and could,
therefor, be rapidly attained, thus bringing to an almost immediate
close this longstanding and dangerous controversy.
Neither one of the two countries has any question pending with
Bolivia. This nation has resuscitated now an aspiration or an
interest which was freely abandoned on her own initiative, in the
Treaty of 1904.94 She wishes us to satisfy it and far from
opposing her desires by quoting that comparatively recent Treaty,
we would be ready to meet them taking into consideration our
own interests, among which the paramount one is that of good
and cordial neighbourly relations. Once we have settled with
Peru, on terms which will insure us peace, it is well understood
that for a country like ours it is an elemental international policy
not to leave outstanding a situation that, however it may be, we
