1560  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
over which they have no control, or they are so deeply involved in 
struggles for independence or livelihood that they have little time to 
reflect on world problems. People in these areas tend to accept and fol­
low, usually passively, the positions taken by their leaders.
20. Informed circles in Latin America have evidenced deep concern 
over the dangers of nuclear war, and there is much interest throughout 
the area in disarmament. Nevertheless, while desiring that the US take 
a more flexible position on disarmament, a majority of the informed 
persons in Latin America generally recognize the importance to their 
own security of the US deterrent. Even in Mexico, where one of the 
highest levels of radioactivity in the world has aroused popular con­
cern, there is no great pressure for a suspension of tests.
21. In the Arab world and much of Southeast Asia, informed circles 
emphasize the dangers of the nuclear situation, without much regard 
for the problems of defense in the non-­Communist world. They see this 
situation as part of the great power struggle which could get out of 
hand with the small nations as probable victims. They hope, by remain­
ing neutral, to escape this threat and they attempt to exert pressures on 
the great powers to accept controls on testing and nuclear weapons. 
Their views on the merits of any proposition tend to be colored by a 
pre-­existing distrust of the West, and they are frequently more inclined 
to accept the seemingly reasonable Soviet proposals than those of the 
West.
22. India and Japan remain exceptional cases in Asia in the depth 
of popular concern over the nuclear situation. While the masses in 
India have only the vaguest notion of nuclear matters, Nehru’s warn­
ings have made some impression. The Japanese, the only people to 
have experienced a nuclear attack, have developed what amounts to 
a national phobia regarding the use or testing of nuclear weapons. In 
Japan no one can escape the deluge of comment and exhortation on the 
subject, at times including daily radio bulletins on the fallout-­count. 
Opposition to testing is vocal and insistent in both countries and there 
is relatively little concern, except in limited circles in Japan, that a test 
ban or other controls be backed with adequate safeguards. Neither the 
Indian nor the Japanese public want their countries to have anything 
to do with nuclear weapons, although there may be a softening in the 
Japanese attitude in the future as Japan develops a potential to produce 
its own weapons, or if there are indications that Communist China pos­
sesses nuclear weapons. The peoples of both nations would view the 
use of nuclear weapons in almost any circumstances as an unmitigated 
disaster.
23. Nevertheless, even in India and Japan, the public has become 
a bit more discerning in its evaluation of Bloc propaganda on nuclear 
issues over the past year. Soviet advances in weapons technology
