December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 717 Israel and Egypt after peace. Egypt makes up about forty percent of the Arab world. If Egypt is a friend and ally, guided and corrected by us when there is a departure from what has been promised, within the limits of our influence, the agreement should work. If Sadat is weakened, we will do everything we can within the limits of our power to insure Egyptian compliance with the agreement. You have my personal commitment. We stand behind all of these documents. Israel still feels threatened by terrorism and the Arab build-up over the next 10 to 30 years. The Arab world is capable of persuading some countries because of oil. The United States can withstand such blackmail. Egypt is a partner of Israel. We place a restraint on the PLO, and on the radical Arabs as threats to Israel. We plan to go to the Saudi leaders to caution them against overt acts against Egypt. Saudi Arabia fears the Soviet Union and we help protect them. We stand with you as equal partners. What we do for you is more than balanced by what Israel does for the United States. A democratic and stable Israel is a tremendous strategic asset to the United States, but this is especially true if Israel is at peace with Egypt as a friend. We can work more closely with both countries then. There will be difficult days ahead. You have different views on autonomy for the Palestinians. We have never put pressure on Israel to sign an agreement that is contrary to your interests. The treaty could open a new day for Israel that would bring advantages and permanent peace. You would have diplomatic relations with your largest Arab neighbor. I asked you to be forthcoming and generous. My belief is that Sadat has been very generous and forthcoming in the last two days. He has asked us to use all of our influence to bring an agreement now. Sadat is waiting to hear from us. I am willing, if you agree, to work all night to conclude the agreement. The remaining differences are minor compared to the differences we faced a year ago. (The session ends at 3:35 p.m.) (The meeting resumes at 5:00 p.m.) Prime Minister Begin: I have good news. We have found a synonym for the notes to Article 6. We propose “does not affect in any way”. President Carter: That is much worse than it was. It means it has no significance at all. Secretary Vance: Let me try “contravene”. Prime Minister Begin: We’ll have to think again. I don’t reject. I have to think about it. We shall consider. In Article 6–2, I made a provisional amendment about the Egyptian-Israeli treaty as a first step. I have decided to give up the amendment and to delete my addition to that amendment. I would rather stick to what was agreed in Washington. We will drop the word derogate. We want to expedite things. We will have a Cabinet session tonight and take all the decisions. In a session
