396 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement to all services approximately in proportion to their last year’s budget apportionment. Such an approach to budget control has no rationale except neces­ sity, and represents arbitrary fiscal ceiling control at its worst. Even more seriously, it accords no recognition whatever to the coming revo­ lution in concept whereby massive deterrent will receive less emphasis while capability for limited engagements receives more. As you probably know, this issue first arose in the NSC last May 1, and was postponed until July 24, at which time the President requested continuing study of our military doctrine. The issue is receiving great attention outside the Executive Branch, particularly within Congress where it will be used politically against the Administration during this coming session. If the cuts mean the withdrawal of one Army division from Germany as the Army is pre­ pared to say they will, serious political repercussions both internally and abroad will occur. Mr. Dulles may raise this issue at Saturday’s meeting. If he does, one way to handle it might be for the President to postpone such politi­ cally dangerous across-­the-­board cuts pending completion of the study he requested July 24, which bears directly on this issue. Or, he might allow a week or two additional time for the two sides on the issue to prepare and present their views before him much as was done in the more general case before the NSC last May 1. While I assume you will not wish to take sides at the Council table, I believe you should know what is behind the issues, if you do not already. And you might be in a position to suggest a solution. You probably know that I believe we shall be frozen into our present rigid and deadly posture forever if we do not begin to change some time, and soon. Even if we started now to change it would be several years before forces or weapons could significantly reflect changed emphasis. (This will be almost impossible without continued nuclear testing for air defense and tactical nuclear capabilities.) I believe that any and every voice raised on the side of reason might help. J.H. Morse, Jr., Captain, USN Special Assistant to the Chairman
