Afghanistan
267
C. They have limited foreign support, in contrast to the enormous
amount of arms that flowed to the Vietnamese from both the Soviet
Union and China;
D. The Soviets are likely to act decisively, unlike the U.S., which
pursued in Vietnam a policy of “inoculating” the enemy.
As a consequence, the Soviets might be able to assert themselves
effectively, and in world politics nothing succeeds like success, what-
ever the moral aspects.
What is to be Done?
What follows are some preliminary thoughts, which need to be
discussed more fully:
A. It is essential that Afghanistani resistance continues. This means
more money as well as arms shipments to the rebels, and some techni-
cal advice;
B. To make the above possible we must both reassure Pakistan
and encourage it to help the rebels. This will require a review of our
policy toward Pakistan, more guarantees to it, more arms aid, and,
alas, a decision that our security policy toward Pakistan cannot be
dictated by our nonproliferation policy;
C. We should encourage the Chinese to help the rebels also;
D. We should concert with Islamic countries both in a propaganda
campaign and in a covert action campaign to help the rebels;
E. We should inform the Soviets that their actions are placing SALT
in jeopardy and that will also influence the substance of the Brown
visit to China,5 since the Chinese are doubtless going to be most con-
cerned about implications for themselves of such Soviet assertiveness
so close to their border. Unless we tell the Soviets directly and very
clearly that our relations will suffer, I fear the Soviets will not take
our “expressions of concern” very seriously, with the effect that our
relations will suffer, without the Soviets ever having been confronted
with the need to ask the question whether such local adventurism is
worth the long-term damage to the U.S.-Soviet relationship;
F. Finally, we should consider taking Soviet actions in Afghanistan
to the UN as a threat to peace.
5 Brown visited China January 1980. See Documents 149 and 150.
