1440  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
my duty to make sure that there was clear and explicit understanding 
between us. I am greatly relieved by what you have now said to me.
I am sending you a separate message about the political question 
as a whole.
With warm regards,
As ever,
(Sgd.) Harold Macmillan
378.	 Message From Macmillan to John Foster Dulles1
London, August 21, 1958
Dear Foster,
Thank you for your letter of August 20. I have now received the 
President’s further message and am most grateful for his clear assur­
ances on the exchange of information. I should like to assure you that 
my concern in my messages to the President was not simply to pro­
tect this country’s nuclear weapons programme. Quite apart from this 
I felt real doubts as to whether your proposed action was calculated 
to extract the maximum advantage for the Western countries from the 
Geneva Conference. I was not thinking so much of world opinion, 
which I know is not fully with us on this issue, but of the risk of throw­
ing away the prize we hope to gain by making the Russians accept an 
international control system on their territory.
As to the larger political problem, I welcome the revision of your 
proposed announcement, which goes a long way to meet my point. I 
still fear that the Russians may be able to escape paying the price for the 
suspension of tests, but I recognise the force of your arguments and I 
agree that the new procedure should reduce that risk. I am also grateful 
to you for accommodating us on the date from which a suspension of 
tests should begin. I am therefore ready to join you in the action now 
proposed. I am sending Selwyn some suggested amendments to your 
draft announcement which I hope you may feel able to accept.
My intention is to make a parallel announcement at the same time 
as yours. I am still not sure that we need make these announcements 
1 Source: Statement on suspension of nuclear testing. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, 
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan to Dulles, 1955–59.
