September 18–December 16, 1978
401
One of my predecessors, Mrs. Golda Meir, having received the
so-called Rogers Plan, said to the NEW YORK TIMES that an Israeli
Government that would accept such a Plan would commit treason to
our people.4 I hope, Mr. President, that your Administration will not
bring forth plans or make proposals—as exemplified by the Saunders
Mission—that will compel me to repeat my predecessor’s statement.
Please excuse me, Mr. President, for having written this long letter.
But it is a crucial moment and I feel, with all my heart, that we deal with
the future and, indeed, with the lives of the Jewish people who have re-
turned after all the age-long suffering to the land of their ancestors.
Yours respectfully and sincerely,
Menachem Begin”
Respectfully yours,
Simcha Dinitz
Ambassador
4 On December 22, 1969, Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir stated her opposition to
a Middle East peace plan proposed by Secretary of State William P. Rogers that called for
Israeli withdrawal to its pre-1967 border in return for a binding peace agreement with its
Arab neighbors. She stated, “The Government cannot accept a paper of this kind,”
adding “[i]t would be treasonous for any Israeli Government to accept it.” (James Feron,
“Mrs. Meir is Indignant,” The New York Times, December 23, 1969, p. 1)
118.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State1
Tel Aviv, October 30, 1978, 1445Z
16006. Eyes Only for Executive Secretary Tarnoff from the Ambas-
sador. No other distribution. Subject: U.S. Strategy Options on Settle-
ments Problem.
1. You will appreciate the extreme sensitivity of this message. I
suggest you personally distribute it to the Secretary, Roy Atherton, and
Hal Saunders only rpt only.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Middle East, Box 46, 10/21–31/78. Secret; Sensitive; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis.
Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation
Room.
