938 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX nian, has become the President of the collective State Presidency. On May 15, Kolisevski is to rotate out of office and be replaced by another member of the Presidency, Cvijetin Mijatovic, a Serb from Bosnia- Hercegovina, for a one-year term. With Tito’s death, his title of President of the Presidium of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) will be subsumed within the Presidium as a whole. Thus the current Chairman of the Presidium, Stevan Doronjski, a Serb from the Vojvodina, will become the head of the Party until his rotation out of office when his one year term ends in October, 1980. There is no established procedure for the rotation process in the LCY Presidium and we do not know who will replace Doronjski. We anticipate that the succession process will operate smoothly, and that the collective State and Party governing bodies will function as planned—at least during the first few months after Tito’s death. Political activity during Tito’s lengthy illness indicated that the senior members of the Party, including Vladimir Bakaric, a Croat, Milos Minic, a Serb, and a few others, intend to play an active political role in conjunction with the operation of the collective organs of leadership. How this will work in practice remains to be seen. We believe that the military, in the person of Defense Secretary Ljubicic, will represent a stabilizing factor on the national scene. In the first few months of this year, Yugoslavia passed through a period of near crisis, occasioned by the most serious illness President Tito had ever suffered. His extended illness coincided with severe domestic economic difficulties and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Any one of these factors would have posed serious problems for the Yugoslav leadership. Their unfortunate coincidence compounded the problem and presented the Yugoslav leaders—this time effectively minus Tito—with a situation without precedent. Tito’s comrades did very well indeed.3 To assert that these few months provided a definitive test of the succession machinery of the post-Tito leadership would be an exaggeration. The time was too short 3 In a May 6 memorandum to the Vice President, Eagleburger provided his own analysis of the transition from Tito to the collective leadership. “By and large the system has functioned smoothly,” Eagleburger wrote, adding that the new leadership understands that “how well they do in the first six months will have a substantial impact on the future viability of the system.” Because of that fact, Eagleburger wrote, “decisionmaking will proceed in a fairly orderly fashion” and that “there will, in fact, be an extraordinary effort to compromise differences and to avoid even a hint of personal rivalry or controversy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Under Secretary of State for Management (1967–1984), Lot 84D204, Box 10, Chron, May, 1980)
