enthusiastically and was seeking authorization that he might proceed with
it. O’Malley also obtained a promise from our Belgian colleague similarly
to make such a representation to the Belgian Government.
5. I received a call on the afternoon of the 16th from a representative of
Chang Tso-lin. He represented courteously, but positively for all that, that
funds were being obtained by the Southerners in disregard of the treaties;
but that the Northerners frowned upon such acts violating treaties and they
proposed to make an appeal to the powers asking to be placed in a practical
position no less favorably, by being enabled through agreement of the
powers to raise funds by means that were legitimate. He urged the taking of
steps to put into force the surtaxes provided by the Washington Treaty. I
inquired whether as a practical matter the Northern authorities would expect
that they would receive the revenues collected from such surtaxes in ports
under Nationalist control. His reply was that such diversion of funds to their
enemies naturally would not be formally assented to, but as practical men
they realized that this might be done. They would be content to have the
revenues collected from the surtaxes in ports located within the territory
they themselves controlled. He hinted unmistakably that in case the
Northerners were not thus granted the surtaxes, the Northern military
coalition will find itself, regardless of treaty obligations, obliged to act upon
its own initiative, and that perhaps it might become more red than the Beds
in the South.
6. After the above conversation I received a circular, dated December 15,
from the Senior Minister. Enclosed in it was a memorandum which had
been received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, regarding tariff revision
at Shanghai at present. It stated that:93
“This Ministry has received a communication from Ho, the
Japanese Minister, to the effect that he has been instructed by his
Government that the newly revised tariff must be approved and
made effective by the Special Customs Conference.
“The Chinese Government is of the opinion that in this way the
newly revised tariff can become effective at an early date and that
this is also in accordance with the resolution of the Washington
