Eastern Europe Region 53 in relations with a particular country in advance of demonstrable progress on their parts along either of the two criteria. Vine suggested that our interests in limiting the GDR’s mischief in Berlin might call for a more forthcoming U.S. attitude. 4. Aaron and Nimetz stressed that the main point was to underscore the special status of Romania, Poland and Hungary, not to prevent limited improvements in relations with the other three countries. Brzezinski outlined the three areas of U.S. policy: atmospherics (visits), economics (MFN) and scientific and other exchanges; all agreed that those instruments are very limited. Aaron thought it might be preferable to rank concrete manifestations of policy, not countries. Secretary Brown agreed, noting that, for instance, a port visit by the U.S. Navy in Bulgaria should not be ruled out. 5. In the end there was general support for the following reformulation of Option 3: the U.S. would give demonstrably greater support for those countries that have achieved a measure of independence or internal liberalization (Romania, Hungary and Poland). Within that context, it would be appropriate to develop a scenario for returning the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. However, Option 3 would not preclude improvements in U.S. relations with the other three (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the GDR), provided those improvements were tangibly and demonstrably in the U.S. interest. Negotiations of claim agreements could continue, but the results would have to be assessed on their own merits, case by case. Efforts could continue to normalize our relations with the GDR, bringing them into line with Czechoslovakia, provided that effort did not dilute the basic differentiation. 6. There was general agreement that our European Allies, especially the FRG, have somewhat different interests in Eastern Europe than our own. No purpose would be served by exhorting them to adopt a posture identical to ours. 7. There was consensus that our policy toward Eastern Europe and toward CSCE should have parallel objectives. Both should promote modest steps toward re-joining the two halves of Europe, not as a threat to the Soviet Union but as an improvement in the security and life quality of all Europe.
