United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  137
ETA–55.	
Circular Airgram from the Secretary of State to All 
Diplomatic Posts in Latin America1
 
Washington, October 20, 1960, 10:13 p.m.
SUBJECT
Inter-American Social Development Program
REFERENCE
State CA–2131, September 2, 1960
SUMMARY
The U.S. Inter-American Program for Social Development, now 
incorporated into the Act of Bogotá, constitutes a major evolutionary 
step in U.S. policy toward Latin America. Country Teams are requested 
to study means of exploiting it in the light of local conditions.
The instruction cited outlined in some detail the historical back-
ground to the recent meeting of the OAS Committee of Twenty-One at 
Bogotá, and further explained the purposes and objectives of the new 
U.S. Inter-American Social Development Program to be presented at 
that meeting.
With Cuba casting a sole dissenting vote, the Committee adopted 
the “Act of Bogotá” which incorporates major features of the U.S. pro-
posals with some additions by the Latin American countries. This doc-
ument represents a significant new long range approach by the U.S. 
Government, in cooperation with the other American Republics, to 
attack the roots of social unrest in the area. The Council of the OAS has 
given its formal approval.
On the one hand, the new Act calls upon Latin American countries 
to institute some badly needed new legal and institutional reforms for 
the purpose of providing greater economic opportunities to the average 
citizen and particularly to the lower income groups. On the other hand, 
it states the intention of the U.S. Government to provide capital resources 
and technical assistance “to support the efforts of the Latin American 
countries that are prepared to initiate or expand effective institutional 
improvements land to adopt measures to employ efficiently their own 
resources with a view to achieving greater social progress and more bal-
anced economic growth.”
Under the first heading the Act of Bogotá calls for measures 
in the following fields: (a) improvement of conditions in rural liv-
ing and land use; (b) improvement of housing and community 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 820.40/10–2060. Confidential.
