838
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
sending formal response but meanwhile he wanted to give oral reply.
Saudi Arabia’s desire to maintain relations with Egypt has been and re-
mains very strong. Even at this time of greatest strain, SAG has tried to
keep as strong relation as possible. Unfortunately, maintenance of rela-
tions apparently does not meet the interests of President Sadat. Sadat
apparently saw some remaining links in the relationship and he
“chopped” them in his May Day speech.4 He has made it impossible to
maintain any relations or any of the commitments that SAG had made,
even in such areas as military sales. Prince Saud then said in low
solemn voice that he wished to inform me officially that HMG felt that
it could no longer keep its commitment to purchase F–5s for Egypt.
Commitments should be of equal importance to both countries. SAG
has tried to keep its commitments in the face of many obstacles, but
now SAG feels it cannot keep this commitment.
5. I said that I thought SAG position was that F–5 deal was consid-
ered to be completed transaction and that it would therefore be carried
through. Saud replied that indeed arrangement had been considered as
“completed” and thus outside boundaries of Baghdad decisions5 but
this was no longer possible.
6. I said that I was indeed sorry to hear this news. I remembered
that Crown Prince Fahd had told us on several occasions that SAG
wished to do all that it could to help Egypt. The way relations between
the two countries have deteriorated over the past few weeks has been
great tragedy. I was certain that SAG decision on F–5s would not be
taken lightly in Washington but would in fact cause great distress.
Prince Saud said that this was not situation that Saudi Arabia wanted
but it was one brought on by President Sadat.
7. I asked if SAG distinction between Egypt and Egyptian people
still remained in effect. Would SAG now take actions, for example,
against Egyptian expatriates in Saudi Arabia? Saud said distinction still
existed and Saudi Arabia would take no action against Egyptians in
Saudi Arabia but he did not know what actions Egyptian Government
might take.
8. I asked Saud how he thought Islamic Conference would turn
out. I pointed out, as Secretary Vance did in his letter, that ostracism of
Egypt could harm the interests of both Saudi Arabia and U.S. in area.
4 In his May 1 speech, Sadat accused Saudi Arabia of “encouraging (or paying)”
Arab states to cut diplomatic relations with Egypt, “discounted previous Saudi financial
aid,” and questioned whether the Saudis would honor their pledge to finance Egypt’s
purchase of F–5Es. Sadat also criticized the Saudi leadership, comparing it unfavorably
with that of the late King Faisal, as well as Syria. A summary of the speech is in telegram
8815 from Cairo, May 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790198–0967.
5 See footnote 7, Document 91.
