“Whereas this Government wishes to cooperate in relieving Austria from the immediate burden created by her outstanding debts: Therefore be it “Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized to extend, for a period not to exceed twenty-five years, the time of payment of the principal and interest of the debt incurred by Austria for the purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation, and to release Austrian assets pledged for the payment of such loan, in whole or in part, as may in the judgment of the Secretary of the Treasury be necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes of this resolution: Provided, however, That substantially all the other creditor nations, to wit, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Great Britain, Greece, Holland, Italy, Norway, Rumania, Sweden, Switzerland, and Yugoslavia shall take action with regard to their respective claims against Austria similar to that herein set forth. The Secretary of the Treasury shall be authorized to decide when this proviso has been substantially complied with.” The action of the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority of the resolution was taken on June 9, 1923. In 1923 a reconstruction loan amounting to about $125,000,000 was floated by Austria in the United States and European countries. This loan was guaranteed by several of the European governments. It saved Austria from economic and social disintegration and collapse. The program of reconstruction led to the stabilization of Austrian currency during 1923 and the balancing of the Austrian budget by 1924. It has been balanced ever since. Austria’s economic reconstruction, however, has not been completed and the capital resources of the country are not adequate to the task. The Austrian Government now desires to float a new loan in the net amount of 725 million Austrian schillings, or about $100,000,000, for the continuation of the program of reconstruction. The proceeds would be applied to capital expenditures, that is, to the repair, improvement and re-equipment of the
