746
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
mentioned. We believe Pakistan would honor a proviso not to use our
aircraft to deliver embargoed items to Iran.
3. Given the political sensitivity of shipping U.S.-procured arms
via Iranian authorities and our inability to control the weapons once
they reach Iran, we request your prior approval of this proposal.3
Stansfield Turner4
3 In his reply to Turner, June 2, Brzezinski approved Turner’s proposal, “provided
adequate assurances can be obtained that such weapons will not be diverted by the
Iranians to other purposes (including retention by the Iranians themselves).” Noting
“the extreme importance of the Afghanistan resistance effort,” Brzezinski requested semi-
monthly reports on the status both of U.S. involvement and what was known of U.S.
involvement by other parties. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of
Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–367, 1 Jan–30 Jun
80, Afghanistan)
4 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
280.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, May 1980
Afghanistan: Factions in the Ruling Party
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
The ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP) of Afghanistan, in
which Moscow has a substantial stake, is beset by longstanding divi-
sions. President Babrak Karmal’s regime would have fallen apart by
now were it not for constant Soviet pressure on the feuding factions—
Babrak’s Parcham (Banner) and the Khalq (People’s) of former Presi-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Services, Job 81T00208R: Production Case Files, Box 4, Afghanistan: Factions in the Ruling
Party, An Intelligence Memorandum. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A typed
note at the bottom of the page reads: “The author of this paper is [name not declassified]
of the Near East-South Asia Division, Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated
with the Offices of Strategic Research and Central Reference and the National Intelligence
Officers for the Near East and South Asia and the USSR and Eastern Europe. Comments
and queries are welcome and may be directed to the Chief, Southwest Asia Analytic
Center, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Research for this paper was completed on 23
May 1980.”
