118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
had understood from Begin that according to President Carter, Egypt
would be ready to permit Israeli forces to remain in the West Bank after
five years, while insisting on a statement of “full withdrawal”, perhaps
leaving Israeli forces there in some special status. (Secretary Vance
nodded agreement.) But, Dayan said he was not clear on the future of
the West Bank settlements. Did the Egyptians mean withdrawal to in-
clude dismantling all settlements? Secretary Vance said this was un-
clear at this point and has to be further defined. The basic principle is
that there should be no settlements in the West Bank or Sinai in the
Egyptian frame of reference. However, what in practical terms they
will accept is unclear.
Weizmann summarized a number of points from his various
meetings with Sadat and Gamacy which he characterized as “very in-
teresting and tangible”. The question however is whether Sadat still en-
dorses that. (He mentioned such examples as joint policing, retention of
Israeli forces, leaving West Bank settlements intact, permitting private
land sales to Israel, open borders, full commerce, and so forth.) Weiz-
mann said that when he met Sadat he would remind him of their dis-
cussion of these points and that “we don’t start from zero in these
meetings”. Secretary Vance agreed and said that one important pur-
pose here is to get down in writing agreement on some of these points
thus far discussed but not recorded.
Dayan then recalled that in the U.S./Israeli “working paper” of
last autumn,6 the United States and Israel had agreed on the parties to
be included in the negotiations, and one of the parties was the Pales-
tinian Arabs. He then asked whether we can, in the near future, see a
way to bring in representatives of the Palestine/Arabs to these negotia-
tions, either formally or as advisers. Dayan said he had recently met
privately with some Palestine/Arab leaders and that he was encour-
aged by their point of view, though he recognized that they would not
necessarily say the same things if other Arabs were present. Was there
some way to get them now into the negotiations? Secretary Vance said
he had discussed this point with Kamel this morning who said that if
Camp David ends with a sufficient and satisfactory agreement, that
then he believed Palestine/Arabs would be prepared to join the
negotiations.
Weizmann inquired whether Sadat still wanted to start with a
broad statement covering the West Bank problem and then with that in
hand to go ahead on Sinai. Vance replied that to the best of his knowl-
edge he is still in that mood, but “you will have to hear it from him.”
Weizmann said he hoped everyone understands that there is a major
difference between the Sinai and the West Bank.
6 Not further identified.
