World Hunger and Food Policy
881
require parties to the conflict to take various measures to facilitate relief
actions designed to deal with shortages of food and other essential
items among the civilian population.10 The Commission strongly be-
lieves that the starvation of civilians should be outlawed as a method of
warfare, and that a method should be devised to deal with famine
brought on by armed conflict. Therefore:
The Commission recommends that the United States Senate ratify the
Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Convention, adopted by the Interna-
tional Conference on Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict.
4. Overcoming Domestic Hunger and Malnutrition Through Federal
Programs
Recent findings indicate that there have been dramatic improve-
ments in the nutrition of low-income citizens since the introduction of
the Food Stamp; School Lunch; School Breakfast; Women, Infants and
Children (WIC); Elderly Feeding; and Expanded Food and Nutrition
Education Programs. Yet, lack of consistent nutritional information,
inflation, and the rising real cost of food threaten these advances and
others expected from wider access to these nutrition-support pro-
grams. Further, information on the nutritional status of American cit-
izens is surprisingly sparse for all economic brackets, especially
high-risk populations. Because the Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey is a national effort, it does not disclose the full magnitude of the
malnutrition problems for the elderly, the poor, migrant workers, or
Native Americans. Although various Federal agencies gather supple-
mentary data, there is no single coordination point in the United States
Government to compile and analyze this information. Accordingly:
The Commission recommends that increased resources be provided to
those domestic hunger programs which have a demonstrated record of success,
and that a systematic effort to assess the nutritional status of Americans be
undertaken.
Congress and the Department of Agriculture will have to take
steps to assure that food assistance programs, particularly food stamps,
respond to increases in inflation and unemployment. When food prices
rise, food stamp allotments diminish in value. The Food Stamp Act cur-
rently requires that allotments be adjusted semi-annually in accordance
10 Presumable reference to the Diplomatic Conference on Reaffirmation and Devel-
opment of Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, which took place in Ge-
neva February–March 1974, February–April 1975, April–June 1976, and March–June
1977.
