338 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement system (TROUNCE). One of the 3 missile submarines in the fleet pos­ sesses both a REGULUS I and a REGULUS II capability. Currently, U.S. Army forces contribute to the nuclear retaliatory capability with REDSTONE, CORPORAL, HONEST JOHN, 280mm gun, 8-­inch howitzer units, and atomic demolition munitions now deployed in Europe; and with HONEST JOHN, 280mm gun, 8-­inch howitzer units, and atomic demolition munitions in the Pacific. The following air defense capabilities opposing U.S. retaliatory forces apply in general to the Soviet Bloc’s air defense system: a. Against penetrations conducted during daylight and in clear weather, at altitudes between about 5,000 and about 35,000 feet, capa­ bilities of the system are greatest. At about 35,000 feet they would begin to diminish, and above 45,000 feet would fall off markedly; at altitudes below 5,000 feet, they would also be progressively reduced. b. Against penetrations conducted at night and under poor visi­ bility conditions, the capabilities of the system would be considerably reduced. c. Against varied penetration tactics utilizing altitude stacking, diversionary maneuvers decoys, and electronic countermeasures, capa­ bilities of the air defense system would be diminished through disrup­ tion and saturation. The advantage accruing to the United States and its Allies as a result of a retaliatory offensive would be dependent on the amount of warning of Soviet attack and the degree of protection afforded military installations, particularly those installations from which our retaliatory effort would be launched. It is estimated that enemy losses sustained as a result of a U.S. offensive retaliatory attack would provide a mar­ gin of advantage to the United States and its Allies which, if exploited effectively in conjunction with other military operations, would assure eventual victory. B. HIGHLY MOBILE AND SUITABLY DEPLOYED READY FORCES WITH THE CAPACITY TO RESPOND SELECTIVELY AND FLEXIBLY TO LOCAL AGGRESSION, USING ALL WEAPONS (INCLUDING NUCLEAR WEAPONS) AS REQUIRED, AND TO CARRY OUT GENERAL WAR TASKS. 1. OVERALL CAPABILITIES. a. Army. U.S. Army forces are capable of reacting flexibly to local aggression or general war utilizing selective fire power of the appropri­ ate magnitude. Development of new infantry, armored, and airborne divisions, with organic nuclear capability, has greatly increased the operational capability of Army to meet the threat of a nuclear war. All active Army divisions are organized in the new Pentomic structure and are capable of integrating nuclear fire support with that of conventional
