provisions in the Treaty of St. Germain,76 and Austrian legislation, and the
further fact that the adoption of these changes would not effect any material
change in the meaning of the Article, the Department authorizes you to
accept the proposed changes.
Article VI. Article VI of the treaty provides that in the event of war between
either High Contracting Party and a third state, such Party may draft for
compulsory military service the nationals of the other having a permanent
residence within its territories who have declared an intention to adopt its
nationality by naturalization, unless such individuals depart from the
territory of the belligerent within sixty days after the declaration of war.
Austria expressed a desire to have Article VI omitted. It expressed a
willingness, however, to waive, by a protocol or by notes to be exchanged
at the time of signing the treaty, the right to object to the drafting of
Austrian nationals within the limitations of Article VI.
It appears from your report that the Austrian Government fears that if it
concludes a treaty containing such a provision, Austria may be regarded as
unneutral in its attitude toward friendly nations with which the United
States might be at war. It is not believed by this Government that such a
provision in a treaty could be regarded as placing either Party to the treaty
in the position of disregarding its obligations of neutrality in the event of
one of the parties to the treaty becoming a belligerent.
In view of the large alien population in the United States and the effect
which the abandonment of the Article in the negotiations with Austria
would have on other treaty negotiations in which this Government is
engaged, the Department would regard the omission of the Article from the
Treaty with Austria or the relegation of the provision to a supplemental
protocol or exchange of notes as distinctly prejudicial to the interests of the
United States. This Article is included in the Treaty of the United States
with Germany signed December 8, 1923, and in the Treaty signed with
Hungary June 24, 1925. The German and Hungarian negotiators both
expressed the doubts of their Governments in regard to the acceptance of
the provision but after discussion it was accepted by both Governments. It
is probable that Austria may not be inclined to insist upon the omission of
