Chapter 7, January–May 1991  963
not conditional on a signed and delivered agreement, but we were 
not going anywhere with the Houston package up in the air. The U.S. 
wanted to do business.
13. Bessmertnykh remarked that the Houston package was not in 
as bad shape as Bartholomew suggested, that the issues in dispute were 
small ones. Now that they knew a letter was coming they would keep 
it in mind. Bartholomew said that the problems in Geneva were big 
political, and neuralgic.
14. Bartholomew said Bessmertnykh should note that he believed 
he and Obukhov had done good work before, but under pressure of 
having to go before the ministers. The Obukhov-Bartholomew meet-
ings have their greatest value in this context. He could see some benefit 
to having such a meeting, particularly if a ministerial was not going to 
happen. (Bessmertnykh added that such a meeting would also be ben-
eficial in the case of a nonprofessional Soviet Minister without a grasp 
of the issues.) Bartholomew acknowledged Bessmertnykh’s arguments 
but said that the 10th and 11th was too early in any case.
Bessmertnykh said that he understood and would convey the mes-
sage to Moscow.
Eagleburger
188.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, January 10, 1991, 1757Z
00241. Subject: START: Soviet Response to Baker Letter
1. This is Blackbird—031. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Late on Thursday, January 10, Nazarkin called me from Moscow. 
He said he would return to Geneva Saturday night and that his return 
had been delayed by working on the Soviet response to Secretary 
Baker’s letter of January 4.2
3. Nazarkin said that Shevardnadze’s response was not yet com-
pleted and he was not absolutely certain when it would be delivered. 
Based on decisions made thus far, however, Nazarkin said it was 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
N910001–0132. Secret; Niact; Immediate; Nodis. Sent via the Blackbird channel.
2 See Document 185.
