National Security Policy 1033 the addition of sites of the new type. Both systems are capable of inter­ ceptions at medium and high altitudes up to 60,000 feet, and would have some capability up to about 80,000 feet, particularly if carrying a nuclear warhead. The SA–1 system has a low altitude limit of about 3,000 feet. The low altitude limit of the SA–2 is approximately 1,000 feet under ideal siting and engagement conditions. Under usual conditions, it would be considerably higher, and under unfavorable conditions it might be as high as 7,000 feet. 18. Each SA–2 site appears capable of 360° coverage. The system possibly can handle two targets simultaneously, with more than one missile in the air against each target. However, these targets must be within the approximate 12° radar look angle (both horizontal and verti­ cal) of the system’s guidance radar during the period from acquisition to intercept. Maximum intercept range will vary depending upon type of target, approach angle, and other operational factors; for example, against a directly incoming, high-­flying B–52, SA–2 range would be on the order of 25 n.m. The CEP will also vary under different conditions, but probably approximates 100 feet on the average. 19. The SA–2 system does not appear to be designed or sited to cope with low-­level attacks. We continue to estimate that the Soviets are probably developing a surface-­to-­air system (SA–3) specifically designed for defense against targets down to about 50 feet. It is still possible that such a system could become available for operational use late in 1960, but an initial capability in 1961 now appears more likely. 20. For defense against advanced aircraft and cruise-­type missiles, the USSR will probably incorporate technical improvements into the SA–2 system to increase its altitude and range capabilities. Significant improvements could appear in about 1961. In view of the widespread deployment and estimated growth potential of the SA–2, we now con­ sider it very unlikely that the Soviets will develop in the near term an entirely new high-­altitude system (previously estimated as SA–4). It remains possible, however, that such a system will be developed at a later date, and we believe it could become operational 2–3 years after the initiation of flight tests. 21. Antiballistic. We believe the Soviets are pursuing a very high priority program to develop defenses against ballistic missiles. Solution of the problems of an antimissile missile would involve the development of complex and costly components and their integra­ tion into a weapon system with high capabilities for distant detec­ tion, discrimination, identification, and interception. The net result would be heavily dependent on tactics, deployment, and the effec­ tiveness of Western countermeasures. While such a system (SA–5) is
