793.00/111
[Document 672]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1925.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 723 of July 30, 1925,
which is a reply to my note of July 23, dealing with Chinese affairs. The substance of
the British Government’s comments upon the suggested draft which I communicated to
you in my note of the 23rd instant has been communicated to the American Minister at
Peking by telegraph. It seems necessary however to invite your attention to what
appears to be a misinterpretation on the part of the British Government of the text of
the American draft, for I note that the British Chargé at Peking has been informed that
the British Government disapproved the statement that the extraterritorial commission
“will be instructed to make recommendations to enable the Powers to consider what
steps may be taken for relinquishing their extraterritorial rights”. You say that the
British Government feels that the Commission “should be allowed to make such
recommendations as may appear to them desirable without any lead from the Powers.”
I think that if you will read carefully the draft quoted in my note of July 23, more
particularly that part of the text thereof which appears on page 11,17 you will observe
that this Government’s proposed draft states “it is prepared to instruct its commissioner
to join his colleagues in including in their report recommendations based upon their
findings which will enable the governments concerned, to consider what, if any, steps
may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights”. I feel that
thus phrased the sentence is all inclusive and does not carry, as the British Government
seems to believe, any intention on the part of this Government to give any direction to
its Commissioner other than this Government’s desire that he consider the question and
give to it his views. This Government desires to examine any proposition which the
Chinese Government wishes to make regarding the abolition of extraterritorial
privileges and then decide, on the basis of the recommendations made by its
Commissioner, what, if any, steps may be taken to meet the Chinese proposal.
I note that the British Government is of the opinion that the general tone of the reply
which is to be made by the Corps Diplomatique should be less encouraging to the
Chinese than in the American text, and that it objects to such phrases as “constant and
sympathetic interest” of the United States Government towards the anticipated treaty
move, and “gratification at progress in the improvement of the Chinese Judicial
system”. Instructions have been sent to the American Minister in Peking to the effect
that I have no objection to the omission of these words from the note, if the British
Government finds it impossible to use phraseology of a similar character.
