Peru 1051 PE–16. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1  Washington, September 25, 1958. SUBJECT Peruvian Reaction to U.S. Imposition of Lead and Zinc Quotas. PARTICIPANTS Dr. Rául Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru Dr. Juan Bautista de Lavalle, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS Sr. Miguel Grau - Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru ARA – Mr. Rubottom WST – Mr. Siracusa; Mr. Pringle Foreign Minister Porras2 said that resentment against the U.S. was very strong in Peru as a result of the imposition of quotas on lead and zinc. He said that newspapers and labor organizations were urging him to leave the U.S. immediately and return home. The resentment extended to the very top of the government. He emphasized that President Prado had cooperated closely with the U.S. since the beginning of his first term of office (1939–45) and that this cooperation had been outstanding during World War II. More recently, however, the President had felt disillusioned with the United States and had noted its coldness toward Peru. Dr. Porras said that other Latin American countries had received much more consideration and aid from the U.S. than Peru and that the time had come for the U.S. to demonstrate its friendliness by helping Peru to solve certain problems. He said Peru was suffering a political crisis, due largely to social discontent arising from the economic situation, fanned by Communist agitation, and that some military plotting was taking place. After speaking of the democratic nature of the Prado Administration, he said he assumed that the U.S. considered it in its best interest to have Peru governed by a democratic president rather than a military dictator, to which Mr. Rubottom indicated firm assent. Dr. Porras then said that he did not want to go back to Peru empty-­handed, that, politically, he must take back some concrete demonstration of continued U.S. friendship and cooperation. (Here the Foreign Minister brought up the Peru-Ecuador 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.236/9–2258. Confidential. Drafted September 26. 2 Foreign Minister Porras was in Washington for the Informal Meeting of American Foreign Ministers, September 23–24; for further information, see Document PA–8, ­footnote 5.
