IV
About the Series
agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government en-
gaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate
with the Department of State historians by providing full and complete
access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and
by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted
in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are avail-
able for review at the National Archives and Records Administration
(Archives II), in College Park, Maryland.
The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to
all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central
files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the
Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the De-
partment’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of interna-
tional conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with
foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memo-
randa of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State
and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of
the Department’s central files for 1977–1981 are available in electronic
or microfilm formats at Archives II, and may be accessed using the
Access to Archival Databases (AAD) tool. Almost all of the Depart-
ment’s decentralized office files covering this period, which the Na-
tional Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been
transferred to or are in the process of being transferred from the De-
partment’s custody to Archives II.
Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through spe-
cial access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential
Library and other agencies. While all the material printed in this vol-
ume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified
documents. The staff of the Carter Library is processing and declas-
sifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not
be available in their entirety at the time of publication. Presiden-
tial papers maintained and preserved at the Carter Library include
some of the most significant foreign-affairs related documentation
from White House offices, the Department of State, and other fed-
eral agencies including the National Security Council, the Central In-
telligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.
Some of the research for volumes in this subseries was done in
Carter Library record collections scanned for the Remote Archive Cap-
ture (RAC) project. This project, which is administered by the National
Archives and Records Administration’s Office of Presidential Libraries,
was designed to coordinate the declassification of still-classified
records held in various Presidential libraries. As a result of the way in
which records were scanned for the RAC, the editors of the Foreign Re-
