First Responses 63 Khomeini; ministries are ill staffed and demoralized; a small war is going on with the Kurds, and the Kurds are not losing; an angry mob of unemployed workers yesterday attacked the Ministry of Labor to demand action on jobs; today there is a report that Iraqi helos penetrated Iranian airspace and drew AA fire—all this and many other problems while they are engaged in a test of will with a superpower. Besides observing that it could not happen to a nicer bunch of guys, we also need to be alert to the signs of total systemic breakdown. Khomeini has gathered all power to himself and the Revolutionary Council, but he is an old man, with no experience in government, and a “staff” composed of squabbling clerics. The risk of serious mistakes, miscalculations, or irrational acts of sheer frustration is very high. There may not be much we can do about it, but we should not assume we are working with an opponent who is capable of exercising real judgment. 29. Memorandum for the Record by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1 Washington, November 14, 1979 In a telephone conversation with an American contact, I received the following report at 0700: the American contact had received a phone call from Khalid al-Hassan in Germany. The report was as follows: —Hani al-Hassan, the PLO representative in Tehran, saw Khomeini for three and one-half hours Tuesday, November 13. —They have set up a committee consisting of Khomeini, Hani al- Hassan, a representative of the students in the American Compound, a representative of the Foreign Ministry (possibly Bani-Sadr himself). 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran 1979. Secret; Eyes Only. Copies were sent to Vance, Christopher, and Newsom. Turner passed similar information to Vance and Brzezinski under a November 14 covering memorandum. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Swiss Channel)
