74 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement government had same policy toward all foreign nationals in China, including Americans. These classified two categories: ordinary aliens and those who breached Chinese law. So long as ordinary civilian free of unsettled case in China he allowed freely to leave. Those who had breached Chinese law also granted lenient treatment according Chinese law. Recent release of 11 airmen was evidence of great con­ tribution made by his government in present talks. He recalled Chou En-­lai in statement to People’s Congress, July 30, had said number Americans in China small and this problem easily settled. Further­ more as he had just informed me so long as he had agreement on his draft proposal he would advise me very soon on results of review of cases by his government. Wang continued he must frankly point out, though he did not intend go into it, bitter plight Chinese nationals, including students, in US past years. Chinese people very excited in their sentiments regard­ ing bitter plight innocent Chinese nationals and students in US. Chi­ nese nationals in US including students faced difficulties in US just as I had pointed out US nationals in China facing difficulties. If it were not that nationals both sides having difficulties there would have been no reason to meet here. As result exchange views past four meetings he had indicated to me Chinese welcomed attitude of American side. Although not entirely satisfied with arrangement suggested on fourth proposal in interest of progress of talks he prepared to use conciliation and compromise and was ready accept arrangement proposed by me. Draft agreement he had put forward was only more detailed version of one I had suggested last meeting. In the main it was same one I had advanced. Said he regarded such arrangement as means of settling problem. It showed his side willing avoid more debate this question and reach agreement in conciliatory way. I replied to Wang that of course our governments each had its point of view and our task was one of reconciling these viewpoints. It seemed to me that my government although Wang not completely satisfied had gone nearly whole way in meeting desires his govern­ ment. So far as American nationals concerned whatever Wang might feel regarding his nationals in US most Americans had been in jail for long period. At our meetings last year I had understood these cases being investigated. More than year now passed and majority these people still in prison. I hoped his government would now find it pos­ sible to expedite measures he had spoken of in order that this problem could be resolved. Said I would examine his proposal in light of what I had just said. Hoped by next meeting he might have some sugges­ tion to meet problem I faced.
