416
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
deh is elected President, these men could still play a constructive role
in communicating with the government.
Brewster
158.
Memorandum From Robert Blackwill of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 20, 1980
SUBJECT
Iran, Afghanistan and the Allies (S)
At a moment when the need for American leadership and Allied
solidarity has seldom been more manifest, we are in danger of convinc-
ing the Europeans and the Japanese that in these dangerous times our
Kamikaze instinct is more refined than our strategic acuity:
—We threaten to take military action against Iran when we have
no evidence it would help free the hostages, and when it would do
much to get the Soviets off the Afghanistan hook with the Moslems.
(Can you imagine the Security Council and General Assembly debates
after we dropped the mines?)
—We continue to press for Allied sanctions against Iran as if we
believed that after the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan an even more
destabilized situation in Iran would be in our interests and not in
Moscow’s.
—We minimize to European dismay the effects of an Iranian oil
boycott of Europe on our Allies and on the world economy.
—In short, we give every sign that the 50 hostages are more impor-
tant to us (and to the President’s reelection prospects) than effective
resistance to Soviet imperialism in Southwest Asia and beyond. (S)
The effect of this in Europe has been to breed cynicism and to
revive doubts at the highest level about the capacity of the Carter
Administration to protect Western interests and to meet the Soviet
challenge. In my judgment, Warren Christopher’s obvious inability to
respond to these concerns in Europe last week was an embarrassment
to him and to the Administration. Schmidt tells the Spanish the U.S.
does not understand the Middle East. Thatcher snaps at Christopher
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
Odom File, Box 27, Iran 12/79–3/80. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for action.
