Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 329 information, including dimensional data, on the missile-­related items that exit each facility. Burt offered to provide additional details in the subgroup. Finally, he said, the sides would declare how many of their SS–24s or Peacekeepers currently exist and where they are located. Unique Identifiers 29. In his opening remarks on the subject of unique identifiers, Burt said the U.S. was pleased that the Soviet side had accepted the U.S. concept of unique identifiers during Round XI. He noted that the task of writing treaty provisions to implement this concept would be made much easier if each side could demonstrate to the other the technology it would use in applying unique identifiers, or tags, to missiles. This initiative would allow each side to demonstrate in technical detail its ideas on this subject. As the first step of a process that would culminate in such a demonstration, Burt said, the U.S. proposes that the sides agree on a mutually convenient time for a briefing of Soviet experts on the U.S. approach to tagging technology and how our tagging concept would work in conjunction with PPM and OSI. Of course, he continued, the U.S. would expect a similar briefing for U.S. experts on the Soviet approach. RV Inspections 30. In his opening remarks Burt said the U.S. side had also devoted considerable detailed thought to RV inspections. The purpose of the U.S. proposal was to demonstrate each side’s proposed inspection procedures for verifying that specified types of ICBMs and SLBMs have no more than the number of RVs attributed to them. Burt offered to provide additional details in the NST subgroup. Data Exchange 31. In his opening remarks on data exchange, Burt described the U.S. suggestion that the sides exchange and periodically update data for fully agreed categories in the draft MOU before treaty signature. The purpose of this suggestion, he explained, was to enhance confidence and prepare more completely for treaty implementation. ALCMs 32. In his opening remarks Nazarkin said the time was ripe to resolve the ALCM issue. Noting this, Bartholomew asked how the Soviet side proposed to pick the apple from the tree. Burt recalled that in Geneva he and Nazarkin had discussed ALCM issues extensively and had agreed that this could be an area for discussion at the ministerial. Burt cited several ALCM issues on which the sides still disagreed: the ALCM attribution rule, how to distinguish nuclear and conventional ALCMs, whether to count conventional ALCMs in the START
