Afghanistan 565 OSD NSC Secretary Harold Brown Gary Sick W. Graham Claytor Thomas Thornton William Perry* Robert Blackwill JCS *Present for last ten minutes only General David Jones General John Pustay SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The meeting was devoted almost entirely to a report by Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Christopher on their mission to Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the assessment of the situation by both Pakistan and Saudi Arabia is graver than ours. They both see Soviet actions as part of a deliberate strategic challenge to the U.S. and the region. The Pakistanis see four options facing them: 1. Possible Soviet penetration of their borders. 2. Soviet penetration and retention of some territory. 3. Aggression against Pakistan by India, possibly Soviet-inspired. 4. A coordinated Soviet-Indian attack against Pakistan. The Pakistanis believe they can handle the first contingency. They are worried about the second since it might be intended to humiliate them and they would probably lack the capability to eject Soviet forces. The third is a major concern, since they are convinced that the Indians are aggressively minded and in league with the Soviets. The fourth would be a calamity for them, and only superpower intervention could stave off a major defeat. (S) The Pakistani objectives in the talks was to upgrade the 1959 Agreement to the status of a treaty, to increase the aid package about [above] $400 million, and to keep their options open regarding possible opposition or accommodation with the USSR. The latter was probably a device to keep pressure on us on the other two points. In fact, they have taken a rather firm position—both at the Islamic Conference and in the final communique of this trip—opposing the Soviets.2 Accommodation does not appear to be a genuine option for them. The party was impressed by the evident determination of Pakistan to fight if need be to protect its independence. After intensive discussions, it was agreed that we would not present the aid package to Congress until we had sounded out other powers about the assistance they could provide. It has not been decided exactly how to proceed with Congressional affirmation of the 1959 commitment, but the initial reaction of the SCC was that 2 For the text of the joint U.S.-Pakistani statement issued on February 3, see the Department of State Bulletin, March 1980, p. 65.
