292
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
it is admittedly true that the mobs were deliberately stirred up by such
unscrupulous persons as Kashani and that there was Communist par-
ticipation, there can be no question but that deep national feeling was
aroused by the appointment of Qavam and his announced intention of
dealing with the British. In view of this, it is unlikely that any Iranian
leaders can for a long time to come make any substantial deviation
from the Mosadeq policies.
The position of the United States in the wake of these develop-
ments is not easy to determine. It is possible that everthing may revert
to the status quo ante and that we may be able to continue to deal with
Mosadeq about as we did previously. It is possible, however, that the
depth of anti-foreign feeling that has been stirred up is so great that he
will find himself obliged to take further anti-Western measures. A fa-
vorite slogan of the rioters of the past few days was that the American
military advisers to Iran must be expelled. Should Dr. Mosadeq find
himself obliged as a sop to nationalist feeling to remove the American
Military Missions from the picture, the United States might be forced to
change its policies in Iran. There are a number of ways in which he
could proceed against our Military Missions which would call for vary-
ing reactions on our part. If Dr. Mosadeq should simply approach our
Ambassador and say that the presence of the two Missions on contract
to the Iranian Government (Armish and Genmish) was no longer polit-
ically possible and that he would like to terminate their contracts
quietly and by mutual agreement, the United States might be able to
live with such an arrangement. Under these circumstances our military
aid would continue and the Military Assistance Advisory Group
(MAAG) would remain in Iran.4
On the other hand should Dr. Mosadeq make a dramatic gesture
and announce that he was “kicking the Americans out” and termi-
nating military aid, it is difficult to see how the United States under the
Mutual Security concept could continue any aid to Iran. Should this
occur it might be necessary either at the time or at the end of the fiscal
year to terminate our present Point Four Program. It is sincerely hoped
that this can be avoided since what might be interpreted as complete
abandonment of Iran could have most unfortunate repercussions in
that country.
Consideration of our aid programs raises the whole question of
our general approach to the Iranian problem. During the course of the
past few years, the United States has on a number of occasions at very
high levels made public statements regarding its concern for the con-
tinued independence and territorial integrity of Iran. In the case of its
4 This sentence was highlighted and a question mark placed in the margin, appar-
ently by Acheson.
