National Security Policy 909 [NOTE: Pages 4–8 of source text denied in full.] [text not declassified] by all means available to determine if an attack has in fact occurred. In this connection advance action will be taken to identify all possible means of establishing such communications to include means both in [text not declassified] and to be prepared to use these means when necessary. Only when you have established by the procedures outlined above that communications are impossible, may you assume that an attack has occurred on the United States. b. You will bear in mind that the above delegation of authority to expend nuclear weapons is an emergency measure necessitated by recognition of the fact that communications may be disrupted by the attack. It is mandatory to insure that such [text not declassified]. Section “C” Special Additional Instructions Regarding Retaliation in the Event of a Nuclear Attack Upon the United States 1. PURPOSE: These special instructions provide additional guid­ ance applicable to the expenditure of nuclear weapons in the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States in retaliation against the enemy identified as responsible for the attack, subject, in the case of retaliation from friendly foreign territory, to applicable agreements or understand­ ings, if any, with the government exercising sovereignty over the coun­ try or countries concerned. 2. POLICY. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States, it is assumed that the President would have approximately the same information as the Department of Defense regarding the strength and character of the attack and the identity of the nation launching it. Retaliation for such attack, therefore, will be on [text not declassified]. In such circumstances, [text not declassified] if any, with the government exercising sovereignty over the country or countries concerned. 3. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROCEDURE AND RESPON­ SIBILITIES. a. [text not declassified] b. In the event that a nuclear attack has in fact occurred on the United States as authenticated by the procedure of paragraph 4. a (2), Section “B”, of these instructions, [text not declassified]. (1) Comply with applicable international agreements or under­ standings, if any, in expending nuclear weapons for retaliatory pur­ poses from friendly foreign territory. (2) Alert your manned retaliatory forces to the fact that they may be recalled prior to their arrival in the target area. 4. OPERATIONAL LIMITATIONS. The delegation of authority to expend nuclear weapons for [text not declassified].
