National Security Policy 1213 Enclosure Statement of Policy CHANNELS FOR TRANSMISSION OF WARNING OF ATTACK2 1. The Standing Group, in considering the provision of warning of imminent attack, has concluded that there is a clear requirement for cer­ tain defined national responsibilities and established secure channels for the transmission of warning of attack. 2. The Standing Group has suggested that the following respon­ sibilities should be recognized by the signatory Powers of the North Atlantic Treaty, and should be included in orders to the Major Commands of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO): a. The discoverer of credible information indicating definite prepa­ rations for, or movement in initiation of attack against any element of NATO is responsible that the substance of such information be trans­ mitted immediately through the duly established channels for the infor­ mation of the Major Commands of NATO and the Standing Group. b. Each Power and each Major Command of NATO is responsible for preventing the transmission in its name of unofficial and/or une­ valuated warning of attack. To this end, it should advise the Standing Group and the Major Commands of NATO as to the agencies who are authorized to transmit warning messages. c. Only in extreme emergency, in which the element of time would prohibit normal complete processing through internal channels, should there be recourse to releasing the information at some lower level. 3. The Standing Group suggested the following channels for transmission of urgent intelligence as being currently appropriate and adequate: a. From the designated agency of the country or command first receiving AND EVALUATING the information, to the Standing Group via the duly established channels (see subparagraph 2–­b above) with information copies to the NATO Major Commands. b. In cases of extreme urgency, when the element of time is vital, any internationally identifiable agency (for example, ambassadors and commanders in chief, as opposed to those specifically designated) should inform the Standing Group by the quickest means available, with copies to Major Commands of NATO. 2 This paper was originally a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated August 14, 1951. It was concurred in by the National Secu­ rity Council on September 18, 1951 (NSC Action No. 558) and paragraphs 4 and 5 were approved by the President on September 19, 1951. Pursuant to NSC Action No. 2215-­c, the NSC Planning Board editorially revised the paper, to bring it up to date, by amending paragraph 4 and deleting paragraph 6 of the 1951 paper. [Footnote is in the original.]
