Negotiating Channels 419 This means that we need to make an all-out effort to beat Kennedy in both Maine and New Hampshire. I will be working with Kraft and Strauss2 on this. It will not be easy but can be done. Secondly, and a much more difficult goal is to find some way to resolve the hostage situation in the next 30–45 days so that we can begin to build a relationship—however tenuous—with the Iranian government that undermines Soviet influence in the country and discourages Soviet military intervention. I would not want to imply in any way that you, Cy, Zbig or the excellent team that has been working on this matter have not done everything humanly possible to obtain the safe release of the hostages. Our position which was developed at the Camp David meeting3 was correct both substantively and politically. Based on my own recent involvement in this matter and discussions with both the French contacts and with Professor Cottam, I have concluded that the situation does not exist now nor will it exist in the near future whereby the hostages are released simultaneously with the other steps we are willing to take. For that reason, it seems to me that we have to at least consider taking some risks in obtaining their release that were neither feasible or advisable before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. This is not to suggest that we have to abandon any of our basic principles, but that we are going to have to consider modifying our tactics. The substantive gap between the Iranians and ourselves is significant. The internal political situation is so fragile and fluid that no present or future leader of the civilian government will be able to agree in advance to the simultaneous release of the hostages. Rightly or wrongly, they will argue that to create the proper political atmosphere for obtaining Khomeini’s blessing for the release of the hostages, there must be some actions taken that can be used with Khomeini and by Khomeini as evidence that he has won the battle with “the U.S. imperialists.” If this analysis is correct, it would mean that we would need to develop a scenario that included the early release of the hostages after some steps that tested each other’s seriousness of purpose. I doubt very much if Ghotbzadeh or the future leadership of the government would be able to agree in advance to a scenario that had Khomeini’s blessing. Professor Cottam says that Khomeini does not think or operate in that way. 2 Tim Kraft resigned as Carter’s campaign manager in September 1980; Robert Strauss replaced him. 3 Presumably a reference to the November 23, 1979, meeting; see Document 51.
