262
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
2. There is a tendency among some observers of the Iranian scene,
particularly in OIR, to assume that this urban middle class has not only
found expression through the National Front but also that its interests
as a class have been directly represented by the National Front. These
observers have adopted the view that the balance of power has shifted
decisively from the traditional ruling group—the wealthy landlords,
merchants, and tribal leaders—to the urban middle class and that the
“old guard” has lost not only the ability, but even the will, to rule. They
have viewed the nationalization of oil as merely a first step in a com-
prehensive present program to: (a) free Iran from foreign influence;
(b) eliminate the social, economic, and political privileges of the tradi-
tional ruling aristocracy; and (c) introduce major reforms which would
improve the lot of the mass of the population. They have assumed that
the influence of the Shah has already been virtually eliminated and that
any attempt by the Shah to obstruct the National Front “program”
might well lead to the overthrow of the Pahlevi dynasty and the estab-
lishment of a republic. They also consider that the failure of such a
“program” for any reason would induce large numbers of the urban
middle class to shift their allegiance to the Tudeh Party, thereby greatly
increasing Tudeh’s potential and the possibility of Communist domi-
nation of Iran. In short, these observers have assumed that a political
and social revolution has in fact already taken place.
3. The pace of political, economic, and social change in Iran is nor-
mally so slow and the conditions of life of the vast majority of the popu-
lation appear so intolerable by Western standards that it is easy for
Western observers to assume that a major development, such as the
sudden rise to power of the National Front, imminently foreshadows,
or even constitutes in itself, a revolutionary development. Moreover,
the tendency to make such an extreme interpretation of recent Iranian
developments has been supported by the flamboyant personality of
Mossadeq and by the fact that, in the absence of oil royalties, funda-
mental reforms would appear to be necessary if Iran is to remain viable
and independent. Nevertheless, a review of events of the past year and
an analysis of the present situation in Iran suggest that no basic changes
in Iran’s social and political structure have yet taken place. The most
that can be said is that the increased participation of the urban middle
class in political affairs may in time bring about such changes, although
this class itself does not now consciously aim for such changes.
4. The most significant development of the past year has undoubt-
edly been this sudden increase of political activity by the urban middle
class. With the exception of Mossadeq himself, none of the leaders of
the National Front has been a member of the traditional ruling aristoc-
racy and few of them had previously held important government
posts. They came to power not as a result of political bargaining among
