National Security Policy  879
attacking the continental United States only through the extensive use 
of one-­way missions, Soviet long range aviation has continued to be 
improved by the phasing-­in of additional jet bombers, more realistic 
and larger scale training exercises, improvement of potential staging 
bases in the Arctic, development of in-­flight refueling, and improve­
ment of electronic equipment for ECM, bombing, navigation, and other 
purposes. Nuclear weapons storage sites have been identified at many 
home bases of the Soviet long range aviation force and it is believed that 
nuclear bombs are now the primary weapon of this force. The number 
of aircraft launched against the United States in an initial attack, even 
under conditions where surprise was a major Soviet consideration, 
could range in the several hundreds.
2. It is estimated that the USSR is developing and stockpiling a ver­
satile group of nuclear weapons with yields ranging from about 1 KT 
to about 12 MT.
3. For planning purposes, it should be considered that the Soviets 
will probably attain an operational capability with ten ICBMs in the first 
half of 1960, with a possibility of this occurring in the latter part of 1959.
4. The USSR probably now has a limited number of submarines 
capable of launching subsonic, cruise type missiles with a range of 
150–200 nautical miles. These missiles could be launched by a subma­
rine only after surfacing. Additional submarines could be converted to 
include this capability in four to six months from the time the decision is 
made to do so. At least 3 Z-­Class submarines may have been converted 
to include a missile capability, possibly of the short range ballistic type.
5. Clandestine attack on the United States by sabotage, biological 
warfare, and placement of nuclear weapons, could occur against spe­
cifically selected targets.
C. SUMMARY EVALUATION OF U.S. AIR DEFENSE CAPABILITY 
AND PROBLEMS. The absolute capability of our forces to defend 
the United States against air attack by air breathing weapon systems 
has progressively increased. This over-all increase results from estab­
lishment of North American Air Defense Command; installation of 
additional early warning radar coverage (including full activation 
of Aleutian extension of Pacific DEW lines); provision of more effec­
tive control of the air defense system through automation; increased 
coverage of the sea surveillance system; and availability of improved 
weapon systems including those with nuclear warheads. Although U.S. 
air defense capabilities have improved during FY 1959, Soviet nuclear weap­
ons development and improved delivery capabilities during same period have 
made any relative U.S. gain questionable. Soviets are probably now capa­
ble of exploiting weaknesses in our air defense system at very high and 
low altitudes and of utilizing electronic countermeasures, sabotage, 
and deception to contribute to their attack. The estimated Soviet initial 
limited ICBM capability will provide an additional means of exploiting
