158  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
meeting, it appears that we can make reasonably firm plans for the 
following deployments:
United Kingdom
4 squadrons
France
3 squadrons
Italy
2 squadrons
Turkey
1 squadron
Alaska
1 squadron
Okinawa or Near East
1 squadron
Total
12 squadrons
Accordingly, at this time the Department of Defense recommends that 
the total number of squadrons for the first generation of IRBMs be held 
for planning purposes to 12 squadrons (180 missiles). On the basis of 
a review of the THOR and JUPITER programs and even though we 
have only had sporadic successes in both programs, we would not have 
any reason to believe that either program will result in a complete fail­
ure. Because of the inherent differences between the two missile sys­
tems, particularly the ground support equipment, we do not feel that 
it would be desirable to place both JUPITER and THOR in the same 
overseas deployment locations. Accordingly, we have allocated the 
first three squadrons of JUPITER to France and would propose that the 
fourth JUPITER squadron be dropped from the program. We would 
propose ­that the remaining requirement of five squadrons be met by 
the THOR to achieve the program objectives at the lowest cost. To meet 
the schedules for deployment shown on the chart and the needs of the 
space program, it will be necessary to increase the THOR production 
rate from 6 to 8 missiles per month. We also propose to arrange with 
the Army for a finite program for a total of 3 JUPITER squadrons. This 
is essentially a buy-­out type program. We feel it is necessary to pursue 
this course of action so long as we do not have proven weapon systems, 
but are at the same time proceeding with the assumption that both pro­
grams will be successful.
The decision as to whether to install interim defense against ballistic 
missiles attack at SAC bases, utilizing modified, available anti-­aircraft 
missiles, such as NIKE-HERCULES and TALOS has been given exten­
sive study. It is estimated that a 25 unit land-­based TALOS program, to 
be effective in a timely manner, would require immediate approval and 
obligation of nearly one billion dollars, mostly to be spent over a period 
of three years, with additional funds required to develop and incorporate 
the anti-­ballistic missile capability. A lesser program, on the order of 12 
land-­based TALOS units, would require expenditure of approximately
