January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1313 tioning of Soviet ground forces in Syria. Given Sunni hostility toward Assad’s closeness with the Soviet Union, however, a Sunni regime might begin to distance itself from the Soviets and move closer to moderate Arab states. [handling restriction not declassified] [1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified] 390. Presidential Determination No. 80–231 Washington, July 16, 1980 Subject Presidential Determination Under Section 4 of the Arms Export Control Act— Egypt Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Section 4 of the Arms Export Control Act,2 I hereby determine that the financing under the Arms Export Control Act of the sale of F–16 and associated missiles to Egypt is important to the national security of the United States.3 You are requested on my behalf to report this determination to the Congress, as required by law. This determination shall be published in the Federal Register. Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 6–9/80. No classification marking. 2 See footnote 2, Document 279. 3 The Justification for the Presidential Determination, attached but not printed, states: “The resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict in its broadest context is the only way to achieve stability in the Middle East. Without such peace and stability, the concerns of Arabs and Israelis for their security, independence, and territorial integrity cannot be completely allayed. Egypt and Israel are leading the way in the search for such a comprehensive peace that the Middle East so badly needs, but the task is difficult. Consequently, it is in the U.S. national security interest to assist Egypt in meeting its legitimate security requirements, thereby bolstering its sense of confidence and resolve to continue the efforts towards a permanent peace. “The Egyptian Air Force is beginning a modernization program by replacing elements of its aging Soviet-made equipment. This FMS financing will assist the Egyptian Air Force to obtain a limited number of aircraft armed with appropriate missiles.”
