Human Rights 147 2. Ms. Tuchman organized the meeting to consider the suitability of her draft outline for the PRM, dated 20 May, and already “approved” by President Carter. (copy attached)2 3. Ms. Tuchman delivered an illuminating sketch of the previous history of the PRM. Apparently, a draft outline that she prepared in February was rejected by the NSC in March.3 Because the Human Rights aspect of US approval of loan decisions of International Financial Institutions (IFIs) required immediate attention, an Interagency Working Group on Economic Assistance and Human Rights was set up. NSC, State, Treasury, Commerce (?), and later DOD, were members. This group is now replaced by the larger group invited to the meeting (which in addition to CIA, now also includes Justice, USIA, AID and a representative of the Ambassador to the UN). State has the larg-est representation: the Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator for Human Rights (Ms. Derian, Mr. Schneider) and Policy Plans (Ms. Vogelgesang). 4. Early in the meeting, each member was asked to list the papers on human rights of his unit that could be made available to the group. In the course of the discussion, Ms. Tuchman praised the usefulness of CIA’s 11 May Memorandum “Impact of the US Stand on Human Rights,”4 and indicated that President Carter continues to read CIA’s weekly report on human rights. 5. Ms. Derian referred to Secretary Vance’s 30 April speech on Human Rights Policy5 as a major policy directive. Ms. Tuchman, however, characterized it as a great speech, but not a policy, and said that this was the President’s view of it as well. 6. Ms. Derian talked about the activities of her expanding office, in terms of Action Plans on Human Rights for each country and for International Organizations (including IFIs) as well. She apparently indicated that there was a need to move quickly to stay ahead of Congress’s measures restricting loans and military sales to poor performers in the human rights area. She indicated that many decisions were already being made with the human rights criteria in mind. 7. The actual discussion of the 20 May outline was brief and somewhat confused. Most participants wanted to discuss the means at hand to implement US policy. [name not declassified] indicated that it would be helpful if the objectives of the policy were discussed first, so that means and implications (the section of greatest concern to CIA) would be placed in a more meaningful perspective. 2 Attached but not printed. PRM–28 is printed as Document 46. 3 See footnote 1, Document 22. 4 See Document 42. 5 See Document 39.
