Afghanistan 899 Ambassador to the Mongolian Peoples Republic, a post of no importance to the Afghan regime. Sarvari, a member of the Khalq faction of the Communist Party, was a suspected KGB agent. The second person who might replace Babrak or be placed in another high position was the former Minister of Commerce Mohamad Khan ((Salaler)). Under the royal regime in Afghanistan, he held an important post in the Ministry of Planning. He was then named Minister of Commerce after gaining the confidence of President Daoud, who allowed him to participate in all secret conferences. When Daoud was overthrown, he was arrested with all of the President’s5 5 The rest of the cable was cut off in this copy. No other copy was found. 343. Article in the President’s Daily Brief1 Washington, December 24, 1980 AFGHANISTAN: ONE YEAR LATER In the year since their Christmas Eve invasion, the Soviets have achieved their core objective in Afghanistan—they have kept a Communist regime in place in the country. This has come at considerable international political cost and military difficulties. Moreover, the Soviets have so far made only limited progress toward establishing conditions that will permit the Babrak regime to stand on its own. —**Despite the Soviets’ increased involvement in military operations and a steady refinement of their anti-insurgent tactics, the insurgency goes on in every province at as high a level as any time since the Soviet invasion. —The Afghan Army, which must be rebuilt if a Communist government is to survive without direct Soviet support, still numbers no more than about 20,000. It continues to be hampered by defections and by frequent clashes between adherents to the two factions of the Afghan Communist Party.** —The Afghan Government is weak, lacks popular support, and is virtually paralyzed by the same factional squabbling that weakens the Army. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.
