World Hunger and Food Policy
731
228.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)1
Washington, September 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Memorandum of August 24 to Stu Eizenstat on Food Assistance2
Thank you for sharing your thoughts on possible adjustments in
our food assistance program with me.3 I am sorry to be so long in re-
plying. I agree that relative predictability in the level of our aid is some-
thing we should strive to attain.
I can see certain problems in your suggestion, however. If we
really try to stick to a policy of the Government buying five to six mil-
lion tons of food a year, the cost of such a program could vary consider-
ably with changes in prices. I would anticipate that a relatively open-
ended budget commitment of this nature would be opposed by the
Office of Management and Budget. On the other hand, if the floor is ad-
justed with harvest levels, your proposal would retain some of the de-
fects of the present system. There also might be some objection from ag-
ricultural interests to abandoning the present method in which
purchasers of PL 480 Title I commodities deal directly with private
American exporters for what, I infer from your memorandum, would
be a system of purchasing from the Government. Notwithstanding
these difficulties, I believe your proposal has merit and it should be
given further careful consideration.
We might also consider using our emergency food reserve pro-
posal,4 which was announced after you wrote your memorandum, to
stabilize PL 480 program levels. Stocks for the reserve could be accu-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770173–0345. No
classification marking. Drafted by Stephen Johnson on September 20; cleared by Bos-
worth and Boeker.
2 An unknown hand corrected the date from August 22 to August 24.
3 See Document 222. In a September 6 memorandum to Katz, Johnston commented
upon Bourne’s proposal: “It is not clear, but seems to suggest an annual commitment for
5 or 6 million tons of grain purchases for annual food aid disbursements. The annual
amount could be varied. I cannot follow the reasoning in the bottom two-thirds of the
paper, and the whole thing may, in fact, be completely overtaken by the President’s deci-
sion. However, in view of Bourne’s importance in the hunger campaign, I suggest you
consider drafting a memo from Cooper, commenting on this note, since Bourne is likely
to resuscitate his idea later. If you think it not worthwhile, we can forget it.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770173–0347)
4 See footnote 4, Document 225.
