324
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Generally speaking each village (or other social group) need get
only one of the foregoing evidences to begin with, but through the
propaganda program and by the normal spread of news (rapid in these
countries) must know that other villages (groups) are getting other
kinds of benefits which, in due course, will come to it also.
The requirement that this program be widespread throughout the
country (and region), touching a majority of the villages or other
groups during 1953 (there are about 40,000 villages in Persia alone),
discloses at once that the program must be executed through institu-
tions which are capable of reaching vast numbers of people. (i.e. this is
not to be confused with a Near East Foundation, Rockefeller Founda-
tion type of endeavour, nor is it “demonstration” projects, which be-
long to a later stage, that are required for this first objective.)
Examples of such institutions are Ministries of Health, Agricul-
ture, Public Works, etc; Government Development Plan organizations,
Agricultural (or other) Development Banks, cooperatives, and regional
development banks and other agencies such as might be provided
under United Nations auspices.
However, for such institutions to be effective in carrying these first
tangible evidences of changed conditions to a vast number of people
within a short time, it is imperative that the governments of the coun-
tries want such a program to succeed. It is obvious that unless they do,
we have little chance of bringing about such changes.
Nevertheless, there is little evidence that any Middle East gov-
ernment, with the sole exception of Turkey (since its 1950 elections),
has any real desire or intention of this kind.
Thus we are faced with a choice between continuing to use inade-
quate and non-determining measures which are nothing more than a
sop (though an expensive one) to world public opinion, while actually
watching the Middle East deteriorate until it slides into the Communist
orbit or until we can turn the job over to our soldiers, or, on the other
hand, taking such steps as are necessary to encourage and support such
changes in these governments as are required by our own sense of na-
tional and world security.
The question of establishing a “democratic” form of government
has no place here. What is necessary is that each of these countries have
a stable government dedicated to the welfare of its people and capable
of responsible behaviour in relation to other governments of the world.
Conditions among these countries vary widely, and so must the types
of government.
If our choice is to exercise a positive influence upon the evolution
of responsible governments within these countries, we must revise our
(alleged) historical policy of “non-intervention” in the political affairs
of others. (This actually requires only that we stop trying to fool our-
