accepting it than Great Britain, unless perhaps it were France. He replied that if he signed the treaty he must be sure that no possibility existed that difference on some action taken at a future date by Great Britain which the British felt to be within the treaty and which the United States did not, could not be resolved. That eventuality would open way to a very dangerous dispute. I said that I thought that a much greater danger would be suspicion among people of the United States that after Great Britain had been offered an opportunity to preserve the peace, she had preferred, for ulterior reasons, to maintain her right to break the peace. I urged him with great seriousness not to be the last to accept your proposal; there was too much at stake between us. Chamberlain thanked me and said that our conversation had been of valuable assistance to him, and had cleared away many of his difficulties. At the moment my impression is that Chamberlain has not a leg left to stand on, and that the public statement which you made last Saturday night has achieved its purpose fully. When I rose to go, Chamberlain again referred to Mr. Chilton’s misunderstanding of your views. I said that while of course I did not know what was in your mind, it was possible that in order to give the treaty greater emphasis, if it were accepted, but not to discuss it, you might have thought that a meeting of the Foreign Ministers would be useful. He responded warmly that undoubtedly it would, and that he hoped that if the meeting were held, it would be in Washington, and that he himself would like to be present. Please let me know if I am cabling these interviews too fully. I am anxious that Chamberlain’s thoughts be placed clearly before you, and that cannot be done briefly. Apropos of the foregoing, the French Ambassador told me last night after dinner, when I had inquired regarding Briand’s health, that the Minister was recovering, and that had he not been ill the most recent French note would not have been sent. The Ambassador wishes to talk with me; and, unless you see some good reason why I should refrain, I think I shall see him within the next day or two. I think that to go over your Washington statement with him might be very effective, for, as you know, he is a close personal friend of Briand.
