United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  51
institutions now making loans in Latin America, particularly the IBRD, 
the Export-Import Bank and DLF. It would also help if one had some 
general idea of the likely loan terms, i.e., interest rate, length of loan, 
etc. It is possible that the loan conditions contemplated would enable 
the proposed bank to complement, rather than replace IBRD and Ex-Im 
on the one hand and DLF on the other, although, as I understand it, 
DLF would discontinue all direct loaning activities in Latin America 
and local currency repayable loans would be handled by the special 
loans department of the proposed bank.
According to the NAC paper, the ordinary loans department, 
in addition to dollars, would receive and lend local currencies to be 
repaid in the same currency as lent. This would appear to be of mar-
ginal value in Latin America. The only instance I know in which bor-
rowing countries would be able to repay the local currency of another 
Latin American country easier than dollars would be in the case of 
Paraguay and possibly Bolivia. These two countries might be able to 
repay Argentine pesos easier than U.S. dollars.
Unless the loans contemplated by the ordinary loan department 
involve a much longer repayment period than IBRD and Ex-Im Bank 
typically provide, I do not see how there could be very much business 
done over and above that which the IBRD and the Ex-Im Bank are pre-
pared to do. Almost inevitably, it seems to me, the IBRD will reduce the 
ceiling on the loans it would make to any particular Latin American 
country to the extent that that country undertakes repayment obliga-
tions in dollars or other convertible currency through the proposed 
Inter-American Banking Institution. The trouble is not that IBRD and 
Ex-Im Bank do not have authority to make substantially larger loans 
to Latin America, but, rather, the capacity of Latin American countries 
to repay these loans. Adding another banking institution would not 
increase that repayment capacity.
Nor, in general, will the requirement that the Latin American 
countries contribute part of the capital of the proposed Institution 
increase the total capital available for borrowing by the Latin American 
countries. Perhaps any contributions by Venezuela might be a net 
contribution because of its relatively large foreign exchange reserve, 
but surely in the case of most other countries—Brazil, or Argentina, 
or Ecuador—­contributions by these countries to the capital fund will 
inevitably reduce almost pro rata the capital availabilities within the 
country. Much the same considerations apply to the special loans 
department. Latin American countries traditionally are chronically 
short of local currency, so they are likely to be unenthusiastic about 
contributing local currency to the proposed Institution. I think they 
would be doubly reluctant to contribute from their already limited
