1955  27
out also Chinese nationals in US number thousands and added US 
Government required further time to consider.
I then referred to Wang’s second and third proposals and handed 
him list of 76 Chinese students. I told him his reference to “exit per­
mit” in connection with 76 students was inaccurate since no exit per­
mit required of aliens desiring depart US. I then carefully summarized 
in some details US immigration procedure, emphasizing absence exit 
permit system and explaining that US Government neither preventing 
Chinese from leaving nor unreasonably forcing them to leave.
I informed Wang I not in position reply regarding fourth proposal 
which required further careful study. I added that as I already pointed 
out as result of rescinding by US Government all preventive departure 
orders previously issued against Chinese civilians there was not to 
best of my government’s knowledge any Chinese civilian in US whose 
departure for China was being prevented. However I continued “we 
both know of the American civilians in your country whose departure 
is being prevented by reason of their imprisonment or otherwise”. I 
said I was therefore awaiting the specific information regarding meas­
ures which Wang had said at last meeting his government intended 
take with respect Americans.
I then asked Wang for names of 6 Chinese he referred to last meeting 
as not having returned China, saying I would have their cases investigated.
At this point Chinese requested 10 minutes recess.
Wang commenced stating he wished clarify a few points. Regard­
ing classification Americans on his list, said Gordon, Hyde and Joyce 
had committed crimes but not now in prison. Said Mrs. Bradshaw had 
been in prison but now out on bail. Regarding Downey and Fecteau 
said their crimes already publicly made known and unnecessary go 
into here.
I interjected that my question referred not to crimes but to their 
classification as civilians. Wang replied they “classified according char­
acter of their crimes which were military in nature and not according 
their personal status”.
Wang then handed me 6 Chinese names I had requested which I 
said we would investigate. Names by separate tel.
Wang then said I had stated his first proposal beyond scope item 
one of agenda. Since this item dealt with return civilians both sides it 
entitled US to request complete list Americans in China, similarly enti­
tled Wang request complete list Chinese in US. He was glad know US 
Government willing take further time consider this proposal.
Problem now facing us Wang continued is problem return civil­
ians both sides to respective countries. Both sides should make same 
arrangements in order arrive at reasonable settlement. Regarding 
Americans in China he had already submitted complete list including
