translation of this reply,78 which will be observed to state that no credit for the payment of interest on the $12,000,000 advance appears in the Budget Law because this advance was a war loan and it did not appear to be desirable that such loans should appear in the Budget as no definitive decision had yet been taken in regard to them and as interest on them was not effectually paid. The letter further states that interest credits on the $25,000,000 and $15,000,000 advances were entered in the Budget because these advances had been concluded after the Armistice but it expresses the opinion that these credits should also not have been entered as these two advances in reality belonged to the same category of war loans. The letter adds however that the foregoing is without prejudice to any decisions which may be taken with regard to the question of Inter- Allied war debts which must be treated and resolved separately. It will be observed that the letter then states that due note has been taken of my communication to the effect that the $12,000,000 advance bears interest. This is in reply to the Legation’s Note to this effect written in accordance with the Department’s

Subsequently in conversation, Dr. Stojadinovitch has substantially repeated to me the contents of this letter and regarding the reply to Mr. Boal’s Note has stated that this matter was one of considerable difficulty and required more consideration. He intimated that as the Yugoslav Government’s finances stood at present, any interest payments would practically be impossible, but he intended, as already reported, to raise the taxation of the peasants in his Budget for the next fiscal year which he would present to the new Parliament which is to meet about April 18th. In regard to this plan, however it should be noted that it depends upon whether Dr. Stojadinovitch then remains in office which itself depends upon a Radical victory. It may nevertheless be said that practically any Cabinet which may come into power after the elections, will sooner or later find itself obliged to raise peasant taxation which without any undue hardship should increase the Government revenues very substantially. At present, as also reported, the taxation of the peasants, who form 85 percent of the population, is almost nil.
