Afghanistan
133
dent elements inside Pakistan. Should the Soviets view the Paks as
working with others, particularly the Chinese, in supporting a widen-
ing insurgency inside Afghanistan, these warnings could conceivably
be translated into actions, despite the drawbacks mentioned in Islama-
bad 3775.6
8. The Soviets will be weighing the relative positions of strength
of Taraki and his domestic opponents in making their decisions on
providing assistance to the Kabul regime. If a growing domestic chal-
lenge to the regime should progressively spread and reach a point
where it is poised to overthrow Taraki, or if Taraki is unable to maintain
the military’s loyalty, we believe the Soviets will be prepared to con-
sider other alternatives to Taraki. Soviet decision-making in such a
situation would be guided by a combination of cold pragmatism and
opportunism and would be directed at the longer-range goal of estab-
lishing a rapport with—or influencing the selection of—the individual,
group or coalition most likely to emerge at the top.
9. In this connection we have picked up a number of indications
that, behind the froth of public Soviet comments about Taraki, Moscow
may not see him as the Afghan wave of the future. Our Soviet contacts
occasionally express irritation at his indecisive pace in implementing
socio-economic programs and his purge of what are seen here as “pro-
gressive” elements, such as the Parchamists. One leading specialist on
“Middle Asia” who knows the Khalqi leaders personally once blurted
out to an EmbOff that he “felt hatred” for Afghan First Minister H.
Amin. In a recent conversation with two EmbOffs, the Deputy Director
of Dushanbe’s Oriental Institute twice stated that “only time will tell”
if the Taraki regime will be able to survive.
10. In sum, we see a range of considerations relating to domestic
Afghan as well as regional and international factors—including, of
course, the U.S. attitude—as likely to influence Soviet decisions on
assisting what may be an increasingly beleaguered Taraki regime. Mos-
6 In telegram 3775 from Islamabad, March 30, the Embassy responded to telegram
73004 (see footnote 2, above). Regarding the fear of Soviet aggression, the Embassy laid
out three assumptions about Pakistan’s policy: “(A) A crisis in Pak-Afghan relations
may be unavoidable, in time, if the Afghans continue their present policies; (B) Pakistan
would prefer that such a crisis come later rather than sooner; and (C) time may be on
Pakistan’s side as dissidence inside Afghanistan mounts possibly to levels sufficient to
threaten the regime itself or at least to temper the activist naiveté of the DRA leadership.”
Regarding a question posed in telegram 73004, the Embassy answered that there were
“undoubtedly elements within Pakistan’s political life which would support a more
activist/interventionist policy in Afghanistan,” which included the various conservative
religious, nationalistic, and tribal factions in the country. But the Embassy noted that
such support had its limits: any interventionist policy in Afghanistan would have to be
effective to remain popular, and not so confrontational as to provoke a hostile, Soviet-
backed response by the DRA. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790146–0118)
