446 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 153. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA M 80–10012 Washington, January 9, 1980 AFGHAN EXILE GROUPS BASED IN PAKISTAN Peshawar, on the Pakistani side of the Khyber Pass, has for a century been the most important safehaven for Afghans who oppose whatever regime may be in power in Kabul. Following the Marxist coup in April 1978, the number of Peshawar-based dissidents grew and there was a proliferation of marginal and essentially ineffective “liberation groups”. Lacking meaningful financial support, the exile groups have had at best a modest impact on the course of the insurgency. Fragmentary reporting suggests they have provided insurgent groups in eastern Afghanistan with some material assistance, but the rebels’ main source of arms has been stocks captured from Afghan Army units or turned over by deserting Afghan troops and bought from arms dealers in Pakistan. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The numerous fragmented and feuding organizations acknowledge no single leader and have made numerous unsuccessful efforts to unify the Afghan exile opposition. An exile leader’s claim to the press after a recent meeting to have united exile organizations to counter the new Soviet threat is probably as insubstantial as earlier similar claims.2 Among its leaders there is no figure with religious or political stature comparable to Ayatollah Khomeini who could rally national support against the Soviet-installed Kabul regime or serve as the leader of a new government. The exile groups probably do not have a sufficient number of technically qualified members who could form a new government. It is possible exile organizations could, however, contribute a few cabinet-level officials to a national front government made up of officials from former governments who might have survived Communist purges since April 1978. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 120, Super-Sensitive: 1–3/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A typed note at the bottom of the page indicates that the memorandum was prepared in the Office of Political Analysis. 2 A likely reference to a statement made by Ali Tabib, spokesman for the Afghan National Liberation Front (ANLF), who promised that major Afghan opposition groups, including the ANLF, the Islamic Society, the Islamic Party, and the Islamic Revolutionary Movement planned to announce their “organizational unification” against Soviet forces. Tabib also stated: “the key will be for us to make this war as costly for the Russians as Vietnam was for the Americans.” Tabib was quoted in David Kline, “Soviet Combat Troops May Unify Afghan Rebel Groups,” Christian Science Monitor, January 2, 1980, p. 7.
