998  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PA–7.	
Memorandum of a Conversation1

Washington, September 25, 1958.
SUBJECT
United States-Paraguayan Relations; the Paraguayan Foreign Minister Visits the 
Department.
PARTICIPANTS:
Dr. Raúl SAPENA Pastor, Paraguayan Foreign Minister
Dr. Juan PLATE, Paraguayan Ambassador to United States
ARA - Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
COPIES TO: 
EST - Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director, EST, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs
EST/P - Mr. Charles C. Carson, Officer-­in-Charge, Paraguayan Affairs
Following the usual pleasantries, the Minister and Mr. Rubottom 
alluded to their earlier friendship in the days when the latter was on 
duty at our Embassy in Asunción during World War II. Mr. Rubottom 
told the Minister that in the course of informal meeting of Latin 
American Foreign Ministers just ended2 Secretary Dulles spoke to him 
of the Paraguayan chancellor in highly complimentary terms. This 
pleased the Minister immensely.
Getting down to business, the Minister said he wished “to lay all 
the cards on the table.” Mr. Rubottom cordially invited him to make 
himself at home.
The Minister said he was happy to note that general conditions 
in Paraguay today are quite good—­both economically and politically. 
The national budget for the first half of 1958 had showed a surplus of 
some 150 million guaraníes, and although this did not represent a huge 
amount of money, the surplus was a sign of improved economic health. 
The Minister said that evidence of the nation’s economic advance-
ment also appeared in the current annual report of the International 
Monetary Fund, a draft of which he had just read.
Politically, the Minister noted, the Stroessner Government is mov-
ing ahead in its determination to accommodate democratic processes 
in Paraguay: the Liberal Party had been allowed to hold a convention 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Paraguay 1958.” 
Official Use Only. Drafted by Carsen on October 9. The source text is an uninitialed car-
bon copy.
2  The Foreign Ministers of the American Republics conferred informally in Washington, 
September 23–24, to consider and approve measures to strengthen Inter-American eco-
nomic cooperation. For documentation relating to the meeting, see Documents ETA–14, 48.
