1956  1069
acceptable. They follow our explanations but one can see that they are 
not really very convinced.
Yesterday I encountered Wang at the airport in Prague on our way 
down, he having come in from Warsaw. I missed seeing him when I first 
came in the waiting room as he was sitting in the corner all alone but 
he came across the room to speak to me. He made a point of asking me 
about the President’s health, expressed gratification that he was getting 
along well. Incidentally, as in the past Czech officials made a point of 
taking me out to the plane ahead of the other passengers, leaving him 
to fend for himself.
In Zurich while waiting to change planes we talked at some length 
in English at which he is obviously improving. I commented on the 
new horizontal, left to right style of the magazine he was reading which 
led us to some discussion of the language simplification program. He 
said they planned definitely to reorganize the language using an alpha­
bet of twenty-­seven letters which will be Roman and not Cyrillic. He 
volunteered that he had asked to postpone the next meeting because he 
wanted to be in Warsaw for the visit of the Indian Vice President and 
the opening of a trade fair in Poland in which they had a large exhibit. 
He commented that there was also a large exhibit of American books at 
the trade fair. He said his wife spends most of her time in Warsaw and 
that they have four children. We engaged in a little mutual commiser­
ation on the problems of educating children in the diplomatic service. 
The usual afternoon rush at the Zurich airport led him to comment 
on the opening of the tourist season in Europe. I told him that it was 
expected 550,000 Americans would visit Europe this summer, to which 
he commented that was a very fine thing as such visits would lead to 
increased understanding of other people. He said that he had difficulty 
in getting back to Warsaw between our meetings as on the return trip 
there was a six-­hour layover at Prague and the weather was often bad 
on the Warsaw-­Prague leg. He was as usual outside the meeting room 
very affable and friendly. None of this has any particular significance, 
I know, but I thought you would be interested.
Incidentally, while I was gone the UN here called David and said 
that their space situation was going to be very tight during the ECOSOC 
meetings from July 9 through August 15 and wondered whether Wang 
and I had any plans for a vacation. David told them we had not and 
that he did not anticipate there would be any recess. There would not 
in any event be any recess of such a length although there was always 
the possibility of a week’s recess as in the past. They said that in that 
event they hoped we might find it possible to avoid meeting during the 
week of July 9. David said of course he could make no commitment but 
that he had no objection to their saying something to the Chinese if they 
wished to do so and they indicated they were going to call the Chinese. 
There is, of course, also the problem of our meeting during the week of
