570
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
suing a new threshold measure would be to withhold our consent for a
follow-on CTB at the review conference, thus allowing the CTB to ter-
minate. We could then negotiate a new threshold treaty on a bilateral or
trilateral basis.
As to verification, we are negotiating a separate trilateral agree-
ment for the measures we consider essential, especially national seis-
mic stations. If there is to be a CTB after three years, the verification
changes we would want, such as more seismic stations in the USSR,
would involve upgrading this separate agreement, not the verification
provisions of the multilateral treaty—and this should be done trilater-
ally, with no interference from the multilateral conference.
For these reasons, the review conference language should not
imply (as does “future treaty arrangements”) that the multilateral con-
ference would have a broad mandate to shape the future of the treaty.
Nor should it indicate (for example, by using the term “modifications”)
that we expect the conference to deal with changes in the multilateral
treaty—the normal amendments procedure would handle those.
Instead, the multilateral conference should serve essentially to af-
firm what we have decided prior to the conference. If we decide on no
treaty or a new threshold ban, we would insist on treaty expiration at
the conference, and our veto would guarantee that result. However, if
we, the Soviets, and the British were all prepared to accept a compre-
hensive ban after three years, we would seek what would be certain en-
dorsement by the conference. The review conference language should
therefore authorize a very limited choice: letting the treaty lapse or
having a CTB after three years.
On the basis of these considerations, I recommend the following
package proposal:
—Instead of the Soviet term “extension” which implies continuous
obligations, we would propose revised US language authorizing the
conference to “consider the question of renewing” the treaty.
—We would insist that the Soviets drop their reference to testing
by non-parties and accept a general formula like ours.
—We would propose a new provision specifying that a review
conference decision to renew the treaty would enter into force when 20
states, including the US, the UK, and the USSR, have given notification
of their acceptance of that decision. Under this provision, we could con-
trol when the renewed obligations became effective, and we would not
permit entry into force until the Senate had approved.
—We would seek a provision in the trilateral verification agree-
ment to the effect that, prior to the multilateral conference, the three
parties would consider modifications of the agreement that would take
effect if the multilateral treaty is renewed. This would give us a clear
