738
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
If you accept this recommendation, work would commence to for-
mulate the specifics of the changes.8
B. EXPORT FINANCING
Eximbank financing is the most important official incentive for
U.S. exports. Recent Congressionally-determined Eximbank budget
levels, however, have not fully met U.S. export needs. These needs de-
pend essentially on: (1) foreign official export credit competition; and
(2) the availability of private sources of financing for U.S. exports. In
the near-term, a strong Eximbank is needed to meet highly subsidized
foreign official export credit competition. Meeting this competition
head-on not only would support U.S. exports directly, but also would
greatly enhance the U.S. position in the negotiations to reduce official
export credit subsidies. It would put pressure on our trading partners
to follow through on the intent of the Venice Summit Communique,9
which recognized that a more market-related system of export credit
interest rates should be negotiated by December 1, 1980.
You requested an increase in Eximbank loan authority to $4.1 bil-
lion and an additional $1 billion through the Federal Financing Bank
for FY 1980. Some members of Congress wished to raise the FY 1980 au-
thorization level for Eximbank direct loans to about $5 billion; how-
ever, no FY 1980 appropriation has passed and Eximbank therefore re-
mains at its FY 1979 level of $3.75 billion. This presents problems for
both U.S. exporters and our negotiating efforts to reduce export credit
subsidies.
To solve the short-term budget problem, all of your principal eco-
nomic advisers have agreed that we should urge Congressional ap-
proval for an increase in Eximbank’s program activity. In order to bring
the Bank’s budget up to the requested level, an additional $1.35 billion
is needed—up to $350 million in direct credits and the balance in finan-
cial guarantees. This would bring the FY 1980 Eximbank budget up to
the $5.1 billion level you originally requested. The appropriations com-
mittee has already acted, and the full Congress may take action to in-
crease the Eximbank’s funds for FY 1980 before recessing at the end of
8 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation. On
September 9, Carter submitted to Congress a “Review of Executive Branch Export Pro-
motion Functions and Potential Export Disincentives.” In the message accompanying the
review, Carter asserted that “the evidence gathered in preparing this report does illus-
trate the importance that the export community attaches to this tax issue. U.S. taxes on
the earned income of U.S. individuals abroad do clearly have an adverse effect on the
ability of some U.S. exporters to compete in some markets. Accordingly, I will propose to
the Congress, in my 1981 legislative program, revisions of the current law in order to deal
with this problem.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,
1980–81, Book II, p. 1693)
9 See footnote 5, Document 247.
