student body. Every effort is being made to smooth out these differences but
the indications are that the local authorities are siding with the labor
element as against the students and that if a settlement is not reached in the
near future the college may be forced to close its doors.
As soon as this is accomplished a movement will undoubtedly be started
urging the Chinese authorities to take over this splendid institution which
owes its existence entirely to American missionary efforts.
Similar labor difficulties are being fomented at the John Kerr Hospital for
the Insane, another American institution which has done a great work in
Canton. A labor union has been formed amongst the employees in this
hospital and it is not unlikely that exorbitant demands will soon be
forthcoming which may necessitate the closing of the hospital, in spite of
the fact that it is now housing 700 Chinese patients.
As was pointed out in this Consulate General’s Despatch No. 419 it is
becoming increasingly evident that the Communists and radical members of
the Kuomintang party in Canton are following a definite plan to force the
American Missionary institutions in South China to close their doors in
order that an excuse may exist for the Chinese authorities to seize them.
Millions of dollars have been invested by American missionary
organizations in this part of China and some splendid hospitals and
educational institutions have been built up through the course of 75 years. If
the present campaign is allowed to continue and no pressure is brought to
bear upon the local authorities to protect these institutions I feel convinced
they will be ruined and ultimately seized by the authorities who are now
entirely under the control of the radical elements bent upon destroying the
work of the Christians in this part of the world.
 
As has been pointed out repeatedly in the past it will not be sufficient to
protest to the local authorities against the seizure of these institutions for
protests will have no effect whatever. If the United States Government is to
intervene effectively sharp warnings will have to be addressed to the
Canton regime and we should be prepared to follow these warnings with
force if need be. If we are not prepared to take these drastic steps then I fear
