488 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The Secretary said this was fine; we would not use the numbers publicly, although he could not guarantee against leaks. Nevertheless, the U.S. would not brief and would try to keep the specific figures from becoming public. START: SLCMs (continued) Shevardnadze asked whether there were any new details on telemetry encryption. His experts said no, and then he asked whether we could turn to SLCMs. The Secretary suggested further engagement on SLCMs among Karpov, Burt and Bartholomew. This could determine whether we had anything further to talk about. He believed that if we were able to close out the SLCM issue, we would surprise a lot of people. This would be a big step toward a START agreement. He knew others were skeptical but he believed we were making progress. Akhromeyev said, “God help us,” if this were true. The Secretary asked in jest whether we were dealing with the right people. Shevardnadze asked whether anything had been agreed in principle. Nazarkin said the sides were close to agreement on telemetry encryption, but the Soviets needed the U.S. reaction to a new Soviet formulation. A document had been agreed on non-­deployed missiles.9 SLCMs were still being worked on, and no results had yet emerged. Burt said he was more optimistic on SLCMs. Bartholomew said that the sides were exploring some ideas with Mr. Karpov that might have practical possibilities. Bartholomew added that some of these ideas would need to be checked in Washington. The Secretary suggested that the experts keep discussing this approach on the understanding that the U.S. proposals were not being submitted formally; we needed to check a few points in Washington. Notwithstanding this qualification, if the Soviets could give us a reaction we could save some time. The Secretary asked whether the Ministers should receive quick reports on human rights, bilateral and transnational issues. He had run out of arms control topics to discuss. Visits to Radars Shevardnadze said he had one more arms control question to raise. The previous day the U.S. had said it would be prepared to receive Soviet representatives, scientists, etc. to visit U.S. radar stations in Greenland and the UK. He had noted that the British question was tied up with the UK government. Therefore the Soviets suggested the 9 Not found.
