3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
747
conflict, and to search for areas of cooperation which would help pro-
duce a more stable world. I have hoped and believed that this might be
possible. This will not be possible, however, unless both of us recognize
the need to act with restraint in troubled areas across the globe. As
events following your actions in Afghanistan make clear, unrestrained
actions in any one area inevitably have an impact on our relations as a
whole.
Our most serious concern at present centers in Southwest Asia.
The presence of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan creates a new and
more dangerous situation in that region. We do not know your ulti-
mate aims in sending your forces into Afghanistan. We do know, how-
ever, that your action has violated the sovereignty of an independent
nation.
The continued Soviet military presence in Afghanistan will inevi-
tably continue to raise concerns about the desire of the Soviet Union to
conquer and subjugate the Afghan people and the further possibility of
Soviet military action against Pakistan and Iran. Both the presence of
Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and the precedent of their use there, are
of serious concern to Pakistan and other states in the region. The Soviet
action in Afghanistan and increasing Soviet military activity along the
northwest border of Iran also generate apprehension about the possi-
bility of Soviet actions to undermine the independence and territorial
integrity of that country.
It should be evident that the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet mili-
tary forces from Afghanistan is necessary to restore stability to this re-
gion. The actions of the United Nations and the Islamabad Conference
of Islamic States4 have made it clear that most of the peoples of the
world share this conviction.
For our part, we have no interest in seeing a government in Kabul
hostile to the Soviet Union. A return to a neutral, non-aligned but gen-
uinely independent Afghanistan would be in the interests of all and we
would support such a development.
There are similar dangers in the Middle East and in particular the
Persian Gulf. It is essential you understand that the United States has
vital interests at stake in this region. We are prepared to defend those
interests. But if there is restraint on both sides, as befits our two great
nations, and respect for the independence and territorial integrity of
4 The United Nations Security Council met six times between January 5 and 9 to ad-
dress questions dealing with Afghanistan. For a summary of those meetings, see Yearbook
of the United Nations, 1980, pp. 297–302. The First Extraordinary Session of the Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers met in Islamabad from January 27 to 29. The first resolu-
tion of the conference condemned the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, suspended the Af-
ghan membership in the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and called on all
member states to suspend aid to the current Afghan regime.
