Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA Staff have in recent months put 25 times as much effort into harassing the radios with relocation schemes than they have put into executing plans for expanded Muslim-language broadcasts. In effect, Walter Roberts’ letter says to you: “If you want expanded Muslim broadcasts, arrange it for us; otherwise we can’t do it.” He has never sought or shown any receptivity to our advice on relocation schemes. (U) Can anything constructive be done? I am skeptical. One approach would be to tell Atherton to tell Sadat that BIB broadcasts have high priority and we want the Egyptians to make time available. Sadat might or might not accept this argumentation. He would certainly expect us to do something about leaks [less than 1 line not declassified] has permitted us to set up. Experience offers no basis whatsoever for believing that we can keep Tony Shub from telling Binder anything we try to arrange with Sadat—successful or otherwise. Given other problems and opportunities we have in Egypt, I am not sure that the BIB aims— given their small chance of success—are not really fairly low in priority. So I recommend against making an issue of this with Sadat. (S) What is your inclination?5 AGREE DISAGREE [1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified] But we can’t let the BIB off on this so easily and leave them free to concentrate on relocating pieces of the radios to the U.S. and reducing their effectiveness. The need for expanded Muslim-language broadcasts is greater than when we took the decision in mid-December. The invasion of Afghanistan has generated ferment among Soviet Muslims which is going to continue indefinitely and which opens up unexpected opportunities for greater receptivity for informative news and commentary from the outside world. The spillover potential of such broadcasts in Iran and Afghanistan is also great. So why not order the BIB to proceed rapidly to lease time on transmitters in places other than Egypt and, at the same time, to develop plans for building transmitters in locations closer to the target areas? The BIB is not the best instrument for pursuing this kind of program—for the BIB Staff obviously contains subversive elements who want to frustrate, not further, American policy objectives. Moreover, the BIB members themselves have little skill or talent for pushing this kind of thing. But if we don’t do this—what do we do? The radios, which continue to function well in spite of BIB and have great unrealized potential, are largely at the mercy of the BIB. One could try to draw the radios directly into exploring expansion—they are much more likely to do an effective job than BIB. (C) 5 Brzezinski did not check either option, but wrote in the margin: “I basically agree, but would it be an issue?”
