832 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement welfare that the Congress did not pass the interest legislation pro­ posed. The bankers, some of whom initially opposed the legislation, are now seeing the significance of the situation, are terribly worried, and will be put to work on the Congress at once. He did not rule out the possibility of calling a special session once this additional process had been advanced. Under present trends in FY–60, we are running at an annual rate $1.9 billion over our estimates, with but a one-­half billion dollar increase in our income. An announcement at this time that we expect a deficit this year would really “blow the top” off the money market. The President thought Mr. McElroy should go to work on the tar­ get of reducing military and civilian personnel in the armed forces. He said Mr. McElroy will have to be emphatic in holding the line, and that he will support him. Mr. McElroy said that major actions are already being taken in the Pentagon along these lines. The Air Force has recommended reducing its own strength by 20,000 military personnel and 7000 civilian person­ nel. The F–108 project is expected to be cancelled within thirty days. Mr. McElroy said Defense is cutting down on its total outlays, and also on what is being spent overseas. The President commented in this connection that he is holding $50 million out of the medical research appropriations from the Public Health appropriation. Mr McElroy said that he feels Defense has gotten hold of its expenditure rate and is now keeping books on this for the first time. He credited Mr. McNeil with this work, and said that Mr. McNeil had deeply appreciated the nice letter the President sent him accepting his resignation. The President recalled that Mr. McNeil had resisted this type of financial control for several years. The President said he wanted someone to advise Governor Brucker that, with regard to the new construction starts, we should take our time over preparatory work, and not jump into their initiation. He asked me to be in touch with General Bragdon to get a list of the 67 new starts with the object of working on this right in the White House. The President said he thought that in General Lemnitzer Mr. McElroy had a very excellent man who would do everything possi­ ble to carry out Mr. McElroy’s desires. Mr. McElroy said that General Twining continues to wish to withdraw in about mid-­year 1960. He said he had asked General Twining if he thought General Lemnitzer would be ready to take on his assignment, and General Twining enthu­ siastically said he would. Mr. McElroy then discussed briefly his own personal situation, which requires that a change be made before too long. Reverting to the subject of the budget, Mr. McElroy said that the Defense Department had taken some medicine and must take a good
