Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1053
417.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 13, 1977, 11:00 a.m.–12:25 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Walter Stoessel
Ambassador Gerard Smith
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs George Vest
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff Member, Notetaker
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher
Ambassador Berndt von Staden
State Secretary Manfred Schueler
State Secretary Klaus Boelling
Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs Juergen Ruhfus
Assistant Secretary Dieter Hiss
Interpreter for Minister Genscher, Mrs. Gisela Niederste-Ostholt
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation.]
Non-Proliferation
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear non-proliferation
in Latin America.]
The President said that if we can identify the problems, we can ad-
dress them. Brazilian President Geisel had told Mrs. Carter that Argen-
tina was building a reprocessing plant and he implied that Brazil
would not if Argentina did not. Neither country has signed the Tlate-
lolco Treaty. The President felt that if we can assure autonomous fuel
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 24, German Federal Republic, 4/77–3/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took
place in the Cabinet Room. The conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe. In an undated memorandum to Carter,
Vance advised him to try to convince Schmidt to at least defer the transfer of nuclear ma-
terials to Brazil while simultaneously convincing Brazil and Argentina to implement the
Treaty of Tlatelolco. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic, 4/77–3/78) In a July 12 memorandum to
Carter, Brzezinski called Schmidt’s visit “unusually important” not only because
Schmidt’s political future was considered “extremely clouded” both domestically and
within the Atlantic alliance, but because of U.S. pressure to abrogate the Brazilian nuclear
deal. Brzezinski said that Schmidt considered fulfilling “his contractual obligations” a
“matter of ‘honor,’ especially so with all the Third World watching. Nor can Germany af-
ford to repudiate an agreement that encounters American disapproval. What is frustrating
for the Germans is that they basically share your non-proliferation goals, but for the foregoing
reasons, feel that the Brazilian deal allows for little compromise.” (emphasis in the original)
(Ibid.)
