the Agenda, as some of the questions seemed to be inappropriately placed. Dr. Wang voiced vigorous objection to any change being made in the Agenda on the ground that it had been sent out by the Chinese Government and accepted by the different Delegations and should therefore not be changed. A difference of opinion immediately arose as to whether the Agenda had actually been accepted by the participating governments and Mr. Oudendijk explained how the matter had been handled by him in his capacity as Senior Minister. He stated that the Agenda, with certain slight modifications which had been made after discussion in a meeting of the Diplomatic Body, had been telegraphed by his colleagues to their respective governments for approval. The modifications contemplated omitting the item of “Abolition of Likin” from “A”, and making it a separate subject on the Agenda called “B”, thus making the heading, “Provisional Measures”, come under “C”. “Related Matters” would then be called “D” and under this heading was the question of the Board of Reference authorized by a resolution adopted at the Washington Conference. Most of the Governments concerned approved the Agenda as modified, but when the matter was submitted to the Chinese Government the Chinese Committee of the Conference held that the time was too short to make alterations. There the matter had rested, according to Mr. Oudendijk. Notwithstanding Dr. Wang’s insistence that the Agenda had been accepted, it was clear that this view was not shared by other Delegates, notably Count de Martel, Mr. Cerruti and Sir Ronald Macleay. Considerable debate ensued and various suggestions were made with a view to a modification of the Agenda and since Dr. Wang would not agree to a change it was finally suggested by Mr. MacMurray that he (Dr. Wang) should draft a statement to be formally recorded in the Minutes to the effect that the Chinese Government proposed, in connection with Articles 1 and 2 under Section B, to include a discussion of the disposal of the proceeds of the surtaxes. This suggestion, by way of compromise, was accepted by Dr. Wang and the following statement was made a part of the Minutes: “The question of the disposal of the proceeds from the surtaxes as provided in items 1 and 2 under “B” (Provisional Measures to be taken during the Interim Period) will be discussed when the Committee on Section B meets.”
