International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 In all three of these areas, energy, macro-economics and food, I think we will be able to come up with specific details of the kind you spoke with the President about yesterday.8 Under Secretary Cooper I would like to start out by discussing the developing countries. Two things: 1) we must keep our markets open; 2) we must keep up our flows of foreign aid. Japanese foreign aid has increased dramatically in the past few years. Last year the GOJ made a commitment to double its foreign aid and is well on its way to doing that. America has also increased its aid, but not as dramatically. We all know the problems of increasing aid in a democratic society. This makes the Japanese effort all the more important. The GOJ also made a commitment to untied aid. But we have yet to see the orders flowing to foreign countries from such action. We look forward to seeing indications that more GOJ aid money is being spent in Europe, the U.S. and other countries. Secretary Blumenthal invited me to speak on other economic issues. Let me draw your attention to the issue of civil aviation. Fares across the Pacific are about the highest in the world. That works to the disadvantage of your citizens and ours. We recognize the problems you’ve had in opening Narita airport and in keeping it open.9 We can make a small step, however, if the GOJ will agree to fare decreases across the Pacific. In return we’re ready to improve routing of Japanese airlines coming into the U.S. Prime Minister Ohira I wish to thank the four speakers for the concise and constructive summary of the cross section of U.S.–Japan relations. We would like to study the record on how to best deal with these problems. There are two points to note: 1) The question of the issue Mr. Strauss has referred to. I agree that we have passed the point of negotiation. We must solve these problems. I will be going to the Congress today and I feel like a novice 8 Apparently a reference to Ohira’s remarks to Carter during their meeting on the afternoon of May 2. See footnote 2 above.
