3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
793
On the demonstrative and declarative level the record of the Carter
Administration is second to none in the past fifteen years. The Presi-
dent has personally identified himself with prominent Soviet dissi-
dents such as Bukovsky, Shcharansky and Sakharov and during his
visit to Poland2 insisted on contact with both dissident and church
figures. Other Administration officials, most notably yourself, have re-
peatedly met, endorsed and communicated with dissidents in the
USSR and Eastern Europe. The “spies for dissidents”3 exchange you ar-
ranged last year was one of the most politically astute moves the U.S.
Government has ever made on behalf of Soviet dissidents. The Admin-
istration’s human rights policy has generated worldwide debate on
human rights on which dissidents in Communist societies have capi-
talized. Our participation in the Belgrade CSCE meetings under the
vigorous leadership of Arthur Goldberg underscored our commitment
to principle and highlighted Soviet efforts to avoid honoring commit-
ments they accepted in 1975. The Administration took early decisions
which will soon expand the power of VOA and RFE/RL. (U)
Other programs for communicating with Eastern Europe and the
USSR have been modestly expanded. (S)
Allocation of resources—both manpower and money—to pro-
grams encouraging dissidence and serving the needs of dissidence has
not been proportionate to the high level of attention the Administration
has given this field in statements and demonstrative actions.4 There
have been other problems in respect to performance and procedure. No
new operational instrumentalities have been created for implementing
human rights policies, sustaining research effort and channeling and
coordinating human rights initiatives on a self-propelled basis. (C)
Human rights have been overly politicized domestically as a result
of priority assigned by the State Department to more energetic pursuit
of human rights issues with non-Communist Latin American and Af-
rican countries than with Communist-ruled states. As a result human
rights is in danger of becoming a negative concept among conserva-
tives both in the U.S. and abroad. The subject needs to be brought into
better balance. (C)
Our most valuable instruments for communication with Eastern
Europe and the USSR are the big radios. New investment in trans-
mitters has not been matched by comparable investment in program-
ming. Though budgetary allocations for broadcasting have risen each
year, they have not been sufficient to offset inflationary increases in
2 Carter visited Poland December 29–31, 1977.
3 See Documents 157 and 159.
4 Brzezinski highlighted a portion of this sentence and made a check mark in the
margin.
